ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We are a global provider of leading-edge access, 5G transport, and enterprise communications platforms that enable the emerging hyper-connected, hyper-broadband world. Our solutions are deployed by over 750 active customers, including advanced Tier 1, national and regional service providers and enterprise customers in more than 100 countries worldwide. Our solutions and platforms portfolio include products in Broadband Connectivity, Connected Home & Business, Mobile & Optical Edge, and Network & Experience Software.
Our key financial objectives include the following:
•
Increasing revenue while continuing to carefully control costs;
•
Continuing investments in strategic research and product development activities that will provide the maximum potential return on investment; and
•
Minimizing consumption of our cash and cash equivalents.
2021 Highlights and Recent Developments
During 2021, the Company appointed several industry leaders to new roles within the DZS executive team. These appointments, among others, include Misty Kawecki as Chief Financial Officer and Jennifer Yohe as Chief Operations Officer. Each brings a deep history of experience in our markets.
In the first quarter of 2021, the Company made the strategic decision to transition DZS GmbH, formerly Keymile GmbH, a subsidiary of the Company located in Germany, to a sales and research and development center. On July 15, 2021, the Company came to an agreement with the works council and entered into a social plan that covers statutory benefits and one-time severance obligations. The Company incurred related restructuring and other charges of approximately $11.9 million in 2021, consisting primarily of termination-related benefits and impairment of long-lived assets. DZS GmbH reduced headcount by approximately 100 employees. The restructuring was essentially completed in the fourth quarter of 2021.
On March 3, 2021, the Company acquired substantially all of the assets of RIFT, Inc., a network automation solutions company, including all the outstanding shares of RIFT.IO India Private Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of RIFT, Inc. (collectively “RIFT”). RIFT developed a carrier-grade RIFT.ware software platform that simplifies the deployment of any slice, service, or application on any cloud. The total purchase consideration was $0.5 million, including a $0.2 million holdback that was released in April of 2021 following the fulfillment of certain requirements in the purchase agreement.
On February 5, 2021, we acquired all the outstanding stock of Optelian Access Networks Corporation (“Optelian”), a leading optical networking solution provider based in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, and its portfolio of optical transport solutions. This acquisition introduced the “O-Series” to the DZS portfolio of carrier grade optical networking products with 100 gigabits per second and above capability, expanding DZS product portfolios by providing environmentally hardened, high capacity, and flexible solutions at the network edge. The purchase price of $7.5 million included cash paid to the shareholders and option holders of Optelian, cash paid to retire Optelian's outstanding debt on the date of acquisition, and contingent payments to shareholders.
On January 26, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement to sell 4.6 million shares of Common Stock (including 0.6 million shares issued pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $14.00 per share in an underwritten public offering. The equity offering closed on January 29, 2021 and resulted in gross proceeds of approximately $64.4 million and net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, of approximately $59.5 million. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the equity offering to pay off the entire outstanding balance of debt with related parties.
2021 Key Product Developments
Streamlined Product Portfolio. Our focus on product rationalization during 2021 produced a streamlined, simplified, and strategically aligned global product portfolio. Our research and development investment scale has been enhanced through product rationalization efforts and further accelerated by our pivot to a platform-based development approach for our Software and Systems solutions. These platforms give our research and development teams the capacity to increase product innovation with reuse of technology modules across multiple products, improving our ability to bring innovative and differentiated products to market quickly. In 2021 we completed the development of 29 new products across all our technology pillars.
Fiber-Fueled Broadband Connectivity Drives Innovation. We are heavily engaged in and benefiting from the unprecedented and accelerated upgrade cycle from legacy copper and first generation PON technologies to 10 gigabit broadband connectivity solutions. We are enabling the next wave of network deployments fueled by HD video collaboration, augmented and virtual
reality, interactive gaming, and the interactive and collaborative world now known as the Metaverse. The DZS Velocity Broadband Connectivity portfolio accelerates and simplifies the network wide deployment of future-proof next generation, multi-gigabit services over fiber, which are punctuated by new product introductions that simplify the evolution from sub-gigabit PON to 10 Gbps PON, OLTs and next generation G.fast distribution point units (“DPUs”) that deliver multi-gigabit service over legacy copper in MDUs and offer a simplified path to disaggregated network architectures.
Software-Driven Connected Home & Business Experience. The unprecedented drive from service providers to deliver multi-gigabit services to subscribers creates a market opportunity for DZS to complement those advanced services with systems and software to extend those services from the network to connected subscribers’ devices. DZS has responded to this opportunity with the introduction of Intelligent 10Gbps capable Fiber Termination Points, Wi-Fi 6 Residential Gateways and Access Points, and DZS Xperience Software. We accelerated our software strategy and roadmap throughout 2021, building upon the DZS Cloud feature set and announcing a launch of DZS Xperience software that optimizes the management of Wi-Fi services (including Wi-Fi 6).
Differentiated Converged Network Edge. The DZS Helix portfolio focuses on growing service provider opportunities to serve the unique needs of the Connected Home & Business. Featuring one of the industry’s largest collections of feature-rich fiber termination points as well as residential and enterprise gateways and Wi-Fi systems, the DZS portfolio includes support for multi-gigabit capable services, Wi-Fi 6 and managed access network support all the way to the premises edge and beyond. DZS Helix portfolio is also differentiated for its support for new converged network service opportunities in Enterprises and MDUs.
Mobile & Optical Edge. The adoption of 5G and O-RAN technologies have dramatically increased the requirement for bandwidth at the edge of the mobile network and disrupted the way mobile operators are architecting mobile networks. During 2021, we extended our product offerings in the midhaul and backhaul areas of the network with the following:
•
Transformational new products for the edge of the mobile network with packet-based fronthaul, enablement of non-traditional cell sites and deployment of transport and management solutions for in-building 5G small cells.
•
Modular, compact and environmentally hardened 100G-400G Optical Edge products that enable the deployment of technologies traditionally associated with core optical transport to the very edge of the mobile and fixed access networks.
Trends and Uncertainties
In December 2019, a strain of coronavirus, now known to cause COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since that time, the widespread and sustained transmission of the virus has reached global pandemic status. In response to the pandemic, many national and international health agencies recommended, and many countries and state, provincial and local governments implemented various measures, including travel bans and restrictions, limitations on public and private gatherings, business closures or operating restrictions, social distancing, and shelter-in-place orders. The health effects of the pandemic and the above measures taken in response thereto have had an effect on the global economy in general and have materially impacted and will likely continue to impact the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the virus and its variants, and the worldwide response related thereto, it is difficult to predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Due to the uncertainty around the future economic impact of the pandemic, the fair value measurements used in the Company’s impairment assessments could be negatively impacted and could result in future impairments of goodwill, intangibles and other long-lived assets. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenues increased by 16% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, however the impact of a continued COVID-19 pandemic or sustained measures taken to limit or contain the outbreak could continue to have a material and adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Although our operations are influenced by general economic conditions, we do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our results of operations during our fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Consolidated Results of Operations
The table below presents the historical consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) with year-over-year changes (in thousands except percent change).
The table below presents the historical consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) as a percentage of revenues.
Net Revenue
The following table presents our revenues by source (in millions):
Our revenues increased 16.5% or $49.6 million to $350.2 million for 2021 compared to $300.6 million for 2020. The increase in product revenue during the period was primarily attributable to increased sales of our mobile and optical edge and broadband connectivity products and partly as a result of recovering from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021. Service revenue represents revenue from maintenance and other services associated with product shipments. The increase in service revenue was primarily due to the increased product sales. In 2021, we generated $504 million in sales orders as compared to $310 million in orders in 2020 and our backlog as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $225 million as compared to $71 million as of December 31, 2020.
Information about our revenues by geography is summarized below (in millions):
Our geographic diversification reflects the combination of market demand, a strategic focus on capturing market share through new customer wins and new product introductions. As we have strategically expanded our revenue mix in North America over the past year, we continue to leverage our strength in the Asia market, particularly with Tier 1 customers in South Korea and Japan. We anticipate North America will continue to increase as a percentage of total revenue driven by the 53 new customers captured during 2021.
•
Americas Region: For full year 2021, revenue from the Americas increased 64.0% to $101.5 million. Our strategic emphasis on the Americas region and focus on innovation and strategic alignment with service providers and fiber overbuilders has resulted in market share gains and new customers. Our new customer traction is benefitting from government-sponsored broadband incentive programs. For example, our recently announced broadband project in Mississippi with strategic partner Irby Utilities is a beneficiary of multiple broadband stimulus programs.
•
EMEA Region: For the full year 2021, revenue from the EMEA region increased 8.4% year-over-year to $70.0 million. Revenue from the EMEA region reflects typical fluctuations of customer deployment timeframes. For 2021, revenue from the EMEA region was largely driven by customers deploying GPON solutions in the Middle East. Throughout the year, sales activity in the region has expanded to record levels.
•
Asia Region: For the full year 2021, regional revenue increased 2.6% to $178.7 million. The Asia region experienced strong year-end spending from several marquee customers in world leading broadband markets of South Korea and Japan across both our Broadband Connectivity and Mobile Transport segments. The 2021 revenue increase was led by our Mobile and Optical Edge product line. We anticipate more diverse customer revenue within the Asia region in 2022 as customer programs from both existing and recent wins ramp into production.
We anticipate that our results of operations in any given period may depend to a large extent on sales to a small number of large accounts. As a result, our revenue for any quarter may be subject to significant volatility based upon changes in orders from one or a small number of key customers.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Total cost of revenue increased 12.8% to $229.9 million for 2021, compared to $203.8 million for 2020. Total cost of revenue was 65.7% of net revenue for 2021, compared to 67.8% of net revenue for 2020, which resulted in an increase in gross profit percentage to 34.3% for 2021 from 32.2% for 2020. The increase in total cost of revenue was primarily due to the increase in
sales volume. The gross profit improvement was primarily due to our strategic investments and geographic diversification decisions directed towards the higher margin North America region, despite increased supply chain costs.
Our 29 new product introductions throughout 2021 provided synergy and simplification to our next generation product portfolio, and also improved product margins. Price adjustments implemented in 2021 are designed to offset increased semiconductor, component, logistics and expedite costs, which have generally been understood and accepted by our customers.
We anticipate that our new pricing strategy, combined with our aforementioned geographic mix diversification, new product introductions and DZS Cloud software expansion strategy, will allow us to deliver both revenue growth and margin expansion.
Operating expenses
Research and Product Development Expenses: Research and development expenses include personnel costs, outside contractor and consulting services, depreciation on lab equipment, costs of prototypes and overhead allocations.
Research and product development expenses increased by 24.0% to $47.0 million for 2021 compared to $38.0 million for 2020. The increase in research and product development expenses was primarily due to strategic hiring decisions in research, development, and product line management in the second half of 2020 and into the first half of 2021 with the intent to accelerate growth and capture market share.
Selling, Marketing, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses include personnel costs for sales, marketing, administration, finance, information technology, human resources and general management as well as legal and accounting expenses, rent, utilities, trade show expenses and related travel costs.
Selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses increased 42.0% to $90.2 million for 2021 compared to $63.5 million for 2020. The increase in selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to the increase in allowance for doubtful accounts for one customer in India of $14.2 million in the first quarter of 2021. Refer to Note 1, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for further information on the bad debt expense. The increase was also partially due to strategic hiring decisions across sales and administration in the second half of 2020 and into the first half of 2021 with the intent to accelerate growth and capture market share, along with the impact of the Optelian and Rift acquisitions.
Restructuring and Other Charges: Restructuring and other charges for 2021 were $12.3 million and relate primarily to the strategic decision to transition DZS GmbH to a sales and research and development center. The restructuring and other charges consisting of termination-related benefits of $8.5 million, an impairment of long-lived assets charge of $2.7 million mainly related to right-of-use assets from operating leases, professional services of $0.9 million, and $0.2 million of other charges. See Note 6 Restructuring and Other Charges, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for further information.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets: During 2021, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.7 million for the right-of use assets from operating leases related to completion of the headquarters relocation to Plano, Texas. During 2020, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $6.5 million for DZS GmbH intangible assets as part of the Company’s evaluation for impairment, based on a triggering event for potential impairment.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt: During March 2020, the Company paid the outstanding term loan borrowings in full and terminated the PNC Credit Facilities. In association with this debt repayment, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.4 million. There was no debt extinguishment related charge in 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net: Other income (expense) relates mainly to realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses. Other income, net was $1.0 million for 2021 compared to other expense, net of $3.7 million in 2020. The main reason for the increase in other income, net was due to foreign currency exchange gains in 2021.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit): We recorded an income tax expense of $3.2 million for 2021 as compared to $3.5 million expense incurred in 2020. Despite consolidated net losses, we incur income tax expense due to taxable income generated in South Korea and Japan.
Information about our effective tax rate is summarized below (in thousands except tax rate):
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In managing our business and assessing our financial performance, we supplement the information provided by our U.S. GAAP results with adjusted earnings before stock-based compensation, interest, taxes, and depreciation, or Adjusted EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus (i) interest expense, net, (ii) provision (benefit) for taxes, (iii) depreciation and amortization, (iv) stock-based compensation, and (v) the impact of material transactions or events that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance, such as merger and acquisition transaction costs, inventory valuation step-up amortization, purchase price adjustments, restructuring and other charges, goodwill impairment, bargain purchase gain, gain (loss) on sale of assets, impairment of long-lived assets or loss on debt extinguishment, bad debt expense related to a large customer in India, any of which may or may not be recurring in nature. We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA enhances the usefulness of our financial information by presenting a measure that management uses internally to monitor and evaluate our operating performance and to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. We believe Adjusted EBITDA also assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis because it excludes the impact of items that we do not believe reflect our core operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual requirements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts;
•
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•
Non-cash compensation is and will remain a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation package, although we exclude it as an expense when evaluating our ongoing operating performance for a particular period; and
•
Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income (loss) or any other performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP or as a measure of liquidity. Management understands these limitations and compensates for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as a supplemental measure.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
* Refer to Note 1, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for further details on the bad debt expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our operations have historically and continue to be financed through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated in the business, borrowings, and sales of equity.
The following table summarizes the information regarding our cash and cash equivalents and working capital (in thousands):
The Company had a net loss of $34.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net loss of $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $87.0 million and working capital of $124.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $46.7 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, which included $30.1 million in cash balances held by our international subsidiaries. On January 29, 2021, the Company closed an equity offering which resulted in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $59.5 million. The Company used a portion of the net proceeds from the Equity Offering to pay off the entire remaining outstanding balance of debt with related parties, banks, and other lending institutions.
We continue to focus on cost management, operating efficiency and restrictions on discretionary spending. In addition, if necessary, we may sell assets, issue debt or equity securities or purchase credit insurance. We may also rationalize the number of products we sell, adjust our manufacturing footprint, and reduce our operations in low margin regions, including reductions in headcount. Based on our current plans and current business conditions, we believe that these measures along with our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our ability to meet our obligations as they become due in the ordinary course of business for the next 12 months will depend on our ability (i) to achieve forecasted results of operations, and (ii) continue to effectively manage working capital requirements. While we believe that we are likely to achieve forecasted results of operations if we are successful in implementing our business strategies, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic provides great uncertainty with respect to a potential impact on our future operations.
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow activity for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during 2021 was $14.3 million compared with $5.1 million net cash provided by operating activities during 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to restructuring activities related to our Hanover location, an increase in research and development expenses, along with an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by an increase in gross margin.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during 2021 was $9.5 million compared with $2.3 million of net cash used in investing activities during 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to cash used for the Optelian and RIFT acquisitions.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was $23.8 million compared with $17.6 million net cash provided by financing activities during 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 consisted primarily of proceeds from the equity offering of $59.5 million and proceeds from exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases of $6.8 million partially offset by repayments of our short-term borrowings and related party term loans of $42.5 million. Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 consisted primarily of proceeds from borrowings of $32.1 million, proceeds from factored accounts receivable of $11.6 million and proceeds from exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases of $3.7 million, partially offset by a net outflow associated with the repayment of short-term borrowings and long-term debt of $29.8 million.
Debt Facilities
On February 9, 2022, the Company entered into Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., that provides for $30.0 million of revolving credit commitment. Refer to Note 8 Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more detail about our current and past debt obligations.
Future Requirements and Funding Sources
Our fixed commitments for cash expenditures consist primarily of payments under operating leases, inventory purchase commitments, and payments of principal and interest for debt obligations.
From time to time, we may provide or commit to extend credit or credit support to our customers. This financing may include extending the terms for product payments to customers. Any extension of financing to our customers will limit the capital that we have available for other uses.
Our accounts receivable, while not considered a primary source of liquidity, represent a concentration of credit risk because a significant portion of the accounts receivable balance at any point in time typically consists of a relatively small number of customer account balances. As of December 31, 2021, two customers accounted for 26% and 10%, respectively, of our net accounts receivable. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has an allowance for doubtful account of $16.7 million related to one customer. Refer to Refer to Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for further detail. Our receivables from customers in countries other than the U.S. represented 79% of accounts receivable. We do not currently have any material commitments for capital expenditures, or any other material commitments aside from operating leases for our facilities, inventory purchase commitments and debt.
Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, our future contractual commitments were $31.7 million and included operating lease obligations and purchase commitments. Future minimum operating lease obligations were $18.4 million and included operating lease payments for our office locations and manufacturing, research and development locations, which expire at various dates through 2028. Refer to Note 13 Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more details. Our long-term purchase commitments were $3.2 million and included non-cancellable inventory purchase commitments. Refer to Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more details.
The Company’s pension plan obligations are excluded from the contractual commitments since the plan is unfunded, and the timing and amount of any cash payments are uncertain. Refer to Note 15 Employee Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more details.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The methods, assumptions, and estimates that we use in applying our accounting policies may require us to apply judgments regarding matters that are inherently uncertain. We consider an accounting policy to be a critical estimate if: (1) we must make assumptions that were uncertain when the judgment was made, and (2) changes in the estimate assumptions, or selection of a different estimate methodology, could have a significant impact on our financial position and the results that we report in our Consolidated Financial Statements. While we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information available when the estimate was made.
Refer to Note 1 Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for further information on our critical accounting estimates and policies, which are as follows:
Revenue Recognition - the calculation of transaction price, net of variable consideration. Our sales arrangements to certain distributors provide our distributors with volume discounts, price adjustments, and other allowances under certain circumstances. For contracts with customers that contain multiple performance obligations, we account for the promises separately as individual performance obligations if they are distinct.
Inventories - the capitalization of manufacturing costs in inventory, excluding factory excess capacity costs. Inventory reflected at the lower of cost or net realizable value considering future demand and market conditions.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets - the valuation methods and assumptions used in assessing the impairment of property, plant and equipment, identified intangibles, and goodwill, including the determination of asset groupings and the identification and allocation of goodwill to reporting units.
Business Combination - the valuation methods and assumptions used in assessing the fair value of assets and liabilities on the acquisition date.
Income Tax - the determination of deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between the financial reporting and the income tax bases of assets and liabilities. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts - the determination of expected credit losses through analysis of information obtained from credit rating agencies, financial statement review, and historical and current collection trends.
Pension Benefit Obligation - the valuation methods and assumptions used to measure the pension benefit obligation.