Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Summary
We are a Maryland real estate investment trust, or "REIT," formed in August 2012 that specializes in acquiring, investing in, and managing residential mortgage- and real estate-related assets. Our primary objective is to generate attractive current yields and risk-adjusted total returns for our shareholders by making investments that we believe compensate us appropriately for the risks associated with them. We seek to attain this objective by constructing and actively managing a portfolio consisting primarily of residential mortgage-backed securities, or "RMBS," for which the principal and interest payments are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a U.S. government-sponsored entity, or "Agency RMBS," and, to a lesser extent, RMBS that do not carry such guarantees, or "non-Agency RMBS," such as RMBS backed by prime jumbo, Alternative A-paper, mortgage loans that are not deemed "qualified mortgage," or "QM," loans under the rules of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, or "non-QM loans," mortgages on single-family-rental properties, manufactured housing, and subprime residential mortgage loans. We also may opportunistically acquire other types of mortgage- and real estate-related asset classes, such as commercial mortgage-backed securities, or "CMBS," residential mortgage loans, mortgage servicing rights, or "MSRs," and credit risk transfer securities, or "CRTs." We believe that being able to combine Agency RMBS with non-Agency RMBS and other mortgage- and real estate-related asset classes enables us to balance a range of mortgage-related risks.
We were initially formed through a strategic venture among affiliates of Ellington Management Group, L.L.C., an investment management firm and registered investment adviser with a 27-year history of investing in a broad spectrum of residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, or "MBS," and related derivatives, with an emphasis on the RMBS market, and the Blackstone Tactical Opportunity Funds, or the "Blackstone Funds." We are externally managed and advised by our Manager, an affiliate of Ellington. Since our inception, the Blackstone Funds had held special non-voting membership interests in the holding company that owns our Manager. In August 2021, an Ellington affiliate purchased these special non-voting membership interests from the Blackstone Funds.
We use leverage in our Agency RMBS strategy and, while we have not done so meaningfully to date, we may use leverage in our non-Agency RMBS strategy as well, although we expect such leverage to be lower. We have financed our purchases of Agency RMBS exclusively through repurchase agreements, which we account for as collateralized borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings under repurchase agreements in the amount of $1.1 billion with 15 counterparties.
We have elected to be taxed as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, we generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income taxes on our taxable income that we distribute currently to our shareholders as long as we maintain our qualification as a REIT. We intend to conduct our operations so that neither we nor any of our subsidiaries is required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the "Investment Company Act."
On April 2, 2021, we commenced an "at-the-market" offering program, or "ATM program," by entering into equity distribution agreements with third party sales agents under which we are authorized to offer and sell up to $75.0 million of common shares from time to time. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 163,269 common shares under the ATM program which provided $1.9 million of net proceeds after $29 thousand of agent commissions and offering costs.
On June 17, 2021, we completed a public follow-on offering of 3,250,000 common shares, of which 2,675,000 shares were sold by the Blackstone Funds and 575,000 shares were sold by us. The offering generated net proceeds to us of $7.1 million, after underwriters' discounts and commissions and offering costs.
As of December 31, 2021, our book value per share was $11.76 as compared to $13.48 as of December 31, 2020.
Trends and Recent Market Developments
Market Overview
•In 2021, the U.S. Federal Reserve, or the "Federal Reserve," maintained the target range of 0.00%-0.25% throughout the year, and for the first ten months of the year, it directed the Open Market Desk to increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities by $80 billion per month, and of Agency RMBS by $40 billion per month. This activity reflected a continuation of the Federal Reserve's response in 2020 to the negative economic effects caused by the COVID-19 pandemic when the Federal Reserve lowered the target range for the federal funds rate to 0.00%-0.25% from 1.50%-1.75%, committed to purchase U.S. Treasury securities and Agency MBS without explicit limits on the amounts purchased, and also announced several funding and liquidity programs.
At the end of the first quarter of 2021, the U.S. Congress passed the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, which provided for an additional $1.9 trillion of COVID-related stimulus and economic aid. Additionally, in July, the Federal Reserve announced the establishment of a standing repurchase agreement facility to support financing markets.
At its November 2021 meeting, citing “the substantial further progress the economy has made,” the Federal Reserve announced a tapering schedule for its asset purchases, beginning with a reduction of its monthly net asset purchases by $10 billion for U.S. Treasury securities and by $5 billion for Agency RMBS in November; by an additional $10 billion for U.S. Treasury securities and $5 billion for Agency RMBS in December; and with an increasing pace of tapering anticipated in subsequent months, until incremental monthly net purchases reach zero. The Federal Reserve also noted that it expected elevated inflation to be “transitory.”
At its final meeting of the year, in December, “in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market,” the Federal Reserve announced that it would further accelerate the tapering of its asset purchases. Beginning in January 2022, it would reduce the monthly pace of net asset purchases by an additional $20 billion per month for U.S. Treasury securities and $10 billion per month for Agency RMBS, with an increasing pace of tapering in subsequent months, until incremental monthly net purchases reach zero. In addition, given the persistently high rate of inflation, the Federal Reserve shifted to a more hawkish position on interest rates, signaling that multiple increases of the target range for the federal funds rate could be imminent, and also that it could begin to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet soon (as opposed to tapering net purchases to zero, but still maintaining the size of its balance sheet).
In December 2021, US consumer prices increased by 7% year-over-year, which was the fastest pace in nearly four decades. In a congressional hearing in January 2022, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, discussed his focus on inflation and stated, “If we have to raise interest rates more over time, we will. The economy no longer needs or wants the very highly accommodative policies we have had in place.”
•During the first quarter of 2021, long-term interest rates rose significantly and the U.S. Treasury yield curve steepened, with the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield increasing 83 basis points to finish the quarter at 1.74%, and the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield up just 4 basis points to 0.16%. The yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury increased to 158 basis points, which was its widest level since 2015. Interest rate volatility also increased in the quarter, with the MOVE Index, which measures U.S. interest rate volatility, reaching a 10-month high in February.
In the second quarter, long-term interest rates reversed course, with the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield falling 27 basis points to 1.47%, while the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 9 basis points to 0.25%. The yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury decreased to 122 basis points at June 30th, but was still meaningfully higher than the 79 basis point spread at the start of the year. Interest rate volatility subsided for most of the quarter, before increasing modestly during the second half of June.
In the third quarter, interest rates declined in July, before reversing course and rising in August and September. For the quarter, the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield rose 2 basis points to 1.49%, while the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 3 basis points to 0.28%, and the yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury was essentially unchanged. Interest rate volatility remained relatively elevated for much of the third quarter.
During the fourth quarter, short-term interest rates spiked, the yield curve flattened significantly, and interest rate volatility rose, as the market reacted to imminent Fed tapering, potential upcoming interest rate increases, and consistently strong inflation reports. The 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 46 basis points to 0.73%, its highest level since early March 2020, while the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield rose just 2 basis points to 1.51%. The spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury narrowed to 78 basis points, back to about where it started the year. Meanwhile, the MOVE Index reached its high for the year in November.
•After declining to all-time lows over the course of 2020, mortgage rates reversed course during the first quarter of 2021 as long-term interest rates rose. The Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate rose steadily throughout the quarter, increasing to 3.18% as of April 1st, as compared to 2.67% at year end. Although still elevated on an historical basis, refinancing applications declined during the quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index decreasing 21.7% between January 1st and April 2nd of 2021. Still, overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments remained well above pre-pandemic levels, declining slightly from a CPR of 35.1 in December 2020 to 30.8 in January 2021, before increasing to 31.8 in February 2021 and 35.4 in March 2021.
In the second quarter, however, mortgage rates declined as long-term interest rates fell. The Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate decreased to 2.98% as of June 30th, while refinancing applications continued to decline. The Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index decreased another 9% between April 2nd and July 2nd. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments declined from a CPR of 35.4 in March to 27.8 in April and 23.4 in May, before increasing moderately to 24.6 in June.
Mortgage rates also declined in July before reversing course and rising in August and September, in sympathy with long-term interest rates. For the third quarter, the Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate increased by 3 basis points to 3.01%. Refinancing applications rose modestly during the quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index increasing by 9% between July 2nd and October 1st. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments decreased from a CPR of 24.6 in June 2021 to 22.2 in July, before returning to 24.6 in August and declining slightly to 24.1 in September.
Mortgage rates continued to rise in the fourth quarter as the Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate increased another 10 basis points to finish the year at 3.11%. Refinancing applications declined during the fourth quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association’s Refinance Index falling 29% between September 3rd and December 31st. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments continued to fall throughout the quarter, declining to 22.2 in October, 20.2 in November, and 18.7 in December.
•LIBOR rates, which directly or indirectly drive most of our repo financing costs, declined modestly during the first nine months of 2021. Between December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2021, one-month LIBOR declined 6 basis points to 0.08%, and three-month LIBOR fell 11 basis points to 0.13%. In the fourth quarter, LIBOR ticked up slightly, with one-month LIBOR increasing 2 basis points to 0.10% and three-month LIBOR up by 8 basis points to 0.21%.
•U.S. real GDP increased at an annualized rate of 6.3% in the first quarter and 6.7% in the second quarter, before slowing to 2.3% in the third quarter, but accelerating again to an estimated annualized rate of 7.0% in the fourth quarter.
•Positive economic activity drove steady growth in U.S. employment in each quarter of 2021. The unemployment rate dropped from 6.7% at the end of 2020, to 6.0% on March 31st, 5.9% on June 30th, 4.8% on September 30th, and 3.9% at year end.
•Driven by the economic recovery and strong employment, forbearance rates on residential mortgages steadily declined throughout 2021. According to the Mortgage Bankers Association, the total forbearance rate decreased from 5.5% as of January 3rd, to 4.9% on March 28th, 3.9% on June 27th, 2.9% on September 26th, and 1.4% on December 31st.
•In the first quarter, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. MBS Index (“BB MBS Index”) generated a negative return of (1.10%), driven by rising interest rates, but a positive excess return (on a duration-adjusted basis) of 0.15% relative to the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Treasury Index. In the second quarter, long-term interest rates declined and the BB MBS Index generated a positive return of 0.33%, but a negative excess return of (0.60%). After generating a modest return and positive excess return in the third quarter, the BB MBS Index generated a negative return of (0.37%) and a negative excess return of (0.26%) in the fourth quarter, as volatility increased and short-term Treasury yields spiked. For the full year 2021, the BB MBS Index generated a negative return of (1.04%), and a negative excess return of (0.68%).
•In the first quarter, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Corporate Bond Index (“BB IG Index”) generated a negative return of (4.65%), but an excess return of 0.95%, and in the second quarter, a positive return of 3.38% and positive excess return of 1.09%. In the third quarter, the BB IG Index generated a breakeven return and had a negative excess return of (0.15%), and in the fourth quarter, it generated a positive return of 0.23% but a negative excess return of (0.28%). For the full year 2021, the BB IG Index generated a negative return of (1.04%), but an excess return of 1.61%. Meanwhile, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Corporate High Yield Bond Index (“BB HY Index”) generated positive returns and positive excess returns in each quarter of 2021. For the year, the BB HY Index generated a gain of 5.28% and an excess return of 6.63%.
•U.S. equities performed well in 2021, driven by the ongoing economic and employment recovery, continued monetary and fiscal policy support, the development and distribution of vaccines, and other positive factors, which outweighed negative factors including supply-chain challenges, uncertainty about the path of the virus, concerns about the quickening pace of inflation, rising interest rates, and the actual and anticipated removal of stimulus measures.
For the year, the S&P 500 rose 26.9%, the Dow Jones Industrial Average increased 18.7%, and the NASDAQ rose 21.4%. Meanwhile, London's FTSE 100 index increased 14.3% and the MSCI World global equity index increased 20.1%.
The VIX volatility index remained relatively low during 2021, as compared to the months surrounding the onset of the pandemic in early 2020, although it did spike toward the end of the fourth quarter in response to the spread of a new COVID variant and a hawkish shift from the Federal Reserve.
Portfolio Overview and Outlook
As of December 31, 2021, our mortgage-backed securities portfolio consisted of $1.240 billion of fixed-rate Agency "specified pools," $12.0 million of Agency RMBS backed by adjustable rate mortgages, or "Agency ARMs," $37.3 million of Agency reverse mortgage pools, $10.3 million of Agency interest-only securities, or "Agency IOs," $9.1 million of non-Agency RMBS, and $2.8 million of non-Agency IOs. Specified pools are fixed-rate Agency pools consisting of mortgages with special characteristics, such as mortgages with low loan balances, mortgages backed by investor properties, mortgages originated through the government-sponsored "Making Homes Affordable" refinancing programs, and mortgages with various other characteristics.
Our Agency RMBS holdings, excluding IOs, increased by 23% to $1.289 billion as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.051 billion as of December 31, 2020. Over the same period, our non-Agency RMBS, excluding IOs, decreased approximately 50% to $9.1 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $17.6 million as of December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021, we held $13.1 million of IOs, roughly unchanged as compared to December 31, 2020.
In conjunction with our larger portfolio, our debt-to-equity ratio increased to 6.9:1 as of December 31, 2021 from 6.1:1 as of December 31, 2020. Our debt-to-equity ratio may fluctuate period over period based on portfolio management decisions, market conditions, capital markets activities, and the timing of security purchase and sale transactions. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of our borrowings were secured by specified pools.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $69.0 million, along with other unencumbered assets of approximately $16.7 million. This compares to cash and cash equivalents of $58.2 million and unencumbered assets of $47.4 million at December 31, 2020.
Our Agency RMBS strategy generated a net loss for the year, in the face of a challenging Agency market marked by rising interest rates, widening yield spreads, and elevated interest rate volatility for much of the year.
During the first quarter of the year, long-term interest rates rose, the yield curve steepened, and interest rate volatility increased. As a result, most Agency RMBS prices declined, with lower-coupon RMBS performing the worst in the face of heightened extension risk. Next, in a reversal from the prior quarter, long-term interest rates declined and the yield curve flattened in the second quarter; most Agency RMBS underperformed hedging instruments, with higher-coupon Agency RMBS faring the worst. Moving to the third quarter, performance of Agency RMBS was again mixed, with incrementally higher mortgage rates leading to reduced expectations for prepayments, which boosted higher-coupon RMBS, while the anticipated withdrawal of Federal Reserve purchases negatively impacted lower-coupon RMBS. As a result, higher coupons outperformed lower coupons for the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter, short-term interest rates rose sharply, actual and implied volatility increased, and the yield curve flattened as the Federal Reserve signaled that interest rate increases could be imminent. The Federal Reserve also began the tapering of its asset purchases in November, and then accelerated the pace of that tapering starting in December. In response to these developments, most Agency RMBS underperformed U.S. Treasury securities during the fourth quarter, with higher-coupon specified pools and other shorter-duration RMBS particularly underperforming in light of the flattening of the yield curve.
Over the course of the year, virtually all Agency RMBS prices declined, which led to net realized and unrealized losses on our Agency RMBS portfolio. These losses were partially offset by net interest income and net gains on our interest rate hedges.
Pay-ups on our existing specified pool investments declined during the year, while our new purchases during the year primarily consisted of pools with lower pay-ups. As a result, the average pay-ups on our specified pools declined to 1.07% as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 2.40% as of December 31, 2020. Pay-ups are price premiums for specified pools relative to their TBA counterparts.
Our non-Agency RMBS performed well during 2021, driven by net interest income and net realized and unrealized gains. We decreased our non-Agency RMBS holdings over the year, and particularly in the first quarter, as we monetized gains in response to tightening yield spreads. We expect to continue to vary our allocation to non-Agency RMBS as market opportunities change over time.
Our net mortgage assets-to-equity ratio-which we define as the net aggregate market value of our mortgage-backed securities (including the underlying market values of our long and short TBA positions) divided by total shareholders' equity-increased during the year, driven by a larger RMBS portfolio as well as a decrease in shareholders' equity year over year. From time to time, in response to market opportunities and other factors, we increase or decrease our net mortgage assets-to-equity
ratio by varying the sizes of our net short TBA position and/or our long RMBS portfolio. The following table summarizes our net mortgage assets-to-equity ratio and provides additional details, for the last five quarters, to illustrate this fluctuation.
(1)Market value represents the current market value of the underlying Agency RMBS (on a forward delivery basis) as of period end.
We expect to continue to target specified pools that, taking into account their particular composition and based on our prepayment projections, should: (1) generate attractive yields relative to other Agency RMBS and U.S. Treasury securities, (2) have less prepayment sensitivity to government policy shocks, and/or (3) create opportunities for trading gains once the market recognizes their value, which for newer pools may come only after several months, when actual prepayment experience can be observed. We believe that our research team, proprietary prepayment models, and extensive databases remain essential tools in our implementation of this strategy.
The following table summarizes prepayment rates for our portfolio of fixed-rate specified pools (excluding those backed by reverse mortgages) for the three-month periods ended December, 31, 2021, September 30, 2021, June 30, 2021, March 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
(1)Excludes recent purchases of fixed rate Agency specified pools with no prepayment history.
The following table provides details about the composition of our portfolio of fixed-rate specified pools (excluding those backed by reverse mortgages) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had total net realized and unrealized losses on our Agency securities of $(34.5) million, or $(2.72) per share. Our Agency portfolio turnover was approximately 88% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and we recognized net realized gains of $1.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we continued to hedge interest rate risk through the use of interest rate swaps, and short positions in TBAs, U.S. Treasury securities, and futures. We had total net realized and unrealized gains of $14.5 million, or $1.14 per share, on our interest rate hedging portfolio as interest rates increased during the year. These gains were partially offset by net realized and unrealized losses of $(6.5) million, or $(0.51) per share, on our long TBAs held for investment, driven primarily by underperformance of lower-coupon TBAs.
We ended the year with a net short overall TBA position on a notional basis while maintaining a small net long overall TBA position as measured by 10-year equivalents. Ten-year equivalents for a group of positions represent the amount of 10-year U.S. Treasury securities that would be expected to experience a similar change in market value under a standard parallel move in interest rates. The relative makeup of our interest rate hedging portfolio can change materially from period to period.
After giving effect to dividends during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $1.18 per share, our book value per share decreased to $11.76 as of December 31, 2021, from $13.48 as of December 31, 2020, and we had an economic return of (4.0)% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Economic return for a period is computed by adding back dividends declared during the period to ending book value per share, and comparing that amount to book value per share as of the beginning of the period.
Our net Agency premium as a percentage of the fair value of our specified pool holdings is one metric that we use to measure the overall prepayment risk of our specified pool portfolio. Net Agency premium represents the total premium (excess of market value over outstanding principal balance) on our specified pool holdings less the total premium on net short TBA positions. The lower our net Agency premium, the less we believe that our specified pool portfolio is exposed to market-wide increases in Agency RMBS prepayments. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net Agency premium as a percentage of fair value of our specified pool holdings was approximately 2.8% and 6.8%, respectively. Excluding TBA positions, our Agency premium as a percentage of fair value was approximately 4.2% and 8.2% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our Agency premium percentage and net Agency premium percentage may fluctuate from period to period based on a variety of factors, including market factors such as interest rates and mortgage rates, and, in the case of our net Agency premium percentage, based on the degree to which we hedge prepayment risk with short TBAs. We believe that our focus on purchasing pools with specific prepayment characteristics provides a measure of protection against prepayments.
We believe that our adaptive and active style of portfolio management is well suited to the current MBS market environment, which, especially given the current effects and future uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic and to quantitative tightening, exhibits high levels of interest rate risk, prepayment risk, financing and liquidity risk, shifting central bank and government policies, regulatory changes, and disruptive technological developments.
Financing
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our average repo borrowing cost decreased to 0.19%, as compared to 0.91% for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly as a result of decreases in short-term interest rates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the weighted average borrowing rate on our repurchase agreements was 0.18% and 0.25%, respectively.
While large banks still dominate the repo market, non-bank firms, not subject to the same regulations as banks, are active in providing repo financing. Most of our outstanding repo financing is still provided by banks and bank affiliates; however, we have also entered into repo agreements with non-bank dealers.
Our debt-to-equity ratio was 6.9:1 as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 6.1:1 as of December 31, 2020. Our debt-to-equity ratio may fluctuate period over period based on portfolio management decisions, market conditions, capital markets activities, and the timing of security purchase and sale transactions.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or "U.S. GAAP," and Regulation S-X. Entities in which we have a controlling financial interest, through ownership of the majority of the entities' voting equity interests, or through other contractual rights that give us control, are consolidated by us. All inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated.
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our critical accounting estimates are those which require assumptions to be made about matters that are highly uncertain. Actual results could differ from those estimates and such differences could have a material impact on our financial condition and/or results of operations. We believe that all of the decisions and assessments upon which our consolidated financial statements are based were reasonable at the time made based upon information available to us at that time. We rely on the experience of our Manager and Ellington and analysis of historical and current market data in order to arrive at what we believe to be reasonable estimates. See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies. We have identified our most critical accounting estimates to be the following:
Valuation: We have elected the fair value option for the vast majority of our assets and liabilities for which such election is permitted, as provided for under ASC 825, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825"). Electing the fair value option allows us to
record changes in fair value in our Consolidated Statement of Operations, which, in our view, more appropriately reflects the results of our operations for a particular reporting period as all securities activities will be recorded in a similar manner. As such, the mortgage-backed securities are recorded at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheet and the period change in fair value is recorded in current period earnings on our Consolidated Statement of Operations as a component of Change in net unrealized gains (losses) on securities. Purchase and sales transactions are generally recorded on trade date. Realized and unrealized gains and losses are calculated based on identified cost.
For financial instruments that are traded in an "active market," the best measure of fair value is the quoted market price. However, many of our financial instruments are not traded in an active market. Therefore, management generally uses third-party valuations when available. If third-party valuations are not available, management uses other valuation techniques, such as the discounted cash flow methodology.
Summary descriptions, for the various categories of financial instruments, of the valuation methodologies management uses in determining fair value of our financial instruments are detailed in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management utilizes such methodologies to assign a good faith fair value (the estimated price that, in an orderly transaction at the valuation date, would be received to sell an asset, or paid to transfer a liability, as the case may be) to each such financial instrument. See the notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information on valuation techniques used by management in the valuation of our assets and liabilities.
Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation, the estimated fair value of our financial instruments may differ significantly from the values that would have been used had a ready market for the financial instruments existed, and the differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
The determination of estimated fair value of those of our financial instruments that are not traded in an active market requires the use of both macroeconomic and microeconomic assumptions and/or inputs, which are generally based on current market and economic conditions. Changes in market and/or economic conditions could have a significant adverse effect on the estimated fair value of our financial instruments. Changes to assumptions, including assumed market yields, may significantly impact the estimated fair value of our investments. Our valuations are sensitive to changes in interest rates; see the interest rate sensitivity analysis included in