Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In this Form 10-K and in other documents incorporated herein, as well as in oral statements made by the Company, statements that are prefaced with the words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “continue,” “estimate,” “project,” “intend,” “designed,” and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect the Company’s future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. Examples include those statements set forth above prior to “Item 1. Business - Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” These statements are based on the Company’s current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which the Company can give no assurance. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect future events or circumstances. Forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual future financial condition or results. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated. Such risks and uncertainties include the factors set forth above and the other information set forth in this Form 10-K.
Recent Developments
We faced a number of challenges in both business segments in 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic has had an enormous effect on both the mobile canning operation as well as spirits division. Increased competition, supply change issues and restructuring activities added to performance challenges in 2021.
Spirits faced unique challenges during 2021. Across the spirits beverage category, off-premise saw increased volume through 2021. However, we did not benefit from this trend as these increases were attributed to incremental share gains from largest national brands. Large branded spirits companies benefited during the pandemic due to their large scale production capabilities and distribution scale. We were unable to maintain our share with our relative brand growth under-performing the national brands at off-premise locations. Other parts of our business were negatively affected by mandated lockdowns and other related restrictions including a decrease in sales volume in on-premise accounts where products are consumed immediately, such as bars and restaurants. This negative trend has continued through the current period. In addition, we faced challenges with distribution partners in the highly restrictive three-tier distribution system. Despite significant investments in 2021, our distribution partners under-invested in our brands, which negatively affected our performance. Finally, we saw cost increases across much of our direct and indirect costs. While a substantial amount of our raw materials is owned, such as our whisky, and not susceptible to price inflation, imported tequila and other materials such as glass inflated through the year. These increases along with the aforementioned volume challenges negatively impacted gross margins resulting in underperforming the 2021 operating plan.
Craft C+B also faced unique challenges throughout the year. Beginning mid-year 2020 and throughout 2021, the craft beverage industry faced a shortage of aluminum cans. Domestic aluminum can manufacturers continue to make adjustments to manage a supply demand imbalance into 2021. As a result, buyers of aluminum cans continue to face uncertainties. We believe we have sourced an adequate supply of cans with, a supply contract with Canadian Canning to supply our current business plan. In addition, suppliers have successfully passed through price increases, which we did not immediately pass through to our customers. Moreover, this period of rapidly escalating prices left us at a competitive disadvantage to others that had a superior source of cans. We faced a number of competitive challenges from customers, which insourced both can purchasing as well as filling services after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
While we have been indirectly affected by the pandemic, our preventative measures have reduced the direct impact on our work force and customers. These measures included having our employees work remotely whenever possible, screening visitors and workers before entering facilities, requiring visitors and employees to wear masks, and encouraging social distancing.
Results of Operations
Overview
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Segment information is as follows:
Sales
Our sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $12.9 million from $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table compares our segment sales during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
During 2021, the craft beer canning industry supply chain restrictions have become less impactful and on-premise accounts have opened from the COVID pandemic, brewers have begun to purchase raw material again and shift sales to the on-premise bottle and keg packages. This year-on-year shift in supply and return to on-premise sales caused the mobile beer canning industry to service smaller runs at higher costs suppressing sales and margin. In addition, Craft C+B faced stiff competition as well as a trend to insource can purchasing and filling by larger customers expanding into off-premise distribution.
Sales of spirits were down from last year due to Azuñia supply chain constraints, discontinuing our legacy spirits brands and slower distribution expansion outside Oregon due to poor distributor performance. The downturn in sales was only partially mitigated by strategic price increases as well as improved product mix with a focus on the higher margin products.
Customer programs and excise taxes
Customer programs and excise taxes totaled $0.5 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of costs related to both spirits and canning including service labor and overhead, packaging, and in-bound freight charges. Costs specific to spirits include the costs of ingredients utilized in the production of spirits and warehousing rent. Costs specific to canning include service labor. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales decreased to $9.5 million from $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower sales for both spirits and Craft C+B, offset by higher cost of goods and in-bound freight. Spirits also had significant savings from reduced production related expenses post divesture of Redneck and improved mix from lower Azuñia sales. The following table compares our segment cost of sales during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Gross Profit
Gross profit is calculated by subtracting the cost of products sold from net sales. Gross margin is gross profits stated as a percentage of net sales. The following table compares our segment gross profit and profit margin during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Gross Margin
Our gross margin of 23% of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased from our gross margin of 26% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Spirit’s gross margin increased primarily due to a significant reduction in production related expenses as well as strategic price increases and a reduction in discounting. Craft C+B’s gross margin decreased primarily due to lower sales of services, a change in product and service mix, and higher raw material costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $2.6 million from $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $1.4 million decrease in compensation related to lower headcount primarily in sales as we focus our sales efforts in key markets. Through 2021, we concentrated our focus on sales efforts in our key markets - Oregon, California, Arizona, Colorado and Texas.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $6.8 million from $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in non-cash expenses related to depreciation from the leasehold improvements related to our spirits production facility, as well as decreased stock compensation.
Other Income (Expenses)
Total other income, net, was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to expense of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to forgiveness of our $1.4 million in loans under the U.S. government Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP Loans”). In addition, we gained $0.8 million from the remeasurement of deferred consideration for the final Azuñia earn-out.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss decreased to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net loss was primarily due to a decrease in operating loss of $3.6 million and an increase in income from discontinued operations of $4.1 million.
Preferred Stock Dividends
Preferred stock dividends were $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and related to the Series B Preferred Stock dividend of 6% per annum.
Deemed Dividend - Warrant Price Protection-Revaluation Adjustment
Deemed dividend - warrant price protection-revaluation adjustment was $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The dividend related to the inducement to exercise outstanding warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary capital requirements are for cash used in operating activities and the repayment of debt. Funds for our cash and liquidity needs have historically not been generated from operations but rather from short-term credit in the form of extended payment terms from suppliers as well as proceeds from the sale of convertible debt and equity financings. We have been dependent on raising capital from debt and equity financings to meet our operating needs.
To help ensure adequate liquidity and avoid widespread layoffs in light of uncertainties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, we applied for and received PPP Loans of $1.4 million. During 2021, the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) notified us that it approved our request for full forgiveness of the PPP Loans in the principal amount of $1.4 million.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred a net loss of $2.2 million and $9.9 million, respectively, and have an accumulated deficit of $58.6 million as of December 31, 2021. We have been dependent on raising capital from debt and equity financings to fund operating activities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised $5.2 million in additional capital through equity and debt financing (net of repayments). A large portion of this capital raise was used to invest in our three-year growth plan. We made substantial investments in Craft C+B, which we believe will deliver improved results in 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had $3.3 million of cash on hand with working capital of $4.6 million. Our working capital has increased $22.0 million from December 31, 2020 as we have increased our cash, prepaid balances and refinanced current debt since year-end; or in the case of our facility with Live Oak, received forbearance and are in the process of extending the facility. Our ability to meet our ongoing operating cash needs over the next 12 months depends on growing revenues and gross margins, and generating positive operating cash flow, primarily through increased sales, profitable operations, and controlling expenses. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, or additional financing is not available on acceptable terms, we may seek to sell assets, reduce operating expenses, reduce or eliminate marketing initiatives.
Our cash flow results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Operating Activities
Total cash used in operating activities was $5.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash usage was primarily attributable to payment of our current liabilities and an increase in prepaid expenses related to our strategy to shift Craft C+B to offer digital can printing services in the Pacific Northwest.
Investing Activities
Total cash provided by investing activities was $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of $3.4 million received for the Termination Agreement with RSG. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we received proceeds from sales of fixed assets of $0.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively, and incurred capital expenditures of $0.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Total cash provided by financing activities was $5.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of the proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $2.4 million, proceeds from a secured credit facility of $3.3 million, and the issuance of common stock from the warrant exercise for cash, net of expenses, proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock of $2.5 million; offset by $3.7 million of principal payments of our secured credit facilities and $2.9 million of payments on principal of notes payable. Net cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $3.3 million of net proceeds from our existing secured credit facility.
Lines of Credit
From 2019 until December 2021, we utilized an existing accounts receivable factoring line of credit with ENGS Commercial Capital, LLC (“ENGS”) that provided for a minimum of $0.5 million purchased accounts receivable and a maximum of $1.0 million of purchased accounts receivable. The advance rate was 85%, and interest was charged against the greater of $0.5 million or the total funds advanced at a rate of 5% plus the prime rate published in the Wall Street Journal. The Company factored $2.4 million of invoices during the year ended December 31, 2021. In December 2021, our agreement with ENGS expired and we are no longer factoring Craft C+B receivables.
Since 2019, we utilized an existing accounts receivable factoring line of credit with Park Street Financial Services, LLC. The advance rate is 75%, and interest is charged at a rate of 2.4% for the first 30 days plus 1.44% for each additional ten-day period. The Company factored $0.3 million of invoices during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no factored invoices outstanding.
Inventory Line
In January 2020, we and our subsidiaries entered into a loan agreement with Live Oak Banking Company (“Live Oak”) for a loan in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed the lesser of (i) $8.0 million and (ii) a borrowing base of up to 85% of the appraised value of the borrowers’ eligible inventory of whisky in barrels or totes less an amount equal to all service fees or rental payments owed by borrowers during the 90 day period immediately succeeding the date of determination to any warehouses or bailees holding eligible inventory (the “Live Oak Loan”). The Live Oak Loan is secured by all assets of the Company excluding accounts receivable and certain other specified excluded property. The Live Oak Loan bears interest at a variable rate of interest equal to (i) two and 49/100ths percent (2.49%) per annum plus (ii) the Prime Rate as published in The Wall Street Journal, adjusted on a calendar quarterly basis. Interest is payable monthly. Additionally, the Company issued to Live Oak 100,000 warrants to purchase common stock at an exercise price of $3.94 per share. The proceeds of the Live Oak Loan were used to pay off all principal and accrued interest under the TQLA Note of $0.9 million and all principal and interest under loan issued pursuant to that Credit and Security Agreement, by and between the Company and The KFK Children’s Trust, Jeffrey Anderson - Trustee of $3.0 million. On February 5, 2021, we repaid $3.4 million of the loan, reducing the principal balance to $2.8 million as of December 31, 2021. The loan matured on November 11, 2021. On February 28, 2022, Live Oak formally agreed to forbear enforcement of the Loan while the parties finalize a further extension of the maturity date.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These items are monitored and analyzed by management for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
In connection with the preparation of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, there was one accounting estimate we made that was subject to a high degree of uncertainty and was critical to our results, as follows:
Intangible Assets
On September 12, 2019, we purchased the Azuñia brand, the direct sales team, existing product inventory, supply chain relationships and contractual agreements from Intersect Beverage, LLC, an importer and distributor of tequila and related products. The Azuñia brand has been determined to have an indefinite life and will not be amortized. We do, however, on an annual basis, test the indefinite life for impairment. If the indefinite life is found to be impaired, then we will estimate its useful life and amortize the asset over the remainder of its useful life.
We estimate the brand’s fair value using discounted estimated future cash flows or market information and will impair it when its carrying amount exceeds its estimated fair value, in which case we will write it down to its estimated fair value. We consider market values for similar assets when available. Considerable management judgment is necessary to estimate fair value, including making assumptions about future cash flows, net sales and discount rates.
We have the option, before quantifying the fair value, to evaluate qualitative factors to assess whether it is more likely than not that our brand is impaired. If we determine that is not the case, then we are not required to quantify the fair value. That assessment also takes considerable management judgment.
Based on our assumptions, we believe that, as of December 31, 2021, the Azuñia brand was not impaired.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.