ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Introductory Statement
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and information relating to our business that reflect our current views and assumptions with respect to future events and are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to disseminate any update or revisions of any of the forward-looking statements to reflect any change in our expectations with regard thereto or to conform these statements to actual results.
Addressing challenges post-COVID-19 and current war in Ukraine.
COVID-19 is an incomparable global public health emergency that has affected almost every industry and has caused the worst global economic contraction of the past 80 years (IMF). The concerted global efforts achieved the development of vaccines that have helped to reduce a person´s risk of contracting the virus. However, the current war in Ukraine lead us as well to considering the changes in consumer behavior and demand, purchasing patterns, re-routing of the supply chain, dynamics of current market forces, and the significant interventions of governments; Disruptive activities could include the temporary closure of our manufacturing facilities and those used in our supply chain processes, restrictions on the export or shipment of our products, significant cutback of ocean container delivery from Germany, business closures in impacted areas, and restrictions on our employees’ and consultants’ ability to travel and to meet with customers. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which still uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the current conflict as well as virus variants and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, among others. COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine could also continue to result in social, economic and labor instability in the countries in which we or our customers and suppliers operate.
If workers at one or more of our offices or the offices of our suppliers or manufacturers become ill or are quarantined and in either or both events are therefore unable to work, our operations could be subject to disruption. Further, if our manufacturers become unable to obtain necessary raw materials or components, we may incur higher supply costs or our manufacturers may be required to reduce production levels, either of which may negatively affect our financial condition or results of operations.
In light of these challenges, the Company is focusing its efforts on supporting key areas of our business that will help us to stabilize in the new environment and strategize for what comes next. Those key areas are: crisis and management response, workforce, operation and supply chain, finance and liquidity, tax, trade and regulatory, as well as strategy and brand.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements. Certain of these significant accounting policies are considered to be critical accounting policies, as defined below.
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Specifically, critical accounting estimates have the following attributes: 1) we are required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and 2) different estimates we could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the financial statements as soon as they became known. Based on a critical assessment of our accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that our financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and present a meaningful presentation of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Risks and Uncertainties - The Company’s business could be impacted by price pressure on its product manufacturing, acceptance of its products in the marketplace, new competitors, changes in federal and/or state legislation and other factors and new technology. If the Company is unsuccessful in securing adequate liquidity, its plans may be curtailed. Adverse changes in these areas could negatively impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Energy and Water Development Corp and have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission. In the opinion of management, all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of financial position and the results of operations for the periods presented have been reflected herein.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Estimates which are particularly significant to the financial statements include estimates relating to the determination of impairment of assets, assessment of going concern, the useful life of property and equipment, the determination of the fair value of stock-based compensation, and the recoverability of deferred income tax assets.
Leases
Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASC 842- Leases (“ASC 842”). The lease standard provided a number of optional practical expedients in transition. The Company elected the package of practical expedients. As such, the Company did not have to reassess whether expired or existing contracts are or contain a lease; did not have to reassess the lease classifications or reassess the initial direct costs associated with expired or existing leases. The lease standard also provides practical expedients for an entity’s ongoing accounting. The Company elected the short-term lease recognition exemption under which the Company will not recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets or lease liabilities, and this includes not recognizing ROU assets or lease liabilities for existing short-term leases. The Company elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for certain classes of assets (facilities).
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company determines whether the arrangement is or contains a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in the arrangement. Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and short-term and long-term lease liabilities, as applicable.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method as stipulated by ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes”. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities or a change in tax rate is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are reduced to estimated amounts to be realized by the use of the valuation allowance. A valuation allowance is applied when in management’s view it is more likely than not (50%) that such deferred tax will not be utilized.
ASC 740 provides interpretative guidance for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. In the unlikely event that an uncertain tax position exists in which the Corporation could incur income taxes, the Corporation would evaluate whether there is a probability that the uncertain tax position taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities. A liability for uncertain tax positions would then be recorded if the Corporation determined it is more likely than not that a position would not be sustained upon examination or if a payment would have to be made to a taxing authority and the amount is reasonably estimable.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Corporation does not believe any uncertain tax positions exist that would result in the Corporation having a liability to the taxing authorities. The Corporation’s policy is to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if and when required, as part of interest expense and general and administrative expense, respectively, in the statement of operations. The Corporation’s tax returns for the years ended 2012 through 2020 are subject to examination by the federal and state tax authorities. The Corporation’s tax returns for the tax year ended 2021 have not been filed.
We record our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss by estimating our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We estimate our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences arising from differing treatment of items recognized for financial reporting versus tax return purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets, which are included in our balance sheets. In general, deferred tax assets represent future tax benefits to be received when certain expenses previously recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss become deductible expenses under applicable income tax laws, or loss or credit carry forwards are utilized. Valuation allowances are recorded when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We make these estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our future plans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had recorded a full valuation allowance on our U.S. net deferred tax assets because we expect that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized in the foreseeable future. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $550,000 in revenue as a result of meeting the above criteria.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at a measurement date. A fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs, where available, and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
Described below are the three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical assets or liabilities,
Level 2 - Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data,
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available.
Certain assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. The Company adjusts derivative financial instruments to fair value on a recurring basis. The fair value for other assets and liabilities such as cash, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses, customer/investor deposit have been determined to approximate carrying amounts due to the short maturities of these instruments. The Company believes that its indebtedness approximates fair value based on current yields for debt instruments with similar terms.
Stock-Based Payments
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Update 2018-07 (“ASU 2018-07”), “Improvement to Nonemployee Share Based Payment Accounting”, which expanded the scope of ASC 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The guidance was applied prospectively to all new awards granted after the date of adoption. In addition, the guidance was applied to all existing equity-classified awards for which a measurement date has not been established under ASC 505-50 by the adoption date by remeasuring at fair value as of the adoption date and recording a cumulative effect adjustment to opening accumulated deficit on January 1, 2019.
For the Company’s equity-classified awards for which a measurement date has not been established under ASC 505-50, the fair value on January 1, 2019, the adoption date, approximated the value assigned on December 31, 2018, therefore no cumulative adjustment to opening accumulated deficit was required.
Under the revised guidance, the accounting for awards issued to non-employees will be similar to the model for employee awards, except that ASU 2018-07:
● allows the Company to elect on an award-by-award basis to use the contractual term as the expected term assumption in the option pricing model, and
● the cost of the grant is recognized in the same period(s) and in the same manner as if the grantor had paid cash.
Employee and Non-Employee Share Based Compensation
The Company applies ASC 718-10, “Share - Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expenses for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options under the Company’s stock plans and equity awards issued to non-employees based on estimated fair values.
ASC 718-10 requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based option awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The fair value of the award is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods. The Company recognizes share based award forfeitures as they occur.
The Company estimates the fair value of granted option equity awards using a Black-Scholes options pricing model. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are share price, expected volatility and the expected option term (the time from the grant date until the options are exercised or expire). Expected volatility is estimated based on volatility of similar companies in the technology sector. The Company has historically not paid dividends and has no foreseeable plans to issue dividends. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield from governmental zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected option term is calculated for options granted to employees and directors using the “simplified” method. Grants to non-employees are based on the contractual term. Changes in the determination of each of the inputs can affect the fair value of the options granted and the results of operations of the Company.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
On January 1, 2021, the Company adopted ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses to improve information on credit losses for financial assets and net investment in leases that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. ASU 2016-13 replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses. In April 2019 and May 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-04, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments” and ASU No. 2019-05, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Targeted Transition Relief” which provided additional implementation guidance on the previously issued ASU. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, “Financial Instruments - Credit Loss (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842),” which defers the effective date for public filers that are considered small reporting companies (“SRC”) as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Since the Company is an SRC, implementation is not needed until January 1, 2023. The Company will continue to evaluate the effect of adopting ASU 2016-13 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and disclosures.
In June 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). This standard eliminates the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models for convertible instruments. It also amends the accounting for certain contracts in an entity’s own equity that are currently accounted for as derivatives because of specific settlement provisions. In addition, the new guidance modifies how particular convertible instruments and certain contracts that may be settled in cash or shares impact the diluted EPS computation. For public business entities, it is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years using the fully retrospective or modified retrospective method. Early adoption is permitted but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact this new guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modification or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (“ASU 2021-04”), which will clarify and reduce diversity in practice. Specifically, the new standard includes a recognition model comprising four categories of transactions and corresponding accounting treatment for each category. The category that would apply to a modification or an exchange of an equity-classified warrant would depend on the substance of the modification transaction (e.g., a financing transaction to raise equity versus one to raise debt). This recognition model is premised on the idea that the accounting for the transaction should not differ from what it would have been had the issuer of the warrants paid cash instead of modifying the warrants. ASU 2021-04 will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. This ASU will be applied prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date of the ASU. We adopted ASU 2021-04 on January 1, 2022. Adoption of this standard had no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report.
Comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $550,000 of revenue that was previously deferred in 2020, pending the inspection of equipment pursuant to a sales agreement. For the fiscal year 2020, we generated no revenue.
Cost of equipment sold
The equipment sold was manufactured by third-party fabricators in accordance with EAWD’s specifications at a cost to EAWD of $350,000, which was recognized along with the revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021. No costs were recognized in fiscal year 2020.
Gross profit
EAWD recognized a gross profit of $200,000 from the sale of equipment as discussed above for the year ended December 31, 2021, upon recognition of revenue. The Company had no gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense decreased by $6,021,949 or 84.1% to $1,137,795 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $7,159,744 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following discussion provides further explanation of the change in each item.
The largest element of change was a decrease in officer’s salaries by $5,699,268 or 95% to $300,732 as compared to $6,000,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.The decrease resulted primarily from the two following events. To begin, in the first quarter of 2020 the Company issued a combination of common and preferred stock whose value totaled $1,175,000 for our CEO and $1,063,000 for our COO in satisfaction of accrued salary accumulated during the previous years. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020 the Company issued a combination of common and preferred stock whose value totaled $2,850,000 for each of our CEO and COO as a bonus for among other things, successful structuring the Company’s first equipment sale. The Company also issued preferred stock whose value totaled $300,000 for both our CEO and COO as settlement of unpaid accrued salaries.
Additionally, the decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a reduction in management fees to affiliate by $325,000 as the contract with EAWC-TV was terminated as of December 31, 2020 and a reduction in professional fees of $118,499 as a result of lower accounting fees, litigation fees, legal fees and SEC matters. Those decreases were offset by an increase in marketing expense and travel and entertainment of $154,490 and $22,920, respectively, as a result of the Company’s efforts to increase branding and outreach.
Other Income
Other income (expense) increased expense by $1,666,631 from a $433,040 net expense (2020) to a $2,099,671 net expense (2021) primarily as a result of a reduction of interest expense of $860,108 as a result of reduced interest and amortization of debt discount, offset by an increase in the loss on the fair value of derivative liabilities by $2,526,739.
Net Loss
Net loss decreased by $4,555,318 to $3,037,466 for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to $7,592,784 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As discussed above, this decrease was primarily attributable to the compensation bonus and conversion of accrued salary into stock and increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 along with revenue recognized in 2021, partially offset by the increase in other expense in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash of $589,668 and a working capital deficit of $757,053 at December 31, 2021. Our operating and capital requirements in connection with supporting our operations will continue to be significant. Since inception, our losses from operations and working capital requirements have been satisfied through the deferral of payment for services performed by our founders and related parties discussed more fully below.
We have sustained operating losses since we began our operations in 2012. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $22,395,393. The Company cannot predict how long it will continue to incur further losses or whether it will ever become profitable as this is dependent upon the reduction of certain expenses and success in obtaining project contracts, among other things. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We also satisfied our cash and working capital requirements in 2021, through the sale of common stock , the issuance of convertible debentures, and the first sale of product. During the years ended December 2021 and 2020, the Company issued $404,000 and $466,000, respectively, in convertible debentures. The holders of certain of such instruments had the option to convert these convertible debentures into the Company’s common stock at conversion prices ranging from $0.01 to $0.20. The remaining holders at December 31, 2021 have convertible instruments with variable conversion rates. During 2021, holders of convertible debentures exercised their conversion options on convertible debentures amounting to $285,355 of principal and accrued interest in exchange 4,958,413 shares of common stock. The remaining convertible debentures at December 31, 2021 had all converted or been paid by February 1, 2022.
Comparison of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We used $1,556,268 of cash in our operating activities in 2021 compared to $869,393 used in 2020. The increase in cash used of $686,875 includes a net loss of $3,037,466, offset by non-cash expenses of $2,204,699 principally related to amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs of $770,134, depreciation expense of $299, change in fair value of derivative liability of $1,269,266, and common stock issued for services of $165,000, as well as cash used in working capital items in the amount of $723,501 principally related to an increase in inventory of $204,533, an increase of prepaid expenses and other current assets of $435,150, a decrease in due to related party of $28,929, and a decrease in accrued management fees and due to officers of $70,482, offset by a decrease in deferred cost of $350,000 and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $218,096.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We used $4,299 of cash to purchase property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021. No cash was used or provided from our investing activities in 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We received $2,162,208 and $881,440 in cash from financing activities in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash flow from financing activities of $2,162,208 is primarily due to increased financing in 2021 through $1,888,208 in proceeds from the sale of shares and subscriptions to purchase common shares and $369,500 in proceeds from convertible loans payable, offset by repayments of convertible loans payable in the amount of $95,500.
Financial Position
Total Assets - At December 31, 2021, the Company had $1,326,738 total assets representing $589,668 in cash, $55,169 in accounts receivable, $196,553 in inventory, $432,082 in prepaid expenses and other current assets, $3,834 in property and equipment, and $49,432 in operating lease right-of-use assets.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND FUNDING
We expect to generate more revenues which should, grow in time and lead to a positive cash flow. In the near future, we expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through lines of credit, convertible loans and/or further issuances of other securities in sufficient quantities that we will be able to meet our working capital requirement from these possible sources. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt will result in dilution to our current shareholders.
We seek to focus on three main aspects of the water and energy business: (1) generation, (2) supply, and (3) maintenance. We seek to assist private companies, government entities and NGO’s to build profitable and sustainable supplies/generation capabilities of water and energy as required, by selling them the required technology or technical service to enhance their productivity/operability. With its outsourced technical arm and its commission-based global network of vendors, the Company expects to create sustainable added value to each project it takes on while generating revenue from its engineering and technical consultancy services, project management, sale of our patent filed Self Sufficient Power Supply Atmosphere Water Generation Systems (eAWGs) Solar Energy Generation Systems and Energy Management Systems, royalties from the commercialization of energy and water in certain cases, and revenues from the licensed innovated technologies.
Through our BlueTech Alliance for Water Generation established in December 2020, we have state-of the art technology partners, technology transfer agreements, and technology representation agreements in place relating to aspects of renewable energy and water supply. These unique key relationships offer important selling features and capabilities that differentiated EAWD from its competitors.
The Company plans to generate revenue from its engineering and technical consultancy services, project management, sale of our Patent filed Self Sufficient Power Supply Atmosphere Water Generation Systems (eAWGs), Solar Energy Generation Systems, and Energy Management Systems, royalties from the commercialization of energy and water in certain cases, and revenues from the licensed innovated technologies.
Material Commitments
Employment Agreements
The Company entered into employment agreements with each of Mr. Hofmeier, its President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, and Ms. Velazquez, its Chief Operating Officer and Vice-Chairman (together, the “Employment Agreements”), effective January 1, 2012. Under the Employment Agreements, the Company agreed to pay each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez an annual base salary of $125,000 during the first year and $150,000 during the second year and forward. Any increase to the annual base salary after the second year is subject to approval by the company’s Board of Directors. Each Employment Agreement has an initial term of ten (10) years and is automatically renewed for successive one-year terms unless either party delivers timely notice of its intention not to renew. The Company also entered into employment agreement with 4 other employees, effective on the 3rd quarter of 2021.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Related Party Transactions
Due to officers
Amounts due to officers as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are:
Unsecured advances due to officers represent unreimbursed company expenses paid by the officers on behalf of the Company and accrued salaries. These net advances are non-interest bearing and are due on demand.
Accrued salaries represent amounts accrued in accordance with the employment agreements for Mr. Hofmeier, the Company’s President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, and Ms. Velazquez, the Company’s Chief Operating Officer and Vice-Chairman. Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez are also significant stockholders.
On January 9, 2020, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement with each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez whereby (i) Mr. Hofmeier agreed to receive an aggregate 1,022,095 shares of Common Stock and 2,002,488 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in full and complete satisfaction of an aggregate $1,175,000 in unpaid compensation owed to him pursuant to his January 1, 2012 employment agreement with the Company and (ii) Ms. Velazquez agreed to receive an aggregate 1,022,095 shares of Common Stock and 1,778,488 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in full and complete satisfaction of an aggregate $1,063,000 in unpaid compensation owed to her pursuant to her January 1, 2012 employment agreement with the Company.
On December 18, 2020, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement with each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez whereby Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez each agreed to receive 300,000 shares of its Series A Preferred Stock with fair market value of $150,000 (collectively, the “Compensation Shares”). Compensation Shares were issued in full satisfaction of the $150,000 accrued salary due each of the executives in 2020. In recognition of each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez’ extraordinary service to and sacrifice for the benefit of the Company, simultaneously with the Compensation Shares, each executive received a one-time bonus of (i) 10,000,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock with an aggregate fair market value of $1,500,000 and (ii) 2,700,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock, with an aggregate fair market value of $1,350,000.
Customer deposit
EAWC-TV functions as a distributor of EAWD product. In 2019, EAWC-TV, having secured EAWD’s first customer, has placed a $550,000 order for a solar powered atmospheric water generator (“AWG”) for one of its customers. EAWC-TV and the Company on December 13, 2019 agreed to accept a $303,742 reduction in the balance owed by EAWD to EAWC-TV as a deposit with EAWD related to this order. The deposit was satisfied through delivery of the equipment when performance has occurred. The equipment was built in Germany.
In 2020, manufacture of the unit was delayed due to Covid-19 related issues. The Company and EAWC-TV agreed as it had done in 2019, to clear the outstanding balances in the D/T/F EAWC-TV and the outstanding balance it carried in its accounts payable account for administrative services, which it did on December 26, 2020 which resulted in an additional down payment of $193,497. EAWC-TV has an unpaid balance on the equipment of $52,761, which represents a majority of the balance of the Company’s outstanding accounts receivables as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Going Concern Qualification
During the year ended December 31, 2021, pursuant to an equipment sale agreement, the Company recognized revenue of $550,000 for a sale of equipment, along with $350,000 for the cost of construction, earning $200,000 gross profit. The next step to accomplish is to achieve sufficient sales volume to yield positive a net income. The Company has incurred operating losses since it began operations (December 2012) totaling $22,395,393 at December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred net losses of $3,037,466. The Company also incurred a working capital deficit of $757,053 at December 31, 2021.We are an early-stage company and have generated losses from operations since inception (we began operations in December 2012). The Company expects its sales to continue to expand in 2022.
The Company’s ability to transition to profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support its cost structure. The timing and amount of our actual expenditures will be based on many factors, including cash flows from operations and the anticipated growth of our business and availability to sufficient resources.
Management expects sales operations to continue to expand. If necessary, the Company may need to raise additional funds during 2022. Management of the Company intends to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity securities or debt, credit lines or advances from suppliers. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern depends upon its ability to generate sales or obtain additional funding to finance operating losses until the Corporation is profitable.
These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.