ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition and prospects based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those in this discussion as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a bank holding company, and our principal subsidiary, Eastern Bank, is a Massachusetts-chartered bank that has served the banking needs of our customers since 1818. Our business philosophy is to operate as a diversified financial services enterprise providing a broad array of banking and other financial services primarily to retail, commercial and small business customers. We had total assets of $23.5 billion and $16.0 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We are subject to comprehensive regulation and examination by the Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”), the Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
We manage our business under two business segments: our banking business, which contributed $531.1 million, which is 84.5%, of our total income for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our insurance agency business, which contributed $97.2 million, which is 15.5%, of our total income for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our banking business consists of a full range of banking, lending (commercial, residential and consumer), savings and small business offerings, including our wealth management and trust operations that we conduct through our Eastern Wealth Management division. Our insurance agency business consists of insurance-related activities, acting as an independent agent in offering commercial, personal and employee benefits insurance products to individual and commercial clients. See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Business” for further discussion of our banking business and insurance agency business.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 computed in accordance with GAAP was $154.7 million, as compared to $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included items that our management considers noncore, which are excluded for purposes of assessing operating earnings. Operating net income, a non-GAAP financial measure, for year ended December 31, 2021 was $165.9 million compared to operating net income of $102.1 million for year ended December 31, 2020, representing a 62.4% increase. This increase was largely driven by a decrease in the provision for allowance for loan losses which is attributable to greater prior period provisions that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Bank’s borrowers during such periods, and current period releases of allowance for loan losses totaling $9.7 million. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a reconciliation of net operating earnings to GAAP net income.
On November 12, 2021, we acquired Century, which operated 29 banking offices in 21 cities and towns in Massachusetts and southern New Hampshire for $641.9 million in cash. Century had total assets of approximately $6.8 billion at the time of our acquisition, at fair value and excluding goodwill and intangible assets.
Outlook and Trends
Interest Rates
We expect increases in the federal funds rate in 2022 which is anticipated to be beneficial to our net interest income and net interest margin. In its statement released on January 26, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee stated that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate above the current range of 0.0% to 0.25% in response to inflation that is above their 2.0% target and a strong labor market. Approximately 40% of our loans are indexed to a market rate that is expected to reprice along with the federal funds rate. Refer to the section titled “Management of Market Risk” within this Item 7 for additional discussion including the estimated change to net interest income which assumes a variety of immediate and parallel changes in the U.S. Treasury yield curve.
CECL Adoption
We adopted the current expected credit losses accounting methodology (ASU 2016-13), commonly referred to as the “CECL standard” on January 1, 2022. The cumulative day one impact is estimated to be an increase of between $25.0 million and $30.0 million to the allowance which is attributable to the change in accounting methodology for estimating the allowance for credit losses from our adoption of ASU 2016-13 and includes the impact of loans acquired from Century. The portion of the total estimated impact that is attributable to loans acquired from Century is estimated to be between $25.0 million and $28.0 million. The anticipated increase in the allowance is expected to be a result of a) the change in accounting treatment
for loans acquired from Century; and b) transitioning from an “incurred loss” model, which estimates the allowance for loan losses based upon current known and inherent losses within our portfolio, to an “expected loss” model, which estimates the allowance for credit losses based upon losses expected to be incurred over the life of loans in our portfolio. For further information, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
We are a participating lender in the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program. We concluded PPP loan originations in the second quarter of 2021 as the SBA announced in May 2021 that PPP funds were exhausted. The majority of our PPP borrowers are existing commercial and small business borrowers, non-profit customers, retail banking customers and clients of our Eastern Wealth Management division and Eastern Insurance Group.
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated approximately 6,600 PPP loans totaling $543.2 million. These loans have a maturity of five years. Fees received from the SBA and direct loan origination costs are being deferred over the five-year loan term. Through December 31, 2021, we had received $28.7 million in fees from the SBA and had deferred $4.0 million in direct loan origination costs related to 2021 originations.
•During the year ended year ended December 31, 2020, we originated approximately 8,900 PPP loans totaling $1.2 billion. The majority of these loans have a maturity of two years. Fees received from the SBA and direct loan origination costs are being deferred over the loan term, which is generally two years. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $37.1 million in fees from the SBA and deferred $4.6 million in direct loan origination costs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, certain 2020 originations were modified and we received a nominal amount of additional fees from the SBA.
•Net PPP fee accretion (fee accretion less cost amortization) for all PPP loans for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $34.3 million.
In connection with the Century acquisition, we acquired Century’s PPP loans with a remaining unpaid principal balance of $73.7 million at the time of our acquisition. In accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations (commonly referred to as “purchase accounting”), remaining unearned fees received from the SBA and unamortized direct loan origination costs associated with these loans were written off with a corresponding adjustment to goodwill. The net purchase discount associated with these loans was $1.1 million, of which $0.1 million was accreted into income during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table shows certain data related to PPP originations by period. This table is specific to Eastern PPP loan originations and does not include data related to PPP loans that we acquired from Century:
(1)Total SBA fees received on 2020 originations includes additional fees received from the SBA in 2021 for originations that were modified in 2021.
(2)Reflects life-to-date accretion.
The following table shows certain data related to the remaining balance of our aggregate PPP loans (Eastern originations and Century originations) as of December 31, 2021:
The following table shows the balance of our PPP loans (Eastern originations and Century originations) by industry as of December 31, 2021:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present certain non-GAAP financial measures, which management uses to evaluate our performance, and which exclude the effects of certain transactions, non-cash items and GAAP adjustments that we believe are unrelated to our core business and are therefore not necessarily indicative of our current performance or financial position. Management believes excluding these items facilitates greater visibility for investors into our core businesses as well as underlying trends that may, to some extent, be obscured by inclusion of such items in the corresponding GAAP financial measures.
There are items in our financial statements that impact our results but which we believe are unrelated to our core business. Accordingly, we present operating net income, noninterest income on an operating basis, noninterest expense on an operating basis, total operating revenue, operating earnings per share, and the operating efficiency ratio, each of which excludes the impact of such items because we believe such exclusion can provide greater visibility into our core business and underlying trends. Such items that we do not consider to be core to our business include (i) income and expenses from investments held in rabbi trusts, (ii) gains and losses on sales of securities available for sale, net, (iii) gains and losses on the sale of other assets, (iv) rabbi trust employee benefits, (v) impairment charges on tax credit investments and associated tax credit benefits, (vi) expenses indirectly associated with our IPO, (vii) other real estate owned (“OREO”) gains, (viii) merger and acquisition expenses, (ix) the stock donation to the Eastern Bank Foundation (formerly known as the Eastern Bank Charitable Foundation, or the “Foundation”) in connection with our mutual-to-stock conversion and IPO, and (x) settlement of putative consumer class action litigation matters related to overdraft and non-sufficient fund fees, and associated settlement expenses.
We also present tangible shareholders’ equity, tangible assets, the ratio of tangible shareholders’ equity to tangible assets, and tangible book value per share, each of which excludes the impact of goodwill and other intangible assets, as we believe these financial measures provide investors with the ability to further assess our performance, identify trends in our core business and provide a comparison of our capital adequacy to other companies. We have included the tangible ratios because management believes that investors may find it useful to have access to the same analytical tools used by management to assess performance and identify trends.
Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as an alternative or substitute to GAAP net income, or as an indication of our cash flows from operating activities, a measure of our liquidity or an indication of funds available for our cash needs. An item which we consider to be non-core and exclude when computing these non-GAAP financial measures can be of substantial importance to our results for any particular period. In addition, our methodology for calculating non-GAAP financial measures may differ from the methodologies employed by other companies to calculate the same or similar performance measures and, accordingly, our reported non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to the same or similar performance measures reported by other companies.
The following table summarizes the impact of non-core items recorded for the time periods indicated below and reconciles them to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
(1)Reflects costs associated with the IPO that are indirectly related to the IPO and were not recorded as a reduction of capital.
(2)The net tax benefit (expense) associated with these items is determined by assessing whether each item is included or excluded from net taxable income and applying our combined statutory tax rate only to those items included in net taxable income. The 2020 net tax benefit amount reflects the impact of the $12.0 million valuation allowance associated with the stock donation to the Eastern Bank Foundation. The 2021 net tax benefit amount reflects the impact of the reversal of $11.3 million of the $12.0 million valuation allowance associated with the stock donation to the Eastern Bank Foundation.
The following table summarizes the impact of non-core items with respect to our total revenue, noninterest income, noninterest expense and the efficiency ratio, which reconciles to the most directly comparable respective GAAP financial measure, for the periods indicated:
(1)Reflects costs associated with the IPO that are indirectly related to the IPO and were not recorded as a reduction of capital.
The following table summarizes the calculation of our tangible shareholders’ equity, tangible assets, the ratio of tangible shareholders’ equity to tangible assets, and tangible book value per share, which reconciles to the most directly comparable respective GAAP measure, as of the dates indicated:
Financial Position
Summary of Financial Position
Cash and cash equivalents
Total cash and cash equivalents decreased by $0.8 billion, or 40.0%, to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2021 from $2.1 billion at December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to available for sale security purchases partially offset by deposit growth.
Securities
Our current investment policy authorizes us to invest in various types of investment securities and liquid assets, including U.S. Treasury obligations, securities of government-sponsored enterprises, mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, corporate notes, asset-backed securities and municipal securities. We do not engage in any investment hedging activities or trading activities, nor do we purchase any high-risk investment products. We typically invest in the following types of securities:
U.S. government securities: At December 31, 2021 and 2020 our U.S. government securities consisted of U.S. Agency bonds, U.S. Treasury securities and Small Business Administration pooled securities. We maintain these investments, to the extent appropriate, for liquidity purposes, at zero risk weighting for capital purposes, and as collateral for interest rate derivative positions. U.S. Agency bonds include securities issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Bank, and the Federal Farm Credit Bureau.
Mortgage-backed securities: We invest in residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities insured or guaranteed by Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae or Fannie Mae, including collateralized mortgage obligations. We have not purchased any privately-issued mortgage-backed securities. We invest in mortgage-backed securities to achieve a positive interest rate spread with minimal administrative expense, and to lower our credit risk as a result of the guarantees provided by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae.
Investments in residential mortgage-backed securities involve a risk that actual payments will be greater or less than the prepayment rate estimated at the time of purchase, which may require adjustments to the amortization of any premium or acceleration of any discount relating to such interests, thereby affecting the net yield on our securities. We periodically review current prepayment speeds to determine whether prepayment estimates require modification that could cause amortization or accretion adjustments. There is also reinvestment risk associated with the cash flows from such securities. In addition, the market value of such securities may be adversely affected by changes in interest rates.
State and municipal securities: We invest in fixed rate investment grade bonds issued primarily by municipalities in our local communities within Massachusetts and by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The market value of these securities may be affected by call options, long dated maturities, general market liquidity and credit factors.
The Risk Management Committee of our Board of Directors is responsible for approving and overseeing our investment policy, which it reviews at least annually. This policy dictates that investment decisions be made based on the safety of the investment, liquidity requirements, potential returns and market risk considerations.
The following table shows the fair value of our securities by investment category as of the dates indicated:
Securities Portfolio Composition
The following table presents the composition of securities acquired in connection with our acquisition of Century at fair value as of the November 12, 2021 acquisition date:
Acquired Securities at Fair Value
Our securities portfolio has increased year-to-date. Available for sale securities increased $5.3 billion, or 167.3%, to $8.5 billion at December 31, 2021 from $3.2 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase is due to investment purchases during the year ended December 31, 2021 and securities acquired in the Century acquisition as shown in the table above. Partially offsetting the increase in the securities portfolio from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, was the reduction in the unrealized gain on the securities. At December 31, 2021 the unrealized loss was $76.0 million compared to an unrealized gain of $58.7 million at December 31, 2020, representing a $134.6 million decrease. This change is primarily driven by a steepening yield curve.
We did not have trading or held-to-maturity investments at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
A portion of our securities portfolio continues to be tax-exempt. Investments in federally tax-exempt securities totaled $279.8 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $280.9 million at December 31, 2020.
Our available for sale securities are carried at fair value and are categorized within the fair value hierarchy based on the observability of model inputs. Securities which require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable are classified as level 3 within the fair value hierarchy. As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no securities categorized as level 3 within the fair value hierarchy.
The following table shows investment security weighted-average yields by category of security and contractual maturity at December 31, 2021. Weighted-average yields in the table below have been calculated based upon the amortized cost of the security:
Securities Portfolio, Weighted-Average Yield
(1)Investment security weighted-average yields were calculated on a level-yield basis by weighting the tax equivalent yield for each security type by the book value of each maturity.
(2)The negative yield indicated in the “Within One Year” category is the result of premium amortization that is in excess of earned income.
The yield on tax-exempt obligations of states and political subdivisions has been adjusted to a fully taxable equivalent basis (“FTE”) by adjusting tax-exempt income upward by an amount equivalent to the prevailing federal income taxes that would have been paid if the income had been fully taxable.
Loans
The following table shows the composition of our loan portfolio, by category, as of the dates indicated, the loans, by category, that were acquired from Century, and their balances as of the acquisition date of November 12, 2021 and net PPP loan activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
(1)Balances of loans acquired through our acquisition of Century represent unpaid principal balances and do not include the fair value adjustment recorded upon acquisition. Refer to Note 3, “Mergers and Acquisitions” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Amounts presented exclude unamortized premiums, unearned discounts and deferred fees and costs.
(3)Amounts exclude change attributable to acquired PPP loans.
We consider our loan portfolio to be relatively diversified by borrower and industry. Our loans increased $2.6 billion, or 26.2%, to $12.3 billion at December 31, 2021 from $9.7 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase as of December 31, 2021 was primarily due to loans acquired from Century of $2.9 billion partially offset by a decrease in our PPP loan balances within our commercial and industrial balances and business banking portfolios. The changes to our loan portfolio, excluding the impact of the Century acquisition and PPP loan activity, are further detailed below:
•The $342.7 million increase in our commercial real estate loans from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of an increase of $296.3 million in our investment commercial real estate loan balances, which represents loans secured by commercial real estate that are non-owner-occupied, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
•The $59.4 million increase in our retail portfolio was primarily a result of an increase of $137.7 million in residential real estate loans during the year ended December 31, 2021 which was partially offset by a decrease in our other consumer and consumer home equity portfolios of $72.7 million and $5.6 million, respectively. The increase in residential real estate loans is due to the Company retaining more residential real estate loans as held for investment rather than selling such loans on the secondary market. The decrease in other consumer is primarily the result of the continued run-off of our indirect auto loan portfolio.
We believe that our commercial loan portfolio composition is relatively diversified in terms of industry sectors, property types and various lending specialties. As of December 31, 2021, concentrations in our commercial loan portfolios were as follows and includes loans acquired from Century:
We believe that the loan to value ratio (“LTV”) is an important factor in monitoring the risk characteristics of our loans secured by real estate. The following tables show the distribution of loan balances by LTV and year of origination for each of our portfolios of loans, including those acquired from Century, secured by real estate as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Current LTV is calculated based upon exposure amount and the most recently available appraisal value as of the reporting period.
(2)Insufficient data available to calculate LTV.
(3)We generally require an LTV of 80% or less on new CRE loan originations. Certain CRE loans with LTVs greater than 80% may have additional collateral pledged which is not included in the computation of the amounts stated.
The maturity distribution of our loan portfolio is one factor used by management to evaluate the risk characteristics of our loan portfolio. The following table shows the maturity distribution of our loans, including those acquired from Century, as of December 31, 2021:
Scheduled Contractual Loan Maturity
(1)Includes demand loans, or loans without a stated maturity.
The interest rate risk to our loan portfolio is an important element in the management of net interest margin. We attempt to manage the relationship between the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities to produce an effective interest differential that is not significantly impacted by changes in the level of interest rates. The following table shows the interest rate risk of our loans, on a gross basis, due one year after December 31, 2021:
Loan Interest Rate Risk
Asset quality. We continually monitor the asset quality of our loan portfolio utilizing portfolio scorecards and various credit quality indicators. Based on this process, loans meeting certain criteria are categorized as delinquent, impaired, or non-performing and further assessed to determine if non-accrual status is appropriate.
For the commercial portfolio, which includes our commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, commercial construction and business banking loans, we monitor credit quality using a risk rating scale, which assigns a risk-grade to each borrower based on a number of quantitative and qualitative factors associated with a commercial loan transaction. Management utilizes a loan risk rating methodology based on a 15-point scale with the assistance of risk rating scorecard tools. Pass grades are 0-10 and non-pass categories, which align with regulatory guidelines, are: special mention (11), substandard (12), doubtful (13) and loss (14).
Risk rating assignment is determined using one of 14 separate scorecards developed for distinctive portfolio segments based on common attributes. Key factors include: industry and market conditions, position within the industry, earnings trends, operating cash flow, asset/liability values, debt capacity, guarantor strength, management and controls, financial reporting, collateral and other considerations. The new risk rating methodology, inclusive of the expanded grade levels and the scorecard tools, has increased, and is expected to continue to increase granularity and distribution of risk rating assignment with more precision and effectiveness; provide customized and enhanced templates to incorporate more risk factors and attributes applicable to loan and collateral types; increase precision and effectiveness of credit risk identification; and provide a foundation for enhanced reporting, including migration of risk rating analysis.
Special mention, substandard and doubtful loans totaled 5.8% and 7.7% of total commercial loans outstanding at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease was driven by risk rating upgrades in the construction and commercial and industrial portfolios.
Our philosophy toward managing our loan portfolios is predicated upon careful monitoring, which stresses early detection and response to delinquent and default situations. We seek to make arrangements to resolve any delinquent or default situation over the shortest possible time frame.
For the retail portfolio, which includes residential real estate, consumer home equity, and other consumer portfolios, we monitor credit quality using the borrower’s FICO score. As of December 31, 2021, 70.8% of retail borrowers, based on loan balance, have a FICO score of 740 or greater. The following table shows the balances by borrower’s current FICO score as of the dates indicated:
(1)Borrower FICO scores are updated on a semi-annual basis, and the most recent update occurred in August 2021. With respect to loans acquired in connection with our acquisition of Century, borrower FICO scores were updated in December 2021.
(2)Insufficient data available to report.
The delinquency rate of our total loan portfolio increased to 0.65% at December 31, 2021 from 0.49% at December 31, 2020.
The following table provides details regarding our delinquency rates as of the dates indicated:
Loan Delinquency Rates
(1)In the calculation of the delinquency rate as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the total amount of loans outstanding includes $0.3 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively, of PPP loans.
As a general rule, loans more than 90 days past due with respect to principal or interest are classified as non-accrual loans. However, based on our assessment of collateral and/or payment prospects, certain loans that are more than 90 days past due may be kept on an accruing status. Income accruals are suspended on all non-accrual loans and all previously accrued and uncollected interest is reversed against current income. A loan is expected to remain on non-accrual status until it becomes current with respect to principal and interest, the loan is liquidated, or the loan is determined to be uncollectible and is charged-off against the allowance for loan losses.
Non-performing assets (“NPAs”) are comprised of non-performing loans (“NPLs”), OREO and non-performing securities. NPLs consist of non-accrual loans and loans that are more than 90 days past due but still accruing interest. OREO consists of real estate properties, which primarily serve as collateral to secure our loans, that we control due to foreclosure. These properties are recorded at the fair value less estimated costs to sell on the date we obtain control. Any write-downs to the cost of the related asset upon transfer to OREO to reflect the asset at fair value less estimated costs to sell is recorded through the allowance for loan losses.
NPLs decreased $8.3 million, or 20%, to $35.0 million at December 31, 2021 from $43.3 million at December 31, 2020. NPLs as a percentage of total loans decreased to 0.29% at December 31, 2021 from 0.45% at December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in residential non-accrual loans, commercial real estate non-accrual loans, and commercial and industrial loans greater than 90 days past due and still accruing. The decreases in these categories was partially offset by an increase in consumer loans greater than 90 days and still accruing. For additional discussion of non-accrual loans, refer to the later “Credit Ratios” section.
The total amount of interest recorded on NPLs was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The gross interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of those loans if they had been performing amounted to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The total amount of interest recorded on NPLs was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gross interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of those loans if they had been performing amounted to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In the course of resolving NPLs, we may choose to restructure the contractual terms of certain loans. We attempt to work-out alternative payment schedules with the borrowers in order to avoid foreclosure actions. We review any loans that are modified to identify whether a TDR has occurred. TDRs involve situations in which, for economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s financial difficulties, we grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. As described further below, loan modifications made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic met the criteria of either Section 4013 of the CARES Act or the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised) and therefore are not deemed TDRs.
All TDR loans are considered impaired and therefore are subject to a specific review for impairment loss. The impairment analysis discounts the present value of the anticipated cash flows by the loan’s contractual rate of interest in effect prior to the loan’s modification or the fair value of collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. The amount of impairment loss, if any, is recorded as a specific reserve to each individual loan in the allowance for loan losses. Commercial loans (commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, commercial construction, and business banking) and residential loans that have been classified as TDRs and which subsequently default are reviewed to determine if the loan should be deemed collateral dependent.
TDR loans modified during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $0.8 million and $4.2 million, respectively (post modification balance). The overall decrease in TDR loans consisted of a decrease of $2.3 million in commercial loan TDRs and a decrease of $1.2 million in consumer loan TDRs. No loans were modified during the preceding 12 months which subsequently defaulted during the year ended December 31, 2021.
It is our policy to have any restructured loans that are on non-accrual status prior to being modified remain on non-accrual status for approximately six months subsequent to being modified before we consider its return to accrual status. If the restructured loan is on accrual status prior to being modified, we review it to determine if the modified loan should remain on accrual status.
PCI loans are loans we acquired that have shown evidence of deterioration of credit quality since origination and, therefore, it was deemed unlikely that all contractually required payments would be collected upon the acquisition date. We consider factors such as payment history, collateral values and accrual status when determining whether there was evidence of deterioration at the acquisition date. The carrying value and prospective income recognition of PCI loans are predicated on future cash flows expected to be collected. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 the carrying amount of PCI loans was $69.6 million and $9.3 million, respectively. The increase of $60.3 million was primarily attributable to PCI loans acquired from Century of $67.3 million, partially offset by borrower principal payments during the year ended December 31, 2021.
COVID-19 Modifications In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented loan modification programs for our borrowers in 2020 that allowed for either full payment deferrals (both interest and principal) or deferral of principal only. These modifications met the criteria of either Section 4013 of the CARES Act or the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised) and therefore are not deemed TDRs. We have deemed these modified loans “COVID-19 modifications.”
The Appropriations Act, which was enacted on December 27, 2020, extended certain expiring tax provisions related to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States and provides additional emergency relief to individuals and businesses. Included
within the provisions of the Appropriations Act was the extension of Section 4013 of the CARES Act to January 1, 2022. As such, we applied CARES Act TDR relief to qualifying loan modifications executed during the allowable time period.
The following table presents the balance of loans that received a COVID-19 modification and have not yet resumed repayment as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and excludes loans acquired from Century:
(1)Remaining COVID-19 modifications reflect only those loans which underwent a modification and have not yet resumed payment. We define a modified loan to have resumed payment if it is one month past the modification end date and not more than 30 days past due.
As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate amount of loans that received a COVID-19 modification and have become a non-performing loan after the respective deferral period is $4.7 million and are included in the total remaining COVID-19 modifications shown in the table above.
COVID-19 Pandemic-Impacted Industries. Management evaluated the risk present in our commercial loan portfolios with respect to COVID-19 pandemic-impacted industries as of December 31, 2021 and, in connection with that evaluation, identified commercial real estate loans collateralized by properties with office space as a high risk industry sector primarily resulting from the delay in many companies’ return to office plans. As of December 31, 2021, we believe loans to our borrowers in office, retail, restaurant, and hotel industry categories represent those which have experienced and will likely continue to experience the most adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate outstanding balance of loans to our borrowers in office, retail, restaurant, and hotel industry categories was $1.1 billion, $549.0 million, $188.9 million, and $189.0 million respectively, representing 8.8%, 4.5%, 1.5% and 1.5% of total loans, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate outstanding loan balance of loans to our borrowers in office, retail, restaurant, and hotel industry categories was $1.0 billion, $496.4 million, $197.4 million, and $178.7 million, respectively, representing 10.6%, 5.1%, 2.0%, and 1.8% of total loans, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the current balance of loans modified which we considered to be COVID-19 modifications was $987.0 million, of which 40% were for full payment deferrals, while 60% were for full deferral of principal only. This includes $631.7 million in commercial real estate (including commercial construction loans), $105.7 million in commercial and industrial loans, $133.5 million in business banking loans, $88.5 million in residential real estate loans, and $27.5 million in consumer loans. The balance of COVID-19 modifications that have not resumed scheduled repayment or have become delinquent as of December 31, 2021 was $106.7 million compared to $332.7 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the percentage of loans to our borrowers in retail, restaurant and hotel industries that were modified primarily due to the effects on borrowers of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic slowdown beginning in late March 2020 which have not yet resumed payment were less than 0.1%, 2.9%, and 37.6%, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, there were no loans to our borrowers in office industries that were modified primarily due to the effects on borrowers of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic slowdown beginning in late March 2020 and which have not yet resumed payment. As of December 31, 2020, the percentage of loans to our borrowers in office, retail, restaurant, and hotel industries that were modified primarily due to the effects on borrowers of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic slowdown beginning in late March 2020 which have not yet resumed payment were 7.7%, 2.1%, 12.7%, and 39.4%, respectively.
In the normal course of business, we become aware of possible credit problems in which borrowers exhibit potential for the inability to comply with the contractual terms of their loans, but which currently do not yet meet the criteria for classification as NPLs. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we reviewed all of our credit exposures in industries that were expected to experience significant problems due to the pandemic and resulting economic contraction. As part of that review, we downgraded our hotel loans, restaurant loans and other loans that we expected to have associated challenges as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These loans were neither delinquent nor on non-accrual status. Management evaluated loans to borrowers in our office segment as of December 31, 2021 and observed increases in vacancy rates in properties collateralized by such properties. Due to the long-term nature of leases at such properties, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on borrowers’ ability to repay is not currently reasonably estimable. However, based upon management’s regular evaluation of such loans, downgrades to the respective risk ratings have occurred and may occur again at such time heightened risk is identified. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our potential problem loans (including these COVID-19 pandemic-impacted loans), or loans with potential weaknesses that were not included in the non-accrual loans or in the loans 90 days or more past due categories, totaled $470.9 million and $563.3 million, respectively. Included in these potential problem loans was $335.9 million and $319.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, of loans in COVID-19 impacted industries, which includes borrowers in office industries as previously described at both December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Allowance for loan losses. Because we continued to qualify for emerging growth company status under the Jumpstart Our Business (“JOBS”) Act until December 31, 2021, we were permitted to delay adoption of the CECL standard until the earlier of the date at which non-public business entities are required to adopt the standard and the date we ceased to be an EGC. Included in the Appropriations Act was an extension of the adoption date to the earlier of January 1, 2022 or 60 days after the date on which the COVID-19 national emergency terminates. We elected this extension and, accordingly, adopted the CECL standard on January 1, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we followed the incurred loss allowance GAAP accounting model. See “Risk Factors-Our loan loss allowance at December 31, 2021 may be difficult to evaluate in comparison to our peers” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the purpose of estimating our allowance for loan losses, we segregate the loan portfolio into homogenous loan pools that possess unique risk characteristics such as loan purpose, repayment source, and collateral that are considered when determining the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses for each category.
While we use available information to recognize losses on loans, future additions or subtractions to/from the allowance for loan losses may be necessary based on changes in NPLs, changes in economic conditions, or other reasons. Additionally, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of our examination process, periodically assess the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses to assess whether the allowance for loan losses was determined in accordance with GAAP and applicable guidance.
We perform an evaluation of our allowance for loan losses on a regular basis (at least quarterly), and establish the allowance for loan losses based upon an evaluation of our loan categories, as each possess unique risk characteristics that are considered when determining the appropriate level of allowance for loan losses, including:
•estimated future loss in all impaired loans in each category;
•known increases in concentrations within each category;
•certain higher risk classes of loans, or pledged collateral;
•historical loan loss experience within each category;
•results of any independent review and evaluation of the category’s credit quality;
•trends in volume, maturity and composition of each category;
•volume and trends in delinquencies and non-accruals;
•national and local economic conditions and downturns in specific local industries;
•corporate goals and objectives;
•expertise of our lending staff;
•lending policy and practices; and
•current and forecasted banking industry conditions, as well as regulatory environment.
Loans are periodically evaluated using changes in asset quality, historical losses, and other loss allocation factors, which form our basis for estimating incurred losses. For risk rated loans, our risk-rating system takes into consideration a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, such as the borrower’s financial capacity, cash flow, liquidity, leverage, adequacy of collateral, tangible net worth, management team, industry, sales and supplier concentration, credit history,
additional support and the impact of outside factors on repayment ability. Homogenous populations of loans that are not risk rated loans, are analyzed by loan category, taking into account delinquency ratios and historical loss experience.
The allowance for loan losses is allocated to loan categories using both a formula-based approach and an analysis of certain individual loans for impairment. We use a methodology to systematically estimate the amount of credit loss incurred in the loan portfolio. Under our current methodology, the allowance for loan losses contains specific, general and other components.
The specific component consists of reserves for impaired loans (defined as those where we determine it is probable we will not collect all payments when due, typically classified as either doubtful or substandard). All commercial, residential and consumer loan portfolios are periodically reviewed to identify the loans with deteriorating performance. The reports used to identify those loans include, but are not limited to, delinquency reports, risk rating migration (for risk rated loans), asset quality reports, watch loan list and other credit risk management reports. When a loan is determined to be impaired, the measurement will be based on the present value of expected future cash flows, except for collateral-dependent loans, where the impairment is based on the fair value of the collateral.
The general loss reserves methodology, which is applied to categories of loans with similar characteristics, covers all non-impaired loans and is based on our portfolio’s segment historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. The general loss reserve methodology considers multiple qualitative factors that may impact the loss experience during the incurred loss horizon period, including internal infrastructure factors, external macroeconomic factors, internal credit quality factors and external industry data, tailored to the specific loan category.
For additional discussion of our risk rating methodology, see Note 5, “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table summarizes credit ratios for the periods presented:
Credit Ratios
(1)Average loan balances exclude loans held for sale.
Non-accrual loans decreased $8.0 million, or 20%, to $33.0 million at December 31, 2021 from $41.0 million at December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in non-accrual loans in our business banking portfolio and commercial real estate portfolio, partially offset by an increase in non-accrual loans in our commercial and industrial portfolio.
The allowance for loan losses decreased by $15.2 million, or 13.5%, to $97.8 million, or 0.80% of total loans (including PPP loans), at December 31, 2021 from $113.0 million, or 1.16% of total loans at December 31, 2020. The decrease in the allowance for loan losses was primarily a result of improved macroeconomic conditions, risk rating upgrades in the commercial portfolios during the period and loans acquired from Century for which the estimated incurred losses were substantively included in the initial fair value determination as of the acquisition date of November 12, 2021. The economic environment during the year ended December 31, 2021 was assisted by government stimulus, the impacts of loan deferral programs, reductions in unemployment and reductions in COVID-19 related restrictions. These, along with other factors, resulted in a release of allowance for loan losses of $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a provision for allowance for loan losses of $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for loan losses by loan categories listed in loan portfolio composition as of the dates indicated:
Summary of Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
(1)PPP loans are included within these portfolios as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020; however, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, no allowance for loan losses have been recorded on these loans due to the SBA guarantee of 100% of the loans.
To determine if a loan should be charged-off, all possible sources of repayment are analyzed. Possible sources of repayment include the potential for future cash flows, liquidation of the collateral and the strength of co-makers or guarantors. When available information confirms that specific loans or portions thereof are uncollectible, these amounts are promptly charged-off against the allowance for loan losses and any recoveries of such previously charged-off amounts are credited to the allowance for loan losses.
Regardless of whether a loan is unsecured or collateralized, we charge off the amount of any confirmed loan loss in the period when the loans, or portions of loans, are deemed uncollectible. For troubled, collateral-dependent loans, loss confirming events may include an appraisal or other valuation that reflects a shortfall between the value of the collateral and the carrying value of the loan or receivable, or a deficiency balance following the sale of the collateral.
For additional information regarding our allowance for loan losses, see Note 5, “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We adopted the CECL standard on January 1, 2022 and will use the CECL methodology to determine our allowance for loan loss in future periods. For information about risks associated with our adoption of the CECL standard, see “Risk Factors-“We increased our allowance for loan losses as a result of our adoption as of January 1, 2022 of the new accounting standard for determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses and may be required to do so again in the future.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Federal Home Loan Bank stock
The FHLBB is a cooperative that provides services to its member banking institutions. The primary reason for our membership in the FHLBB is to gain access to a reliable source of wholesale funding and as a tool to manage interest rate risk. The purchase of stock in the FHLB is a requirement for a member to gain access to funding. We purchase and/or are subject to redemption of FHLBB stock proportional to the volume of funding received and view the holdings as a necessary long-term investment for the purpose of balance sheet liquidity and not for investment return.
We held an investment in the FHLBB of $10.9 million and $8.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets were $649.7 million and $376.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in goodwill and other intangibles assets was due to our acquisition of Century which resulted in the addition of goodwill and intangible assets of $259.0 million and $11.6 million, respectively, as well as two insurance agency acquisitions which resulted in additional goodwill and intangible assets that are not considered to be material. This was partially offset by amortization of definite-lived intangibles during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not record any impairment to our goodwill or other intangible assets during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We routinely assess our goodwill and other intangible assets to determine if impairments are necessary.
Deposits and other interest-bearing liabilities
Deposits originating within the markets we serve continue to be our primary source of funding our earning assets. We have been able to compete effectively for deposits in our primary market areas. The distribution and market share of deposits by type of deposit and by type of depositor are important considerations in our assessment of the stability of our fund sources and our access to additional funds. Furthermore, we shift the mix and maturity of the deposits depending on economic conditions and loan and investment policies in an attempt, within set policies, to minimize cost and maximize net interest margin.
The following table presents our deposits, including those acquired from Century in 2021, as of the dates presented:
Components of Deposits
(1)The Bank’s estimate of total uninsured deposits was $11.0 billion and $5.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The increase in estimated uninsured deposits between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our acquisition of Century.
The following table presents the composition of deposits acquired in connection with our acquisition of Century at fair value as of the November 12, 2021 acquisition date:
Acquired Deposits at Fair Value
Deposits increased by $7.5 billion, or 61.5%, to $19.6 billion at December 31, 2021 from $12.2 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily a result of our acquisition of Century through which we acquired $6.1 billion total deposits. For more information regarding deposits acquired as a result of the Century acquisition, see Note 26, “Subsequent Events” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on form 10-K. Excluding deposits acquired from Century, interest checking deposits, money market deposits and demand deposits, the deposit types primarily contributed to the increase in legacy deposits (e.g., deposits not acquired from Century) and increased $0.7 billion, $0.6 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively. The increases in these deposit categories reflect strong deposit flows, in part due to government stimulus.
The following table presents the classification of deposits on an average basis for the years indicated:
Classification of Deposits on an Average Basis
Other time deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000, including certificates of deposits as of the dates indicated had maturities as follows:
Maturities of Time Certificates of Deposit $250,000 and Over
Borrowings
Our borrowings may consist of both short-term and long-term borrowings and provide us with sources of funding. Maintaining available borrowing capacity provides us with a contingent source of liquidity.
Our total borrowings increased by $6.2 million, or 22.2%, to $34.3 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $28.0 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances on our borrowings as of the dates indicated:
Borrowings by Category
Results of Operations
Summary of Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Interest and Dividend Income
Interest and dividend income increased by $21.8 million, or 5.3%, to $435.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $413.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily a result of our acquisition of Century on November 12, 2021 which added approximately $6.6 billion in interest-earning assets. Overall, the average balance of our interest-earning assets increased $3.9 billion, or 30.7%, to $16.7 billion as of December 31, 2021 compared to $12.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, reflecting the addition of Century assets and the purchase of investment securities resulting from the investment of the proceeds from our October 2020 IPO. Partially offsetting this increase was a decrease in the yield on average interest-earning assets which decreased by 64 basis points to 2.64% during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our yields on loans and securities are generally presented on an FTE basis where the embedded tax benefit on loans or securities are calculated and added to the yield. Management believes that this presentation allows for better comparability between institutions with different tax structures.
•Interest income on securities and federal funds sold and other short-term investments increased $26.4 million, or 64.1%, to $67.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $41.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest income on securities was primarily due to an increase in the average balance of such securities of $3.6 billion, or 114.0%, to $6.7 billion as of December 31, 2021 compared to $3.1 billion as of December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by a decrease in the yield on such securities. The increase in the average balance of securities was attributable to security purchases of $3.3 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting the investment of the proceeds from our October 2020 IPO, and investment securities acquired of $3.1 billion as a result of our acquisition of Century.
•Interest income on loans decreased by $4.6 million, or 1.2%, to $367.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $372.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income on our
loans was primarily due to the decrease in yield on average loans which was driven by the downward adjustment of the interest rates on our existing adjustable-rate loans as a result of lower interest rates. The FTE yield on average loans decreased 18 basis points to 3.71% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in loan yields was partially offset by an increase in net accretion of PPP loan deferred fees and costs of $20.4 million to $34.3 million during year ended December 31, 2021 from $13.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Also partially offsetting the decline in average yield was a slight increase in the average balance of loans of $371.9 million, or 3.9%, from $9.7 billion to $10.0 billion which was primarily the result of our acquisition of Century which added $2.9 billion in loans as of November 12, 2021, partially offset by a decline in PPP loan balances of $0.7 billion reflecting pay-offs of such balances.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $6.7 million, or 55.8%, to $5.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was a result of lower funding costs associated with the decline in the market interest rates.
•Interest expense on our interest-bearing deposits decreased by $6.1 million, or 54.3%, to $5.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $11.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Interest expense on borrowed funds decreased by $0.6 million, or 78.3%, to $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Average interest-bearing deposits increased $1.6 billion, or 23.8%, for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the Century acquisition. The increase in deposit costs associated with the increase in average deposits was more than offset by the reduction in rates paid on deposits during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased by $28.6 million, or 7.1%, to $429.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $401.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net interest income increased slightly as the reduction in interest income associated with the lower interest rate environment was more than offset by a related reduction in interest expense. In addition, the average balances of interest-earning assets substantially increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020 which reflects assets acquired in connection with our acquisition of Century and the investment of the proceeds from our October 2020 IPO in investment securities.
Net interest margin is determined by dividing FTE net interest income by average-earning assets. For purposes of the following discussion, income from tax-exempt loans and investment securities has been adjusted to an FTE basis, using a marginal tax rate of 21.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 21.8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Net interest margin decreased 57 basis points to 2.61% during the year ended December 31, 2021, from 3.19% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following tables set forth average balance sheet items, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the periods indicated. All average balances in the table reflect daily average balances. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or expense.
Average Balances, Interest Earned/Paid, & Average Yields
(1)Non-accrual loans are included in Loans.
(2)Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4)Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
(5)Represents net income divided by average total assets.
(6)Represents net income divided by average equity.
The following table presents, on a tax equivalent basis, the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Rate and Volume Analysis
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses represents the charge to expense that is required to maintain an appropriate level of allowance for loan losses. We currently follow the incurred loss model for determining the provision for loan losses and adopted what is commonly referred to as the “CECL standard” on January 1, 2022.
We recorded a release of the allowance for loan losses of $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision of $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Given the continued improved economic and credit conditions during year ended December 31, 2021, we determined that a release of the allowance was necessary. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we downgraded the risk ratings for all commercial loans we expected at the time to be significantly impacted by the pandemic, including our hotel and restaurant loan portfolios, which resulted in a total provision of $28.6 million recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
Our periodic evaluation of the appropriate allowance for loan losses considers the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, and trends in loan delinquencies and charge-offs.
Noninterest Income
The following table sets forth information regarding noninterest income for the periods shown:
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income increased by $14.8 million, or 8.3%, to $193.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $178.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $7.0 million increase in interest rate swap income, and a $3.5 million increase in trust and investment advisory fees, which were partially offset by a $3.5 million decrease in net gains resulting from the sale of mortgage loans held for sale.
•Interest rate swap income increased primarily as a result of a favorable mark-to-market adjustment due to the current interest rate and economic environment.
•Trust and investment advisory fees increased primarily as a result of higher asset values associated with the principal assets in customers’ accounts.
•Net gains resulting from the sale of mortgage loans held for sale decreased primarily due to a combination of fewer residential real estate loans originated as held for sale as we designate more residential mortgage loans originated as held for investment and increases in market rates of interest.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth information regarding noninterest expense for the periods shown:
Noninterest Expense
The Company recorded merger and acquisition expenses of $35.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the Century acquisition. These merger and acquisition expenses were included in the following line items of the consolidated statements of income:
Century Merger & Acquisition Expenses
Noninterest expense decreased by $61.0 million, or 12.1%, to $444.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $504.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $95.3 million decrease in charitable contributions and a $24.5 million decrease in other noninterest expenses, excluding merger and acquisition expenses. Partially offsetting these decreases were $35.5 million in merger and acquisition expenses, for which there were none during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in salaries and employee benefits of $18.1 million, excluding merger and acquisition expenses, and an increase in operational losses of $5.3 million.
•Charitable contributions decreased as the Company made no contributions during the year ended December 31, 2021 following the Company’s $91.3 million stock contribution to the Eastern Bank Foundation made in connection with the Company's IPO during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Other noninterest expenses, excluding merger and acquisition expenses, decreased primarily due to reduced costs associated with the conversion of each of our noncontributory, defined benefit plan (“Defined Benefit Plan”) and Benefit Equalization Plan (“BEP”) from a traditional final average earnings plan design to a cash balance plan design, which occurred in the fourth quarter of 2020 and was effective as of November 1, 2020. In addition, other noninterest expenses, excluding merger and acquisition expenses, decreased due to a reduction in impairment charges taken on certain tax credit investments. Non-service cost expenses for the Defined Benefit Plan and the BEP decreased by $13.0 million and $2.1 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Impairment charges taken on certain tax credit investments decreased primarily due to write-downs taken of $10.8 million on certain tax credit investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily composed of a $7.6
million impairment charge reflecting management’s estimate of the future benefit of the investments. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we recorded a net recovery of impairment charges of $0.2 million. For additional information on this impairment charge see Note 13, “Low Income Housing Tax Credits and Other Tax Credit Investments” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Merger and acquisition expenses were $35.5 million and resulted from our acquisition of Century which we completed on November 12, 2021. No such expenses were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 as there were no acquisitions. For additional information on our acquisition of Century, see Note 3, “Mergers and Acquisitions” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Salaries and employee benefits increased primarily as a result of an increase of $7.1 million in ESOP expense, for which fewer expenses were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020, in which the ESOP was established in October of such year. Also contributing to the increase were pension service costs which increased $6.9 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 which resulted from an increase in the projected retirement benefits earned by plan participants during the year ended December 31, 2021. The higher pension service costs were more than offset by a decrease in the non-service cost components of net periodic pension expense for the Defined Benefit Plan and the BEP, as discussed further above.
•Operational losses increased primarily as a result of an accrual of $3.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 for legal expenses associated with the preliminary settlement of the putative consumer class action litigation matters related to overdraft and non-sufficient funds fees.
Income Taxes
We recognize the tax effect of all income and expense transactions in each year’s consolidated statements of income, regardless of the year in which the transactions are reported for income tax purposes. The following table sets forth information regarding our tax provision and applicable tax rates for the periods indicated:
Tax Provision and Applicable Tax Rates
Income tax expense increased by $20.9 million to $34.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $13.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense was due primarily to higher pre-tax income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which lessened the impact on the effective rate related to favorable permanent differences, including investment tax credits and tax exempt income. Partially offsetting this increase was a release of $11.3 million related to a valuation allowance of $12.0 million, established as of December 31, 2020 against our charitable contribution carryover deferred tax asset in connection with our 2020 charitable contribution to the Foundation. For additional information related to the Company’s income taxes see Note 12, “Income Taxes” and Note 13, “Low Income Housing Tax Credits and Other Tax Credit Investments” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Position and Results of Operations of our Business Segments
Banking Segment
•Average interest-earning assets increased $3.9 billion, or 30.7%, to $16.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting the addition of Century assets and the purchase of investment securities representing the investment of the proceeds from our October 2020 IPO. Our acquisition of Century closed on November 12, 2021 and added approximately $6.6 billion in interest-earning assets. The increase in average interest-earning assets resulted in an increase in interest income and was partially offset by a decline in market rates of interest. For additional discussion, refer to the earlier “Interest and Dividends” section.
•Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $1.6 billion, or 22.9%, to $8.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, with average total interest-bearing deposits, our largest category of average interest-bearing liabilities, growing $1.6 billion, or 23.8%, to $8.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 compared to $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in average interest-bearing liabilities was more than offset by a reduction in rates paid on deposits resulting in an overall decrease in interest expense. For additional discussion, refer to the earlier “Interest and Dividends” section.
•We recorded a release of allowance for loan losses of $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision of $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Given continued improved economic and credit conditions during the year ended December 31, 2021, we determined that a release of the provision was necessary. For additional discussion, refer to the earlier “Provision for Loan Losses” section.
•Gains related to interest rate swaps were $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to losses of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 508.0%. This change was due primarily to a favorable mark-to-market adjustment which resulted in an increase in income of $9.8 million which was partially offset by a decrease of $2.7 million attributable to a decline in transactional volume.
•Trust and investment advisory fees increased $3.5 million from $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $24.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily as a result of higher asset values associated with the principal assets in customers’ accounts. Assets under management as of December 31, 2021 were $3.4 billion compared to $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2020.
•Noninterest expense decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to charitable contributions which decreased as no contributions were made during the year ended December 31, 2021 following the our $91.3 million stock contribution to the Eastern Bank Foundation made in connection with our IPO during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was partially offset by costs associated with our acquisition of Century of $35.5 million. For additional discussion, refer to the earlier “Noninterest Expense” section.
Insurance Agency Segment
•Noninterest income related to our insurance agency business remained relatively consistent with a slight increase of $0.4 million, or 0.4%, to $97.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $96.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Noninterest expense related to our insurance agency business increased $5.0 million, or 6.4%, to $82.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $77.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increases in salaries, wages and benefits to employees in this business unit.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are discussed in detail in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is the amount estimated by us as necessary to absorb loan losses incurred in the loan portfolio that are probable and reasonably estimable at the balance sheet date. The amount of the allowance is based on significant judgments and estimates, and the ultimate losses may vary from such estimates as more information becomes available or conditions change. The methodology for determining the allowance for loan losses is considered a critical accounting policy due to the high degree of judgement involved in determining the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, subjectivity of assumptions used and the potential for changes in the economic environment that could result in changes to the amount of the recorded allowance for loan losses. Additionally, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of the regulatory examination process, periodically assess the appropriateness of the allowance for loan losses and may require us to increase the provision for loan losses or recognize further loan charge-offs, in accordance with GAAP.
The allowance for loan losses is evaluated at least quarterly. While we use current information in establishing the allowance for losses, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if economic conditions or conditions relative to borrowers differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluation. We use a methodology to systematically estimate the amount of credit loss incurred in the portfolio. Commercial real estate, commercial construction, commercial and industrial, and business banking loans are evaluated using a loan rating system, historical losses and other factors which form the basis for estimating incurred losses. Portfolios of more homogeneous populations of loans, including residential mortgages and consumer loans, are analyzed as groups using delinquency ratios, historical loss experience and charge-offs.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are deemed to be impaired. For impaired loans, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the loan is lower than the carrying value of the loan. The general component covers non-impaired, non-classified loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. Through December 31, 2021, we followed the incurred loss methodology for determining our allowance for loan loss. We adopted the CECL standard effective January 1, 2022.
For additional information on our allowance for loan losses, refer to Note 5, “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes by establishing deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the accounting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates. We make significant judgments regarding the amount and timing of recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. This requires subjective projections of future taxable income resulting from interest on loans and securities, as well as noninterest income. A valuation allowance is established if it is considered more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Interest and penalties paid on the underpayment of income taxes are classified as income tax expense.
We periodically evaluate the potential uncertainty of our tax positions as to whether it is more likely than not its position would be upheld upon examination by the appropriate taxing authority. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that we believe is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.
For additional information on our income taxes, refer to Note 12, “Income Taxes” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually, or more often if warranted, using a quantitative impairment approach. The quantitative impairment testing compares book value to fair value of the reporting unit. If book value exceeds fair value, an impairment is charged to earnings and allocated to the appropriate reporting unit.
We evaluate other intangible assets, all of which are definite-lived, for impairment whenever there is an indication of impairment, and we evaluate annually the remaining useful lives of those intangible assets. We amortize other intangible assets over their respective estimated useful lives.
For additional information on our goodwill and other intangibles, refer to Note 8, “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Securities. Debt securities are classified at the time of purchase as either “trading,” “available for sale,” or “held to maturity.” Equity securities are measured at fair value with changes in the fair value recognized through net income.
We evaluate impaired securities for other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) at least on a quarterly basis, and more frequently when economic or market concerns warrant such evaluation. Consideration is given to the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, current market conditions, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, performance of collateral underlying the securities, the ratings of the individual securities, the interest rate environment, our intent to sell the security or whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the debt security before its anticipated recovery, as well as other qualitative factors. The term other-than-temporary impairment is not intended to indicate that the decline is permanent. It indicates that the prospects for near-term recovery are not necessarily favorable or that there is a lack of evidence to support fair values greater than or equal to the carrying value of the investment.
If a decline in fair value below the amortized cost basis of an investment is judged to be other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value. The portion of the impairment related to credit losses is included in net income, and the portion of the impairment related to other factors is included in other comprehensive income. Gains and losses on sales of securities are recognized at the time of sale on the specific-identification basis.
For additional information on our investment securities, refer to Note 3, “Securities” and Note 20, “Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Pension and other Post Retirement Benefit Plans. We provide pension benefits for employees using a noncontributory, defined benefit plan, through membership in the SBERA. Effective November 1, 2020, the Defined Benefit Plan was amended to convert the plan from a traditional final average earnings plan design to a cash balance plan design. Benefits earned under the final average earnings plan design were frozen at October 31, 2020. Starting November 1, 2020, future benefits are earned under the cash balance plan design. Our employees become eligible after attaining age 21 and one year of service. Under the final average earnings plan design, benefits became fully vested after three years of eligible service for individuals employed on or before October 31, 1989. For individuals employed subsequent to October 31, 1989 and who were already in the Defined Benefit Plan as of November 1, 2020, benefits became fully vested after five years of eligible service. Under the cash balance plan design, benefits become fully vested after three years of eligible service. Our annual contribution to the plan is based upon standards established by the Pension Protection Act. The contribution is based on an actuarial method intended to provide not only for benefits attributable to service to date, but also for those expected to be earned in the future.
Plan assets are invested in various investment funds and held at fair value which generally represents observable market prices. Pension liability is determined based on the actuarial cost method factoring in assumptions such as salary increases, expected retirement date, mortality rate, and employee turnover. The actuarial cost method used to compute the pension liabilities and related expense is the projected unit credit method. The projected benefit obligation is principally determined based on the present value of the projected benefit distributions at an assumed discount rate (which is the rate at which the projected benefit obligation could be effectively settled as of the measurement date). The discount rate which is utilized is determined using the spot rate approach whereby the individual spot rates on the Financial Times and Stock Exchange (“FTSE”) above-median yield curve are applied to each corresponding year’s projected cash flow used to measure the respective plan’s service cost and interest cost. Periodic pension expense (or income) includes service costs, interest costs based on the assumed discount rate, the expected return on plan assets, if applicable, based on the market value of assets and amortization of actuarial gains and losses. Net period benefit cost excluding service cost is included within other noninterest expense in the consolidated statements of income. Service cost is included in salaries and employee benefits in the consolidated statements of income. The amortization of actuarial gains and losses for the Defined Benefit Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (“DB SERP”) and Outside Directors' Retainer Continuance Plan (“ODRCP”) is determined using the 10%
corridor minimum amortization approach and is taken over the average remaining future service of the plan participants for the ODRCP, and over the average remaining future life expectancy of plan participants for the DB SERP. The amortization of actuarial gains and losses for the Defined Benefit Plan and BEP are determined without using the 10% corridor minimum amortization approach and is taken over the average remaining future service of the plan participants. The overfunded or underfunded status of the plans is recorded as an asset or liability on the consolidated balance sheets, with changes in that status recognized through other comprehensive income, net of related taxes. Funded status represents the difference between the projected benefit obligation of the plan and the market value of the plan’s assets.
For additional information on our employee benefit plans, refer to Note 16, “Employee Benefits” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Derivative Financial Instruments. Derivative instruments are carried at fair value in our financial statements. The accounting for a derivative instrument is determined by whether it has been designated and qualifies as part of a hedging relationship, and further, by the type of hedging relationship. Our derivative instruments that qualify for hedge accounting are classified as cash flow hedges (i.e., hedging the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows associated with a recognized asset or liability, or a forecasted transaction). Our derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments include interest rate swaps, foreign exchange contracts offered to commercial customers to assist them in meeting their financing and investing objectives for their risk management purposes, and risk participation agreements entered into as financial guarantees of performance on customer-related interest rate swap derivatives. The interest rate and foreign exchange risks associated with customer interest rate swaps and foreign exchange contracts are mitigated by entering into similar derivatives having offsetting terms with correspondent bank counterparties.
For additional information on our derivatives, refer to Note 18, “Derivative Financial Instruments” and Note 19, “Balance Sheet Offsetting” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Fair Value Measurements. “Fair value” is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We estimate the fair value in recording acquisition transactions and for financial instruments and any related asset impairment using a variety of valuation methods. For acquisition transactions, the Company uses quotable market prices or observable data when possible in valuing acquired assets and liabilities. Where financial instruments are actively traded and have quoted market prices, quoted market prices as of the measurement date are used for fair value. When the financial instruments are not actively traded, other observable market inputs, such as quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics, quoted prices in markets that are not active or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data, may be used, if available, to determine fair value. When observable market prices do not exist, we estimate fair value. These estimates are subjective in nature and imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount of revenue or loss recorded. To the extent that valuation is based on models or inputs that are less observable or unobservable in the market, the determination of fair value requires more judgment. Accordingly, the degree of judgment we exercise in determining fair value is greatest for instruments categorized in Level 3.
For additional information on our fair value measurements, refer to Note 20, “Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and relevant amendments (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”). This update was created to replace the current GAAP method of calculating credit losses. Specifically, the standard replaces the existing incurred loss impairment guidance by requiring immediate recognition of expected credit losses. For financial assets carried at amortized cost that are held at the reporting date (including trade and other receivables, loans and commitments, held-to-maturity debt securities and other financial assets), credit losses are measured based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable supportable forecasts. The standard also amends existing impairment guidance for available for sale securities, in which credit losses will be recorded as an allowance versus a write-down of the amortized cost basis of the security. It will also allow for a reversal of impairment loss when the credit of the issuer improves. The guidance requires a cumulative effect of the initial application to be recognized in retained earnings at the date of initial application.
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (“ASU 2018-19”). The amendments in ASU 2018-19 were intended to clarify that receivables arising from operating leases are not within the scope of Subtopic 326-20. Instead, impairment of receivables arising from operating leases should be accounted for in accordance with Topic 842, Leases. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-11, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. This update requires entities to include expected recoveries of the amortized cost basis previously written off or expected to be written off in the valuation
account for purchased financial assets with credit deterioration. In addition, the amendments in this update clarify and improve various aspects of the guidance for ASU 2016-13. For public entities that meet the definition of an SEC filer (excluding smaller reporting entities) the guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption is permitted for all entities as of the fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018. For all other entities, the guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. to provide economic relief measures including the option to defer adoption of ASU 2016-13 to the earlier of the ending of the national emergency declaration related to the COVID-19 crisis or December 31, 2020. On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act (the “Appropriations Act”) was enacted to fund the federal government through their fiscal year, extend certain expiring tax provisions and provide additional emergency relief to individuals and businesses related to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. Included within the provisions of the Appropriations Act is an extension of the adoption date for ASU 2016-13 from December 31, 2020 to the earlier of January 1, 2022 or 60 days after the date on which the COVID-19 national emergency terminates.
Effective January 1, 2022, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13.
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial position or results of operations, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management of Market Risk
General. Market risk is the sensitivity of income to changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices and other market-driven rates or prices. Interest rate sensitivity is the most significant market risk to which we are exposed. Interest rate risk is the sensitivity of income to changes in interest rates. Changes in interest rates, as well as fluctuations in the level and duration of assets and liabilities, affect net interest income, our primary source of income. Interest rate risk arises directly from our core banking activities. In addition to directly impacting net interest income, changes in the level of interest rates can also affect the amount of loans originated, the timing of cash flows on loans and securities, and the fair value of securities and derivatives, as well as other effects. The primary goal of interest rate risk management is to control this risk within limits approved by the Risk Management Committee of our Board of Directors.
These limits reflect our tolerance for interest rate risk over both short-term and long-term horizons. We attempt to manage interest rate risk by identifying, quantifying, and where appropriate, hedging its exposure. If assets and liabilities do not re-price simultaneously and in equal volume, the potential for interest rate exposure exists. Our objective is to maintain stability in the growth of net interest income through the maintenance of an appropriate mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and, when necessary and within limits that management determines to be prudent, through the use of off-balance sheet hedging instruments such as interest rate swaps, floors and caps.
Net Interest Income. We analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through a net interest income model. We estimate what our net interest income would be for a 12-month period assuming no changes in interest rates. We then calculate what the net interest income would be for the same period under the assumption that the U.S. Treasury yield curve increases or decreases instantaneously by +200, +300, +400 and -100 basis point increments, with changes in interest rates representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Changes in Interest Rates” column in the table below. The model requires that interest rates remain positive for all points along the yield curve for each rate scenario which may preclude the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios during periods of lower market interest rates. The relatively low level of interest rates prevalent at December 31, 2021 and 2020 precluded the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios. We do not model negative interest rate scenarios.
The tables below set forth, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net interest income on an FTE basis that would result from the designated immediate changes in the U.S. Treasury yield curve.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
(1)Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities, except in the down 100 basis points scenario, where rates are floored at zero at all maturities.
The tables above indicate that at December 31, 2021 and 2020, in the event of an instantaneous parallel 200 basis points increase in rates, we would have experienced a 15.1% and 25.5% increase, respectively, in net interest income on an FTE basis, and in the event of an instantaneous 100 basis points decrease in interest rates, we would have experienced a 5.9% and a 5.0% decrease at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in net interest income, on an FTE basis. Management may use interest rate derivative financial instruments, within internal policy guidelines, to manage interest rate risk as part of our asset/liability strategy. These derivatives provide significant protection against falling interest rates.
Economic Value of Equity Analysis. We also analyze the sensitivity of our financial condition in interest rates through our economic value of equity (“EVE”) model. This analysis calculates the difference between the present value of expected cash flows from assets and liabilities assuming various changes in current interest rates.
The table below represents an analysis of our interest rate risk (excluding the effect of our pension plans) as measured by the estimated changes in our EVE model, resulting from an instantaneous and sustained parallel shift in the yield curve (+200, +300, +400 basis points and -100 basis points) at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The model requires that interest rates remain positive for all points along the yield curve for each rate scenario which may preclude the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios during periods of lower market interest rates. The relatively low level of interest rates prevalent at December 31, 2021 and 2020 precluded the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios, including negative interest rates.
Our earnings are not directly or materially impacted by movements in foreign currency rates or commodity prices. Movements in equity prices may have a modest impact on earnings by affecting the volume of activity or the amount of fees from investment-related business lines.
EVE Interest Rate Sensitivity
(1)Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities, except in the down 100 basis points scenario, where rates are floored at zero at all maturities.
(2)EVE is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3)Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
Liquidity, Capital Resources, Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
Liquidity. Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the normal course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet deposit withdrawals and anticipated loan fundings, as well as current and planned expenditures. We seek to maintain sources of liquidity that are deep and diversified and that may be used during the normal course of business as well as on a contingency basis.
The net proceeds from our IPO significantly increased our liquidity and capital resources at both Eastern Bankshares, Inc. and Eastern Bank. Over time, the initial level of liquidity will be reduced as net proceeds from the IPO are used for general corporate purposes, including the funding of loans. Our financial condition and results of operations were enhanced by the net proceeds from the stock offering and resulted in increased net interest-earning assets and net interest and dividend income. As previously discussed in “Overview” within this section, on November 12, 2021, we completed our previously announced merger with Century for $641.9 million in cash. Although, the transaction reduced the net proceeds from the IPO, we continue to expect that, due to the increase in equity resulting from the net proceeds raised in our IPO, our return on equity has been and will continue to be adversely affected until we can effectively deploy the remaining proceeds of the IPO.
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, and proceeds from calls, maturities and sales of securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and due from banks and securities classified as available for sale. In the future, our liquidity position will be affected by the level of customer deposits and payments, as well as acquisitions, dividends, and stock repurchases in which we may engage. We believe that our existing resources will be sufficient to meet the liquidity and capital requirements of our operations for the foreseeable future.
We participate in the IntraFi Network (formerly “Promontory”), which allows us to provide access to multi-million dollar FDIC deposit insurance protection on customer deposits for consumers, businesses and public entities. We can elect to sell or repurchase this funding as reciprocal deposits from other IntraFi Network banks depending on our funding needs. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a total of $520.5 million and $364.8 million of IntraFi Network one-way sell deposits, respectively. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, no amounts were repurchased of previously sold reciprocal deposits. The additional capacity of $520.5 million and $364.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, should be considered a source of liquidity.
Although customer deposits remain our preferred source of funds, maintaining additional back up sources of liquidity is part of our prudent liquidity risk management practices. We have the ability to borrow from the FHLBB. At December 31, 2021, we had $14.0 million in outstanding advances and the ability to borrow up to an additional $1.8 billion. We also have the ability to borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. At December 31, 2021, we had a $456.1 million collateralized line of credit from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston with no outstanding balance. Additionally, at December 31, 2020 we had the ability to borrow from the Federal Reserve Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”). The Federal Reserve ended the PPPLF as of July 30, 2021. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, we no longer had additional capacity under the PPPLF. We had a total of $790.0 million of discretionary lines of credit at December 31, 2021.
Sources of Liquidity
(1)As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, loans have been pledged to the FHLBB with a carrying value of $2.6 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively, to secure our total borrowing capacity.
(2)Loans with a carrying value of $0.8 billion and $0.9 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, have been pledged to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston resulting in this additional unused borrowing capacity.
We believe that advanced preparation, early detection, and prompt responses can avoid, minimize, or shorten potential liquidity crises. Our Board of Directors and our management’s Asset Liability Committee have put a liquidity contingency plan in place to establish methods for assessing and monitoring risk levels, as well as potential responses during unanticipated stress events. As part of our risk management framework, we perform periodic liquidity stress testing to assess our need for liquid assets as well as backup sources of liquidity.
Capital Resources. We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve (with respect to our consolidated capital requirements). At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we exceeded all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and were considered “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines. For additional information regarding our regulatory capital requirements, refer to Note 15, “Minimum Regulatory Capital Requirements” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities. The amounts below assume the contractual obligations and commitments will run through the end of the applicable term and, as such, do not include early termination fees or penalties where applicable.
The following table summarizes our short-term (e.g. maturity of one year or less) and long-term (e.g. maturity of greater than one year) contractual obligations, other commitments and contingencies at December 31, 2021.
(1)Unused commitments that are deemed to be unconditionally cancellable are included in the less than one year category in the above table. Commitments to extend credit was comprised of $3.0 billion of commitments under commercial loans and lines of credit (including $423.2 million of unadvanced portions of construction loans), $1.9 billion of commitments under home equity loans and lines of credit, $197.2 million in overdraft coverage commitments, $38.6 million of unfunded commitments related to residential real estate loans and $59.9 million in other consumer loans and lines of credit as of December 31, 2021.