Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company's (also referred to herein as "Enterprise," "us," "we," or "our") consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, contained in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," and the other financial and statistical information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 (this “Form 10-K”).
Throughout this management discussion and analysis we have noted certain balances, ratios or other measures of the Company’s performance which exclude the impact of PPP loans, which we expect to be short-term in nature. We refer to any balance, ratio or measure that excludes PPP loans as "core" (non-GAAP). In addition, we refer to any balance, ratio or measure that excludes PPP loans and interest-earning deposits with banks as "adjusted" (non-GAAP). The core and adjusted balances, ratios and measures are supplemental measures that are not required by or are not presented in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). These non-GAAP measures were derived in order to provide more meaningful comparisons to prior periods as: (1) PPP loans outstanding have been originated within the last 21 months and the majority outstanding are expected to be forgiven by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) or repaid during the next several quarters; and (2) growth in customer deposits and PPP loan forgiveness have led to temporarily high liquidity, carried as lower-yielding interest-earning deposits with banks, compared to prior periods. For further discussion regarding the use of these non-GAAP measures, and a reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures, see the section entitled “Non-GAAP Measures” contained in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," of this Form 10-K.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements about the Company and its industry involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Statements other than statements of current or historical fact, including statements regarding the Company’s future financial condition, results of operations, business plans, liquidity, cash flows, projected costs, and the impact of any laws or regulations applicable to the Company, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements may be identified by reference to a future period or periods or by use of forward-looking terminology such as "will," "should," "could," "anticipates," "believes," "expects," "intends," "may," "plans," "pursue," "views" and similar terms or expressions. We caution you that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, assumptions, estimates and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable as of the date made, actual results may prove to be materially different from the results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
There are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the following:
•the impact, duration and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic ("pandemic"), and any current or future variants thereof, and the Company’s participation in and execution of government programs related to the pandemic;
•failure of risk management controls and procedures;
•the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses;
•risk specific to commercial loans and borrowers;
•changes in the business cycle and downturns in the local, regional, or national economies, including changes in consumer spending and deterioration in the local real estate market, could negatively impact credit and/or asset quality and result in credit losses and increases in the Company's allowance for credit losses;
•the uncertain inflationary outlook in the United States and our market areas, and its impact on interest rates, the economy and credit quality;
•deterioration of capital markets, which could adversely affect the value or credit quality of the Company's assets and the availability of funding sources necessary to meet the Company's liquidity needs;
•changes in interest rates could negatively impact net interest income;
•increases in interest rates could negatively impact bond market values and result in a lower net book value;
•our ability to successfully manage the interest-rate environment, our credit risk and the level of future non-performing assets and charge-offs;
•potential decreases or growth of assets, deposits, future non-interest expenditures and non-interest income;
•our ability to maintain adequate liquidity and to raise necessary capital to fund our operations or to meet minimum regulatory capital levels;
•material decreases in the amount of deposits we hold, or a failure to grow our deposit base as necessary to help fund our growth and operations;
•changes in market interest rates that affect the pricing of our loans and deposits and our net interest income, as well as the potential discontinuance of London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”) and the uncertainty around its replacement;
•our ability to keep pace with technological change or difficulties when implementing new technologies;
•technology-related risk, including technological changes and technology service interruptions or failure could adversely impact the Company's operations and increase technology-related expenditures;
•cybersecurity risk including security breaches and identity theft could impact the Company's reputation, increase regulatory oversight, and impact the financial results of the Company;
•increasing competition from larger regional and out-of-state banking organizations as well as non-bank providers of various financial services could adversely affect the Company's competitive position within its market area and reduce demand for the Company's products and services;
•our ability to retain and increase our aggregate assets under management;
•our ability to enter new markets successfully and capitalize on growth opportunities, including the receipt of required regulatory approvals;
•damage to our reputation in the markets we serve;
•risks associated with fraudulent, negligent, or other acts by our customers, employees or vendors;
•exposure to legal claims and litigation;
•the inability to raise capital, on terms favorable to us, could cause us to fall below regulatory minimum capital adequacy levels and consequently restrict our business and operations;
•our ability to maintain an effective system of disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting;
•our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified management personnel;
•recent and future changes in laws and regulations that apply to the Company's business and operations, and any additional regulations, or repeals that may be forthcoming as a result thereof, which could cause the Company to incur additional costs and adversely affect the Company's business environment, operations and financial results;
•future regulatory compliance costs, including any increase caused by new regulations imposed by the government;
•changes in tariffs and trade barriers;
•governmental monetary and fiscal policies, including the policies of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the “Federal Reserve”);
•our ability to comply with supervisory actions by federal and state banking agencies;
•changes in the scope and cost of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the “FDIC”) insurance and other coverage;
•changes in accounting and/or auditing standards, policies and practices, as may be adopted or established by the regulatory agencies, FASB, or the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board could negatively impact the Company's financial results; and
•systemic risks associated with the soundness of other financial institutions.
The foregoing factors should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read together with the other cautionary statements included in this Form 10-K, including those discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Form 10-K. The Company cautions readers that the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K reflect numerous assumptions that management believes to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and beyond the Company's control. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause the Company's actual results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the forward-looking statement. Accordingly, we caution you that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and readers should not place undue reliance on such forward-looking information and statements. Any forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are based on information available to the Company as of the date of this Form 10-K, and the Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or otherwise revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.
Overview
Executive Summary
The Company strategically operates with a long-term mindset that is focused on organic growth and supporting such growth by continually investing in our people, products, services, technology, including digital evolution, and both new and existing branches. Our 26th branch located in North Andover, Massachusetts was opened on January 4, 2021, and our 27th branch located in Londonderry, New Hampshire is expected to open in the third quarter of 2022. Additionally, the relocations of our Lawrence and Lexington, Massachusetts branches were completed in August 2021 and March 2022, respectively.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $42.2 million, or $3.50 per diluted common share, compared to $31.5 million, or $2.64 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 34% increase in net income was substantially impacted by an increase in PPP income of $9.0 million from increases in SBA loan forgiveness, a decrease in the provision for credit losses of $10.7 million from improved credit and economic conditions and a decrease in deposit interest expense of $7.7 million from lower interest rates, partially offset by an increase in non-interest expense of $8.9 million to support the Company's growth and strategic initiatives. Net income results for the year ended December 31, 2021 were also impacted by lower tax-equivalent net interest margin ("net interest margin" or "margin") of 3.44%, compared to 3.59% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The lower net interest margin results were significantly impacted by low market rates and higher liquidity balances.
The Company’s financial results for 2021 were also impacted by non-recurring items including a net gain on the sale of OREO of $1.1 million and a loss on termination of interest rate swaps of $1.8 million reported in non-interest income and a loss on the extinguishment of subordinated debt of $713 thousand reported in non-interest expense.
Total assets amounted to $4.45 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $4.01 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $433.5 million, or 11%. The increase related primarily to increases in interest-earning deposits with banks of $189.9 million, or 89%, investments of $375.2 million, or 64% and core loans (non-GAAP) of $218.4 million, or 8%, partially offset by a decrease in PPP loans of $371.6 million, or 84%.
The increased liquidity at December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, was due primarily to significant customer deposit growth of $504.0 million, or 14%, and funds received for PPP loan forgiveness of $587.0 million. The excess liquidity was partially utilized to fund growth in the Company's investment security portfolio and core loan (non-GAAP) growth as discussed above.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing pandemic and its effects have impacted the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, as discussed in this Management Discussion & Analysis. Management underscores that the pandemic and any related economic effects may continue to impact the Company's financial condition and results of operations in the coming quarters, particularly from its potential impact on interest rates, the economy, organic growth opportunities and the quality of the loan portfolio.
See also Item 1A. "Risk Factors" for further discussion on the impact on risk a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Paycheck Protection Program
The PPP was established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and implemented by the SBA in order to provide loans to help businesses keep their workforce employed during the pandemic. PPP loans may be partially or fully forgiven by the SBA if the borrower meets certain conditions. All PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA and are included in total loans outstanding.
The SBA began funding PPP loans in April 2020, with the first forgiveness payments distributed from the SBA beginning in November 2020. The third round of the PPP ended in May 2021. Over the course of the PPP, the Company originated 4,149 PPP loans amounting to $717.2 million with associated deferred SBA processing fees of $26.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 396 PPP loans outstanding with a principal balance of $73.9 million and deferred SBA fees of $2.4 million, compared to 2,633 PPP loans with a principal balance of $453.1 million and deferred SBA fees of $10.0 million at December 31, 2020. The Company anticipates the majority of the deferred SBA fees will be recognized as the PPP loans are forgiven by the SBA or paid off over the next several quarters.
Culture and Organic Growth Strategy
The Company's business model is to provide a full range of diversified financial products and services through a highly trained team of knowledgeable banking professionals, who have an in-depth understanding of our markets and a commitment to servicing the financial needs of customers. The Company’s approach is people-centric (customers, shareholders, communities and team members), commercially focused and community rooted, offering robust product and service lines, including commercial and residential lending, cash management, wealth management and trust services and commercial insurance, delivered by a knowledgeable and dedicated team of community bankers through traditional in-person service and multiple digital delivery channels offering 24/7 online and remote banking capabilities. The Company is committed to fostering a culture of diversity, equity and inclusion and to investing in employee training and development.
Management utilizes a disciplined credit management approach, which has served to provide consistent quality asset growth over varying economic cycles. Loan growth initiatives are executed through strong business development and referral efforts, by a seasoned lending team, supported by an experienced commercial credit review function.
The Company has an ongoing commitment to use technology and digitization to continually improve customer experience as well as internal operating efficiency and productivity.
The Company generally looks to develop new branch locations within, and to complement, our existing footprint. New and renovated branches exhibit a modern, open-concept lobby with advanced technology. These branches are supported by our "Relationship Bankers," who are cross trained to fully serve customer needs, and each branch is supported by commercial lenders dedicated to that region.
Non-GAAP Measures
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. However, certain financial measures and ratios presented are supplemental measures that are not required by or are not presented in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures are intended to provide the reader with additional supplemental perspectives on operating results, performance trends, and financial condition. Non-GAAP financial measures are not a substitute for GAAP measures; they should be read and used in conjunction with the Company’s GAAP financial information. In addition, the non-GAAP financial measures we present may differ from non-GAAP financial measures used by our peers or other companies.
The following tables summarize the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures related to the impact of PPP loans on total loans and loan interest income:
The following tables summarize the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures related to the impact of PPP loans and interest-earning deposits with banks on net interest margin:
_________________________________________
(1)Year-to-date results reflect tax-equivalent adjustments as of December 31 of the years presented.
(2)PPP loan adjustments include an elimination of average PPP loans, net of deferred SBA fees, as well as interest income on PPP loans and related SBA fee accretion, included in net interest income.
(3)Interest-earning deposit adjustments include an elimination of average interest-earning deposits with banks, as well as interest income on interest-earning deposits with banks, included in net interest income.
Results of Operations
COMPARISON OF YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
Unless otherwise indicated, the reported results are for the year ended December 31, 2021, with the "same period," the "comparable year" and "prior year" being the year ended December 31, 2020. Average yields are presented on a tax-equivalent basis.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $42.2 million, an increase of $10.7 million, or 34%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Diluted earnings per share were $3.50 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $2.64 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•The increase in net income was attributable largely to an increase in net interest income of $11.4 million, and a decrease in the provision for credit losses of $10.7 million, partially offset by an increase in non-interest expense of $8.9 million.
•Year-to-date non-interest income results, which are reviewed below, increased $860 thousand, or 5% over the prior year period and were impacted by non-recurring items related to a gain on sale of other real estate owned ("OREO") and the early termination of interest rate swaps.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $141.6 million, an increase of $11.4 million, or 9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
•The increase in net interest income was due largely to an increase in PPP income of $9.0 million and a decrease in deposit interest expense of $7.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in core loan income (non-GAAP) of $6.9 million.
•Net interest income included PPP income of $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Margin
Tax-equivalent net interest margin was 3.44% and 3.59% for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Margin has been negatively impacted by large balances in lower-yielding interest-earning deposits with banks, and to a lesser extent, loan pay-downs, new loan originations, investment purchases and lower interest yields, partially offset by PPP income.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
•Average interest-earning deposits with banks amounted to $499.1 million and $186.0 million.
•Average PPP loan balances, net of deferred SBA fees, amounted to $297.0 million and $336.5 million.
•Adjusted net interest margin (non-GAAP) was 3.65% and 3.84%.
Interest and Dividend Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total interest and dividend income amounted to $149.0 million, an increase of $4.2 million, or 3%, compared to the prior year.
•The increase was due largely to average interest-earning asset growth of $487.9 million, or 13%, primarily in investments and core loans (non-GAAP), partially offset by a decline in average yields on interest-earning assets of 37 basis points.
•The decrease in interest-earning asset yields since the prior period was due primarily to a shift in asset mix related to large increases in other interest earning assets and investments securities, which resulted from the significant increase in customer deposits, and are lower yielding than loans and loans held for sale, and to a lesser extent, loan pay-downs, new loan originations, and lower interest yields, partially offset by higher yielding PPP income.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total interest expense amounted to $7.5 million, a decrease of $7.2 million, or 49%, compared to the prior year.
•The decrease in interest expense was due primarily to decreases in deposit market rates during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average cost of funding, including the impact of non-interest deposit accounts, decreased 23 basis points. The average cost of interest-bearing checking, saving and money market accounts decreased 26 basis points and the average cost of CDs decreased 90 basis points.
•Partially offsetting the decrease in interest expense was an increase of $247.6 million in the average balances of interest-bearing deposits.
•Non-interest deposit accounts are an important component of the Company's core funding strategy. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the average balance of non-interest checking deposits increased $220.7 million, or 20%, as compared to the prior year. This non-interest-bearing funding source represented 35% of total average deposit balances for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 33% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest rate risk is reviewed in detail under the heading Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk," of this Form 10-K below.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth, on a tax-equivalent basis, the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in the average balances of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have affected interest income and expense for the period indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to: (i) volume (change in average portfolio balance multiplied by prior year average rate); and (ii) interest rate (change in average interest rate multiplied by prior year average balance). Changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately based on absolute value to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
_________________________________________
(1) Income on other interest-earning assets includes interest on deposits, and fed funds sold, and dividends on FHLB stock.
The table on the following page presents the Company's average balance sheet, net interest income and average rates for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
_______________________________________
(1)Average yields and interest income are presented on a tax-equivalent basis, calculated using a U.S. federal corporate income tax rate of 21% in the years ended 2021, 2020 and 2019, based on tax-equivalent adjustments associated with tax exempt loans and investments interest income.
(2)Average loans and loans held for sale include non-accrual loans and are net of average deferred loan fees.
(3)Average investment balances are presented at average amortized cost.
(4)Average other interest-earning assets includes interest-earning deposits with banks, fed funds sold, and FHLB stock.
(5)The subordinated debt is net of average deferred debt issuance costs.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $1.8 million, a decrease of $10.7 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
•The provision for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulted primarily from core loan growth (non-GAAP) and an increase in reserves for unfunded commitments (included in other liabilities), partially offset by a reduction in credit loss reserve factors and declines in reserves for individually evaluated loans.
•The provision for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflected increases in reserves related primarily to the estimated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the credit quality of the loan portfolio and increases in reserves for individually evaluated loans.
The provision for credit losses is a significant factor in the Company's operating results. For further discussion regarding the provision for credit losses and management's assessment of the adequacy of the ACL for loans see "Credit Risk," and "ACL for Loans" included in the section titled "Financial Condition," contained in this Item 7 of this Form 10-K above, for further information regarding the provision for credit losses.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $18.1 million, an increase of $860 thousand, or 5%, compared to the respective prior year periods.
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest income and the related changes for the periods indicated:
The primary components of the increase of non-interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021, are as follows:
•Wealth management fees increased $972 thousand due primarily to asset growth from net new business and market value appreciation.
•Deposit and interchange fees increased $545 thousand due primarily to higher deposit account activity and increased consumer debit card spending resulting in higher interchange activity.
•The Company recognized a gain on sale of OREO of $1.1 million from the sale of an OREO property in October 2021.
•Equity securities market value gains increased $290 thousand and are included in other income.
•The increase of non-interest income during the period was partially offset by a $1.8 million loss on the early termination of $75.0 million in interest-rate swaps, realized in the third quarter of 2021; and
•Decreases in net gains on sales of loans of $576 thousand, resulting largely from lower origination volume and the Company holding more residential loan production in the loan portfolio.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $102.1 million, an increase of $8.9 million, or 10%, compared to the prior year.
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest expense and the related changes for the periods indicated:
The primary components of the increase of non-interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021, are as follows:
•Salaries and employee benefits increased $5.1 million due primarily to an increase of $3.2 million related to performance-based accruals. Excluding this increase, non-interest expense for the year increased 6% over prior year.
•Occupancy and equipment increased $1.1 million due primarily to the higher costs from two branch relocations and one branch opening.
•Technology and telecommunications increased $1.4 million due primarily to higher infrastructure costs and expenses associated with the Company's multi-year digital evolution strategy to enhance operating efficiency and customer experience.
•The Company also realized a loss on the extinguishment of subordinated debt of $713 thousand from the early redemption of the Company’s $15.0 million in subordinated notes issued in January 2015 (the “January 2015 Notes”) on March 31, 2021. The loss on the extinguishment of the January 2015 Notes consisted of $600 thousand in prepayment penalties and $113 thousand in unamortized issuance costs.
Income Tax Expense
The effective tax rate was 24.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. Refer to Note 15, "Income Taxes," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for additional information about the Company's tax positions.
Results of Operations Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with SEC on March 10, 2020.
Financial Condition
Total assets increased $433.5 million, or 11%, since December 31, 2020, to $4.45 billion at December 31, 2021. The balance sheet composition and changes since December 31, 2020, are discussed below.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents may be comprised of cash on hand and cash items due from banks, interest-earning deposits with banks (deposit accounts, excess reserve cash balances, money markets, and money market mutual funds accounts) and federal funds sold ("fed funds"). Cash and cash equivalents increased $182.8 million, or 72%, since December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents amounted to 10% of total assets compared to 6% of total assets at December 31, 2020.
While balances in cash and cash equivalents will fluctuate due primarily to the timing of net cash flows from deposits, borrowings, loans and investments, and the immediate liquidity needs of the Company, management believes customers are generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic and lower interest rates, contributing to the increase in cash and cash equivalents since December 31, 2020.
Investments
At December 31, 2021, the fair value of the investment portfolio amounted to $958.2 million, an increase of $375.2 million, or 64%, since December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from debt security purchases of $211.4 million and $173.3 million during the third and fourth quarters of 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the investment portfolio represented 22% of total assets as compared to 15% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and was primarily comprised of debt securities, with a small portion of the investment portfolio invested in equity securities. At both December 31, 2021, and 2020, all investments were carried at fair value and debt securities were classified as available-for-sale.
Debt Securities
The following table summarizes the fair value of debt securities at the dates indicated:
_____________________________________________
(1) These categories may include investments issued or guaranteed by government sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae ("FNMA"), Freddie Mac ("FHLMC"), Federal Farm Credit Bank ("FFCB"), or one of several Federal Home Loan Banks, as well as investments guaranteed by Ginnie Mae ("GNMA"), a wholly owned government entity.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company purchased debt securities totaling $491.2 million and $144.5 million, respectively. The Company also had principal pay downs, calls and maturities totaling $87.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $77.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We continuously monitor and evaluate our debt securities portfolio to identify and assess risks within our portfolio, including, but not limited to, the impact of the current rate environment, prepayment risk, and credit quality. The overall mix of debt securities at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 remains relatively unchanged and the portfolio was well positioned to provide a stable source of cash flow. At December 31, 2021, the portfolio consisted primarily of 60% in U.S. Government or U.S. Federal Agency bonds and 39% in taxable and tax-exempt municipal bonds. The effective duration of our debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2021 was approximately 4.9 years compared to 4.4 and 3.8 years at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net unrealized gains on the debt securities portfolio amounted to $5.9 million at December 31, 2021, compared to net unrealized gains of $31.1 million at December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company realized net gains of $128 thousand on sales of debt securities with an amortized cost of approximately $2.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company realized net gains of $227 thousand on sales of debt securities with an amortized cost of approximately $5.7 million.
The contractual maturity distribution as of December 31, 2021, of the debt securities portfolio with the weighted average tax-equivalent yield for each category is set forth below:
Scheduled contractual maturities shown above may not reflect the actual maturities of the investments. The actual MBS/CMO cash flows likely will be faster than presented above due to prepayments and amortization. Similarly, included in the table above are callable securities, comprised of municipal securities and corporate bonds, with a fair value of $181.1 million, which can be redeemed by the issuer prior to the maturity presented above. Management considers these factors when evaluating the interest-rate risk in the Company's asset-liability management program.
Loans
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the material presented in Item 1, "Business," under the heading "Lending Products" of this Form 10-K.
Total loans represented 66% of total assets at December 31, 2021, and 77% of total assets at December 31, 2020. Total loans decreased $153.2 million, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, due primarily to PPP loan forgiveness payments received from the SBA during the period. Total core loans (non-GAAP) increased $218.4 million, or 8% since December 31, 2020. The mix of loans within the portfolio remained relatively unchanged with the commercial loan portfolio comprising approximately 88% of total loans at December 31, 2021, compared to 89% at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, within the commercial loan portfolio there has been a slight shift as commercial and industrial loans declined 5% while commercial real estate increased 14%, and commercial construction increased 10%, compared to the respective December 31, 2020 balances.
The following table sets forth the loan balances by certain loan categories at the dates indicated and the percentage of each category to total loans:
As of December 31, 2021, commercial real estate loans increased $204.6 million, or 14%, compared to December 31, 2020. The majority of the commercial real estate portfolio growth during 2021 was concentrated in the 4th quarter of the year which resulted from strong business development efforts and an improving business environment during the second half of 2021.
Commercial and industrial loan balances, decreased $23.5 million, or 5%, as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects a decline in line utilization on revolving lines as business customers made use of alternative government sponsored funding sources and declines in business activity as a result of the pandemic, as well as general pay downs, maturities and reduction in originations.
Commercial construction loans increased by $38.6 million, or 10%, as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. In many cases, these loans move into the permanent commercial real estate portfolio when the construction phase is completed.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received $587.0 million of forgiveness payments on PPP loans from the SBA, compared to $46.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total retail loan balances remained relatively unchanged as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. Residential secured one-to-four family mortgage loans continue to make up the largest portion of the retail segment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company originated $29.1 million of residential mortgage loans for sale in the secondary market, receiving gains on loan sales of $833 thousand, compared to originations of $59.6 million and gains of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Residential loans originated and retained within the portfolio amounted to $84.6 million and $73.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, commercial loan balances participated out to various banks amounted to $66.7 million, compared to $65.3 million at December 31, 2020. These balances participated out to other institutions are not carried as assets on the Company's financial statements. Commercial loans originated by other banks in which the Company is a participating institution are carried at the pro-rata share of ownership and amounted to $62.6 million and $77.1 million at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
See also Note 3, "Loans," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for information on related party loans, loans serviced for others and loans pledged as collateral.
The following table sets forth the scheduled maturities of commercial real estate, commercial and industrial and commercial construction loans in the Company's portfolio at December 31, 2021. The table also sets forth the dollar amount of loans which are scheduled to mature after one year which have fixed or adjustable rates.
_________________________________________
(1) Scheduled contractual maturities may not reflect the actual maturities of loans. The average maturity of loans may be shorter than their contractual terms principally due to prepayments and demand features.
(2) Adjustable-rate loans may have fixed initial periods before periodic rate adjustments begin.
(3) PPP loan maturities are two or five years; however, the majority of SBA forgiveness is expected within one year.
Credit Risk
Non-performing assets are comprised of non-accrual loans (loans contractually past due, with respect to interest or principal, by 90 days, or where reasonable doubt exists as to the full and timely collection of interest or principal), and OREO. The designation of a loan or other asset as non-performing does not necessarily indicate that loan principal and interest will ultimately be uncollectible. However, management recognizes the greater risk characteristics of these assets and therefore considers the potential risk of loss on assets included in this category in evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses. The level of delinquent and non-performing assets is largely a function of economic conditions and the overall banking environment and the individual business circumstances of borrowers. Despite prudent loan underwriting, adverse changes within the Company's market area, or deterioration in local, regional, or national economic conditions, could negatively impact the Company's level of non-performing assets in the future.
Management has been proactive with customers since the onset of the pandemic and granted short term payment deferrals to those requesting financial assistance due to the impact of the pandemic. The Company has accounted for these deferrals in accordance with Section 4013 of the CARES Act which provided financial institutions the option to suspend TDR accounting under GAAP in certain circumstances. As of December 31, 2020, short-term payment deferrals due to the COVID-19 pandemic were outstanding on 47 loans amounting to $46.7 million, or 1.5% of total loans. As of December 31, 2021, these payment deferrals were outstanding on 3 loans amounting to $5.5 million, or 0.2% of total loans. As of December 31, 2021, the majority of the deferral notes had returned to their original payment terms, continue to accrue interest in accordance with those terms and were not reported as TDRs.
See item (g) "Loans" contained in Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of this Form 10-K, for additional information on the Company's loan accounting policies and Credit Risk monitoring.
The following table sets forth information regarding non-performing assets, TDR loans and delinquent loans 60-89 days past due as to interest or principal, held by the Company at the dates indicated:
The decrease in non-performing assets was due to principal pay-downs and credit upgrades, as well as the partial charge-off of two commercial relationships, partially offset by additional credit downgrades and loan advances. One of the charge-offs related to a commercial office building that was reclassified to OREO in April 2021 and subsequently sold in October 2021. The property sold was the Company’s only OREO asset during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
At December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company had adversely classified loans (loans carrying "special mention," "substandard," "doubtful" or "loss" classifications) amounting to $61.0 million and $75.3 million, respectively. Adversely classified loans above that were performing but possessed potential weaknesses and, as a result, could ultimately become non-performing loans, amounted to $34.5 million at December 31, 2021, and $37.4 million at December 31, 2020. The remaining balance of adversely classified loans were also on non-accrual and amounted to $26.5 million and $37.9 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. The decrease in adversely classified, non-performing loans at December 31, 2021, was due primarily to the decrease in non-accruing commercial relationships discussed above.
Total individually evaluated collateral dependent loans amounted to $34.6 million and $48.3 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. Total accruing collateral dependent loans amounted to $8.4 million and $10.3 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively, while non-accrual collateral dependent loans amounted to $26.2 million and $38.0 million as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
In management's opinion, the majority of collateral dependent loan balances at December 31, 2021, and 2020 were supported by the net realizable value of the underlying collateral. Based on management's collateral assessment at December 31, 2021, collateral dependent loans totaling $18.4 million required no specific reserves while collateral dependent loans totaling $16.2 million required specific reserve reserves of $1.0 million. At December 31, 2020, collateral dependent loans totaling $23.4 million required no specific reserves while collateral dependent loans totaling $24.9 million required specific reserve reserves of $6.2 million. The decrease in specific reserves since December 31, 2020, was due primarily to the partial charge-off of two
commercial relationships noted above. Management closely monitors all individually evaluated relationships for their individual business circumstances, credit metrics, or underlying collateral value deterioration to determine if additional reserves are necessary.
Total TDR loans as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $16.4 million and $17.7 million, respectively. TDR loans on accrual status amounted to $8.6 million and $10.3 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. TDR loans included in non-accrual loans amounted to $7.8 million and $7.5 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company continues to work with customers and enters into loan modifications (which may or may not be TDRs) to the extent deemed to be necessary or appropriate while attempting to achieve the best mutual outcome given the individual financial circumstances and prospects of the borrower.
ACL for Loans
In the first quarter of 2021, the Company adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board's guidance related to measuring credit losses, including the current expected credit losses ("CECL") methodology for estimating the allowance for credit losses ("ACL"). The CECL methodology requires earlier recognition of credit losses using a lifetime credit loss measurement approach that also requires the consideration of reasonable and supportable forecasts in the estimate.
The adoption of CECL resulted in the Company recording a net cumulative-effect adjustment, effective January 1, 2021, that decreased retained earnings by $6.5 million, net of $2.5 million in deferred income taxes. The ACL for loans increased by $6.6 million and the reserve for unfunded commitments (included in other liabilities) increased by $2.4 million.
See also Note 4, "ACL for Loans," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for further information regarding credit quality and the allowance for credit losses and the Company's methodology under CECL.
While management uses available information and judgement to estimate credit losses on loans, future additions to the ACL for loans may be necessary. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Company's ACL for loans. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize additions to the ACL for loans based on judgments different from those of management.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the Company's allowance for credit losses among the categories of loans, the percentage of allowance allocated by category of loans to the total allowance for credit losses, and the percentage of loans in each category to total loans for the periods ending on the respective dates indicated:
Management believes the PPP portfolio to be of minimal credit risk, the average loan size was approximately $187 thousand, and Management expects that, based on its due diligence at origination and in the forgiveness application process, the majority of balances will be forgiven, with any remaining balance fully guaranteed by the SBA.
The following table summarizes the activity in the allowance for credit losses for the periods indicated:
Reserve for unfunded commitments
The reserve for unfunded commitments is classified within "Other liabilities" on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. The estimate of credit loss incorporates assumptions for both the likelihood and amount of funding over the estimated life of the commitments, including adjustments for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Management periodically reviews and updates its assumptions for estimated funding rates.
The Company’s reserve for unfunded commitments amounted to $3.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and $2.5 million at January 1, 2021. The provision for unfunded commitments amounted to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase at December 31, 2021, compared to January 1, 2021, resulted from growth, primarily in unadvanced construction loan balances, partially offset by lower reserve factors.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company's ACL for loans and reserve for unfunded commitments is adequate as of December 31, 2021.
Deposits
Total deposits amounted to $3.98 billion as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $429.0 million, or 12%, compared to December 31, 2020. Total deposits as a percentage of total assets were 89% at December 31, 2021, and 88% at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the deposit balances by certain categories as of the dates indicated and the percentage of each category to total deposits:
__________________________________
(1) Brokered deposits which are individually $250,000 and under.
As of December 31, 2021, customer deposits amounted to $3.98 billion, an increase of $504.0 million, or 14%, since December 31, 2020, and $1.2 billion, or 43%, since December 31, 2019. Since December 31, 2020, the largest growth occurred in checking accounts and to a lesser extent money market accounts. Management believes the deposit growth since December 31, 2020, was due in large part to customers depositing funds received from PPP loan advances, stimulus checks, and generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic and low interest rates.
The Company offers its customers the ability to enhance FDIC insurance coverage by electing to participate a portion of their deposit balance into nationwide deposit networks, with an equal and reciprocal balance deposited to the Company through the network. The Company’s total customer deposit balances reflect the reciprocal deposits received from other banks' customers participating in the programs. Essentially, the equivalent of the original customers' deposited funds comes back to the Company and are carried within the appropriate category under total customer deposits. The Company's balances in these reciprocal products were $546.7 million, $508.4 million, and $419.7 million at December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively. Savings accounts are not eligible for this program.
Management may, from time to time, utilize brokered deposits as a cost-effective wholesale funding source to support continued loan growth. Brokered deposits may be comprised of non-reciprocal insured overnight deposits and term funding gathered from nationwide bank networks or term deposits from large money center banks. At December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2019, the Company had no brokered deposits outstanding, compared to $75.0 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the scheduled maturities of CDs greater than $250,000:
The table below sets forth a comparison of the Company's average deposits, and average rates paid for the periods indicated, as well as the percentage of each deposit category to total average deposits. The annualized average rate on total deposits reflects both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits.
Borrowed Funds
Borrowed funds, comprised of FHLB borrowings and other borrowings, amounted to $5.5 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $4.8 million at December 31, 2020. The Company's primary borrowing source is the FHLB, but the Company may choose to borrow from other established business partners. Outstanding borrowings from the FHLB typically have been comprised of overnight or short-term borrowings and term advances linked to outstanding commercial loans under various community reinvestment programs of the FHLB, which represents the majority of the balance at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, and 2020, borrowed funds consisted of FHLB borrowings only. The majority of the FHLB advances outstanding at December 31, 2020, were overnight advances, which the Company paid-down during the year ended December 31, 2021 as the Bank's liquidity increased.
The Company may also from time-to-time use interest-rate swaps to hedge against adverse interest rate movements of short-term FHLB advances.
At December 31, 2021, the Bank had the capacity to borrow additional funds from the FHLB of up to approximately $790.0 million and the capacity to borrow from the FRB discount window of approximately $350.0 million.
In April 2020, the Company established access to the FRB's PPPLF, which provided funding secured by the pledge of PPP loans and expired on July 2021. Advances issued under the PPPLF were non-recourse. The amount and term of an advance matched the amount and remaining term of the PPP loans pledged. The FRB's PPPLF program expired on July 31, 2021.
The table below shows the comparison of the Company's average borrowed funds and average rates paid for the periods indicated:
The category "Other borrowed funds" represents overnight advances from the FRB discount window, or borrowings from correspondent banks, advanced as part of our annual test of these external funding facilities.
For additional information on the composition of borrowed funds, including weighted average rates and maturities, and maximum borrowing outstanding at any month end, see Note 8, "Borrowed Funds and Subordinated Debt," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Subordinated Debt
The Company had outstanding subordinated debt, net of deferred issuance costs, of $59.0 million at December 31, 2021, and $73.7 million at December 31, 2020.
On March 31, 2021, the Company redeemed $15.0 million in subordinated notes issued January 2015. The redemption of the January 2015 Notes was recorded as a loss on the extinguishment of subordinated debt in the amount of $713 thousand, consisting of $600 thousand in prepayment penalties and $113 thousand in unamortized issuance costs.
In July 2020, the Company issued $60.0 million in subordinated callable in July 2025 and due in July 2030.
Derivatives and Hedging
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company entered into three pay fixed, receive float interest-rate swaps to hedge against adverse interest-rate movements with a combined notional value, maturing from 2023 through 2025 of $75.0 million. In August of 2021, the Company terminated the interest-rate swaps resulting in a loss of $1.8 million and eliminated the related borrowing costs from 2022-2025.
The Company also has a "Back-to-Back Swap" program whereby the Bank enters into an interest-rate swap with qualified commercial banking customers and simultaneously enters into an equal and opposite interest-rate swap with a swap counterparty. The customer interest-rate swap agreement allows commercial banking customers to convert a floating-rate loan payment to a fixed-rate payment. The notional value of interest-rate swaps with customers increased to $36.3 million at December 31, 2021, from $38.0 million at December 31, 2020. The fair value of assets and corresponding liabilities associated with these swaps and carried on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets was $528 thousand at December 31, 2021, compared to $2.3 million at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to meet cash needs arising from, among other things, fluctuations in loans, investments, deposits, and borrowings. Liquidity management is the coordination of activities so that cash needs are anticipated and met readily and efficiently. The Company's liquidity policies are set and monitored by the Company's Board. The duties and responsibilities related to asset-liability management matters are also covered by the Board. The Company's asset-liability objectives are to engage in sound balance sheet management strategies, maintain liquidity, provide and enhance access to a diverse and stable source of funds, provide competitively priced and attractive products to customers and conduct funding at a low-cost relative to current market conditions. Funds gathered are used to support current commitments, to fund earning asset growth, and to take advantage of selected leverage opportunities.
The Company's liquidity is maintained by projecting cash needs, balancing maturing assets with maturing liabilities, monitoring various liquidity ratios, monitoring deposit flows, maintaining cash flow within the investment portfolio, and maintaining wholesale funding resources.
The Company's wholesale funding sources included primarily borrowing capacity at the FHLB and brokered deposits. In addition, the Company's secondary funding sources include uncommitted overnight fed fund purchase arrangements with correspondent banks and access to the FRB discount window. At December 31, 2021, the Bank had the capacity to borrow additional funds from the FHLB and FRB discount window of up to approximately $790.0 million and $350.0 million, respectively.
Management believes that the Company has adequate liquidity to meet its obligations. However, if general economic conditions, the pandemic, or other events, cause these sources of external funding to become restricted or are eliminated, the Company may not be able to raise adequate funds or may incur substantially higher funding costs or operating restrictions in order to raise the necessary funds to support the Company's operations and growth.
The Company has in the past also increased capital and liquidity by offering for sale shares of the Company's common stock and through the issuance of subordinated debt. On July 7, 2020, the Company issued $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate
subordinated notes. For additional information on the Company's capital planning, see the section entitled "Capital Resources" contained in Item 1, "Business," of this Form 10-K.
Capital Resources
The Company is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. The Company's capital policies and capital levels are monitored internally on a quarterly basis and capital planning is reviewed at least annually by the Board.
Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate or result in certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary supervisory actions by regulators, which if undertaken, could have a material adverse effect on the Company's consolidated financial condition. At December 31, 2021, the capital levels of both the Company and the Bank complied with all applicable minimum capital requirements of the Federal Reserve Board and the FDIC, respectively. Additionally, the Company met the definition of "well-capitalized" under the applicable Federal Reserve Board regulations and the Bank qualified as "well-capitalized" under the prompt corrective action regulations of Basel III and the FDIC.
On January 1, 2021, the Company's adopted of CECL and recorded a net cumulative-effect adjustment that decreased retained earnings by $6.5 million, net of $2.5 million in deferred income taxes.
On March 31, 2021, the Company redeemed the January 2015 Notes. The redemption of the January 2015 Notes was funded through a dividend from the Bank. This redemption and dividend decreased retained earnings at the Company and Bank, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company declared $8.9 million in cash dividends. Shareholders utilized the dividend reinvestment portion of the DRSPP to purchase an aggregate of 36,651 shares of the Company's common stock, totaling $1.3 million.
On January 18, 2022, the Company announced a quarterly dividend of $0.205 per share to be paid on March 1, 2022, to shareholders of record as of February 8, 2022.
See also Note 12, "Shareholders' Equity," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for additional information regarding the capital requirements applicable to the Company and the Bank and their respective capital levels at December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company is required to make future cash payments under various contractual obligations. The following table summarizes the contractual cash obligations at December 31, 2021:
The Company is also party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. The instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk in excess of the amount recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The contractual amounts of these instruments reflect the extent of involvement the Company has in the particular classes of financial instruments.
The following table summarizes the contractual commitments at December 31, 2021:
_______________________________________________
(1) Offsetting positions to these interest-rate swaps offered to commercial loan customers are entered into with a counterparty. Notional principal amounts are not actually exchanged.
See also Note 10, "Commitments, Contingencies and Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk and Concentrations of Credit Risk," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding unadvanced loans and lines, commitments to originate loans, letters of credit and commitments to originate loans for sale or to sell loans. See Note 9, "Derivatives and Hedging Activities," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding customer related interest-rate swaps.
Wealth Assets Under Management & Administration
Wealth assets under management and administration are not carried as assets on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. The Company provides a wide range of wealth management and wealth services, including investment management, brokerage, annuities, trust, and 401(k) administration.
As of December 31, 2021, wealth assets under management, at fair market value amounted to $1.04 billion, an increase of $64.9 million, or 7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase since December 31, 2020, was due primarily to asset growth from market appreciation along with new customer growth.
Additionally, the Company had assets under administration at fair value amounted to $257.9 million at December 31, 2021, and $210.9 million at December 31, 2020, consisting of primarily 401(k) plans and to a lesser extent trust and custodial accounts.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company's asset and liability structure is substantially different from that of an industrial company in that virtually all assets and liabilities of the Company are monetary in nature. Management believes the impact of inflation on financial results depends upon the Company's ability to react to changes in interest rates and by such reaction, reduce the inflationary impact on performance. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction, or at the same magnitude, as the prices of other goods and services. As discussed previously, management seeks to manage the relationship between interest rate-sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against wide net interest income fluctuations, including those resulting from inflation.
Various information shown elsewhere in this annual report will assist in the understanding of how well the Company is positioned to react to changing interest rates and inflationary trends. In particular, additional information related to the margin sensitivity analysis is contained in