ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
In addition to the information provided here in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we believe that in order to more fully understand our discussion in this section, you should read our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and the other disclosures herein, including the discussion of our business and risk factors. The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis may contain various “forward looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, regarding future events or the future financial performance of the Company that involve risks and uncertainties. Certain statements included in this Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements related to anticipated cash flow sources and uses, and words including but not limited to “anticipates”, “believes”, “plans”, “expects”, “future” and similar statements or expressions, identify forward looking statements. Any forward-looking statements herein are subject to certain risks and uncertainties in the Company’s business and any changes in current accounting rules, all of which may be beyond the control of the Company. The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth therein. Undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made in the financial statements for the year ended January 31, 2021 to conform with the year ended January 31, 2022 presentation. The Company determined that the more appropriate place to record sales of cryptocurrency and the associated costs, and fair market value adjustments to cryptocurrency was other income and not revenue and cost of sales. There was no change in net loss for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Overview
The Company’s original business was to provide computer related services. The Company developed and acquired Internet publishing and broadcasting and web search portals. We published and generated textual, audio, and/or video content on the Internet, and operated websites that used a search engine to generate and maintain extensive databases of internet addresses and content. The Company discontinued this line of operations on April 17, 2020.
The Company is now primarily engaged in the business of consulting and developing blockchain and cybersecurity related solutions. Our technology platform provides the building blocks to power blockchain-related applications for organizations seeking to tap into the benefits of blockchain to solve critical business issues. Our patent--pending advances in blockchain engineering deliver the essential elements needed for real-world business use: speed, security, and energy efficiency. Currently, our lines of business are EB Advise, EB Build and EB Control.
On June 21, 2021, we acquired all of the equity interests of 832. 832, which is located in Texas, has developed many innovations in the areas of distributed computing, artificial intelligence and blockchain technologies.
On June 30, 2021, we acquired all of the equity interests of Mercury. We have utilized Mercury, which is located in Idaho, as our hosting solution since May 2020. The Company, with Mercury, launched its mining operations in the western United States. We have commenced mining for Bitcoin.
On July 31, 2021, we acquired all of the equity interests of Vengar. Vengar, which is located in Florida, has developed a zero-trust data access and protection software that the Company plans to integrate into its blockchain solutions.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Financial Information
Our historical results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2022, may not be comparable with our results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2021, for the reasons discussed below.
832’s operations are included in our historical operating results as of June 21, 2021. Mercury’s operations are included in our historical operating results as of July 1, 2021. Vengar’s operations are included in our historical operating results as of August 1, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to uncollectible receivables, inventory valuation, deferred compensation and contingencies.
We base our estimates on historical performance and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates allow us to make judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We believe the following accounting policies are our critical accounting policies because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and they require critical management judgments and estimates about matters that may be uncertain. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is derived from the subscription, non-software related hosted services, term-based and perpetual licensing of software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, consulting services, training, and technical support. Most of our customer arrangements involve multiple solutions and various license rights, bundled with post-contract customer support and other meaningful rights that together provide a complete end-to-end solution to the customer.
We recognize revenue when all guidelines establish through the five-step process to govern contract revenue reporting are met. This 5-step process consists of:
1.
Identify the contract(s) with a customer
2.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract
3.
Determine the transaction price
4.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
5.
Recognize revenue when or as you satisfy a performance obligation (rather than on final delivery, as in the past)
Services revenue. We generate services revenue via consulting services and software development. The Company is engaged in developing, engineering, and designing blockchain projects, to include platforms and cryptocurrencies for customers.
Subscription revenue. We generate revenue from subscriptions through staking of our current crypto assets. Our primary token being staked is a hybrid Proof of Work (“POW”) and Proof of Stake (“POS”) system. Stakers, in this particular token are paid inflation based both on the duration of the stake (contract length), as well as based on the volume / quantity of tokens staked. Rewards / interest / inflation are paid in the native token. We also participate in networks with POW consensus algorithms, through creating or validating blocks on the network. In exchange for participating in the consensus mechanism of these networks, the Company earns rewards in the form of the native token of the network. Each block creation or validation is a performance obligation. Revenue is recognized at the point when the block creation or validation is complete, and the rewards are available for transfer. Revenue is measured based on the number of tokens received and the fair value of the token at the date of recognition.
Product revenue. We generate product revenue through customized product development.
Acquisition Method of Accounting
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date.
Our operating results for the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 are summarized as follows:
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended January 31, 2022 was $2.5 million as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. Revenue for January 31, 2022 primarily consisted of $1.7 million from consulting services, $0.4 million from product revenue, and $0.3 million from staking of cryptocurrency. Revenue for January 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $0.1 million from consulting services. The primary reasons for the increase in revenue was due to increases in consulting services and staking, as well as the acquisitions of 832 and Mercury.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended January 31, 2022 was $0.2 million, which primarily consisted of product costs and commissions from Mercury.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended January 31, 2022 was $2.3 million as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist primarily of selling, general and administrative expenses and amortization and depreciation expense. Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, consultant fees, professional fees, computer and internet expenses, marketing expenses, utilities expenses, meals and entertainment, office supplies, and reporting fees.
Operating expenses for the year ended January 31, 2022 was $4.3 million compared to $50.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. The primary reason for the decrease was due to stock based compensation of $49.2 million, which was recorded for the year ended January 31, 2021, partially offset by increases in operating expenses due to the acquisitions of Render, 832, Mercury, and Vengar.
Operating expenses for the year ended January 31, 2022 of $4.3 million consist primarily of stock based compensation of $2.0 million, payroll costs of $1.1 million, professional fees of $0.3 million, consultant fees of $0.3 million, marketing expenses of $0.1 million, and bad debt expense of $0.1 million.
Operating expenses for the year ended January 31, 2021 of $50.0 million consist primarily of stock based compensation of $49.2 million of which $47.7 million related to the issuance of Series A and B preferred stock.
Operating Loss
Operating loss decreased by $47.9 million to an operating loss of $2.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 as compared to an operating loss of $49.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. The primary reasons for the decrease in operating loss was due to the increase in revenue and decrease in operating expenses as discussed above.
Other Income
Other income consists primarily of sales of cryptocurrency and the associated costs, fair market value adjustments to cryptocurrency, and interest income and expense.
Other income for the year ended January 31, 2022 was $5.2 million compared to $0.6 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. Other income for the year ended January 31, 2022 of $5.2 million consists primarily of fair market value adjustments to cryptocurrency of $3.8 million and net profit from sales of cryptocurrency of $1.2 million. Other income for the year ended January 31, 2021 of $0.6 million consists primarily of net profit from sales of cryptocurrency of $0.4 million.
Adjusted Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA
The Company reports all financial information required in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The Company believes, however, that evaluating its ongoing operating results will be enhanced if it also discloses certain non-GAAP information because it is useful to understand our performance that many investors believe may obscure the Company’s ongoing operational results.
Adjusted Revenue, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined by the Company as revenue adjusted for cryptocurrency activities.
Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined by the Company as net income (loss) plus net interest income, income tax (benefit) expense, depreciation and amortization, and stock based compensation, and related party transactions recorded in equity for the year ended January 31, 2021.
The following table reflects certain non-GAAP financial amounts for the years ending January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively (in thousands):
Between April 2020, when we discontinued our previous line of operations, and June/July of 2021 when we acquired 832, Mercury, and Vengar, our main activity was investing in and selling of cryptocurrencies. During this period management and our stockholders evaluated our performance based on our cryptocurrency. As we integrate 832, Mercury, and Vengar, and release the various products associated with these acquisitions, a significant portion of the evaluation of our performance will continue to be based on cryptocurrency activities.
Adjusted Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, net cash provided by operating activities or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, Adjusted Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA presented by other companies may not be comparable to our presentation, since each company may define these terms differently.
The table below reconciles Adjusted Revenue, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to revenue.
Net income as a percentage of revenue for the year ended January 31, 2022 is 93%, compared to net income as a percentage of adjusted revenue for the year ended January 31, 2022 of 20%. The 20% is a more accurate reflection of our profit margin.
The table below reconciles Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to net income (loss).
Analysis of Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022. We had net income of $2.3 million, which included fair value adjustments to cryptocurrency of $3.8 million, stock based compensation of $2.0 million and realized net gain on investment in cryptocurrency of $1.2 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. We had net loss of $49.3 million, which included stock based compensation of $49.2 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $1.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to net cash used by investing activities of $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. During the year ended January 31, 2022, we sold $5.8 million of cryptocurrency and purchased $3.1 million of cryptocurrency. We also had capital expenditures of $1.5 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $0 for the year ended January 31, 2021. During the year ended January 31, 2022, we had proceeds from issuance of common stock of $0.8 million and we paid off debt to a related party of $0.5 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the year ended January 31, 2022, we gained $1.1 million in cash. Cash on hand as of January 31, 2022 was $1.1 million. Based on our revenues, monthly burn rate, cash on hand, and cryptocurrency holdings, the Company can sustain its operations going forward.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, we funded operations primarily through cash on hand and cash from sales of cryptocurrencies and common stock. We funded our acquisitions primarily with our common stock.
On March 17, 2022, the Board approved the conversion of 2,000,000 shares of blank check preferred stock into 2,000,000 shares of Series C Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001. On April 19, 2022, the Company sold 250,000 shares of Series C Preferred Stock for $1.0 million.
On April 19, 2022, two warrants were exercised for a total of 500,000 shares of common stock resulting in the Company receiving $0.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements as of January 31, 2022.
Going Concern
Our financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles, which contemplate the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. Because the business is relatively new and has a short history and relatively few sales, no certainty of continuation can be stated. The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.