ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future financial performance. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and other factors include, among others, those listed under “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” and those included elsewhere in this report. Our financial statements are prepared in U.S. dollars and in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.
Overview
We provide an internet interactive software to allow consumers that need credit repair to track all the monthly payments they make and pay all their bills on-time. Once a consumer begins to use the Ecrid bill pay system, the system rewards them with an ECRID credit rating of up to 900 points. Each time the consumer does not pay a bill on-time, Ecrid subtracts points from the credit rating Ecrid assigns the consumer. Maintaining a high Ecrid score will enable the consumer lenders to buy a car, house or other payment related things.
Our founder and sole officer and director, Cleveland Gary, who has education in Business Administration and over 25 years of work experience in business administration, currently handles all facets of the Company's operations, and our strategic development.
The Company developed a credit report monitoring software that gives lenders a sound up to date credit report that validates the members credit worthiness. Within the scope of each member's credit report, Ecrid Credit Tool Analysis provides to the lender a comprehensive analysis report that validates the members credit worthiness along with their ability to assure monthly payments can be made on time based upon each member's income to debt ratio. Inclusive of the credit evaluation software is the Ecrid Bill Pay feature where each member can pay their bill and have it processed to avoid late payments. In addition, each member will receive a monthly alert to inform them of their Ecrid Credit Score through the Ecrid Score Monitoring feature.
The process for creating and the related online software, database and system becomes popular and more and more clients seeking to be able to borrow funds will begin using the Ecrid scoring system. For purposes of demand and marketability, choosing a format that is currently on the demand is vital (consumers are desperate to borrow funds to assist their finances), and this is why a proper needs assessment is essential. We consider it the most important aspect of the entire process.
Next, we determine the feasibility of making our product a success. We consider our product a success when the members are getting approved for a home, car, credit card, personal loan and other products and services that can be financed within each member's income to debt ratio range. With using the Ecrid Credit Analysis Tool, it creates for the borrower and lender a win/win situation because the borrower chances of defaulting on the loan is highly unlikely because the approval is based on what each member can afford to pay.
Basically, a successful payment plan is created through the Ecrid Credit Analysis Tool for each member to succeed in making their monthly payments on time from the beginning to the end of the loan agreement. The Ecrid System makes it easier for the Lender to trust giving the borrower a credit approval because the lender is assured the borrower has the ability to pay off the evaluation from the Ecrid Credit Analysis Tool.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations during the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021.
Revenue. We did not generate any revenue for the years ended March 31, 2022 or 2021. The Company has since launched its software and is engaged in marketing its service offering.
Operating costs and general and administrative expenses.
The Company had operating costs of approximately $1,718,575 and $7,595,918 for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company recorded stock base compensation expense of $1,620,467 and $7,593,229 for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Net loss. The Company incurred net losses of $1,718,575 and $7,595,918 for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, due mainly to the recognition of stock based compensation expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow
The Company had cash of $10,019 as of March 31, 2022. Cash used in operating activities for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 was $39,981 and $0, respectively.
The net loss incurred for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 was $1,718,575 and $7,595,918, respectively. Included in the net loss amounts was stock based compensation expense for the officer and for advisory consulting expense of $1,620,467 and $7,593,229, respectively, which did not require cash disbursements.
The had current liabilities at March 31, 2022 of $22,496 including $2,496 payable to the officer. The Company plans on cash flow from future earnings and funding from its current Form S-1 offering to satisfy obligations and operations for the next twelve months. The Company may seek additional funds if needed.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
There were no contractual obligations or commitments of any kind.
Related Party Loans
From time to time the officer and majority stockholder has made loans to and have received payments from the Company.
As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, the amount due from the officer, net of transactions between the Company and an entity controlled by the officer, was $41,867 and $49,140, respectively.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. However, our management will closely monitor price changes in our industry and continually maintain effective cost control in operations.
Seasonality
Our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to significant seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, as a result of new market opportunities or new product introductions.
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements.
Effect of Inflation and Market Prices on Net Sales and Revenues
We do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. However, our management will closely monitor price changes in our industry and continually maintain effective cost control in operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles GAAP requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Property and Equipment, Net.
Property and equipment consist primarily of office and laboratory equipment, leasehold improvements, vehicle, and is stated at cost. Depreciation is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives ranging from three to seven years. The Company has one vehicle recorded in property and equipment with a net book value of $5,280 as of December 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation.
Stock-based compensation is accounted for under FASB ASC Topic No. 718 - Compensation - Stock Compensation. The guidance requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively the vesting period). The guidance also requires measurement of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. We account for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with guidance related to equity instruments that are issued to other than employees for acquisition, or in conjunction with selling, goods or services.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments.
The carrying value of cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses and notes payable approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of these accounts.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Management has evaluated all recent accounting pronouncements as issued by the FASB in the form of Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) through the date these financial statements were available to be issued and found no recent accounting pronouncements issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, when adopted, will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Company.