Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis may include statements regarding our expectations with respect to our future performance, liquidity, and capital resources. Such statements, along with any other non-historical statements in the discussion, are forward-looking. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, factors listed in other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC''). We do not assume an obligation to update any forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any of the forward-looking statements contained herein.
Overview and Financial Condition
We are an innovative entrant into the green technology licensing space, and as a recently registered publicly traded company with our initial S-1 registration statement declared effective as of January 15, 2021, we are one of the few publicly-traded green technology development firms in the U.S. As of the date of this Annual Report, we have two years of implementing our business plan under new management following our change of control in late February 2020.
Our total operating and other expenses in excess of our gross profit have resulted in a net loss of $5,834,144 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which, considered in light of our past financial performance, give rise to the going concern statement below. In furthering our business, as described in Item 1 above concerning our business and operations, we are seeking to license commercially viable green technologies that fulfill concrete market demands, and develop product applications that we can sell into the market. Our technology licensing and product development activities are spearheaded by Julia Otey-Roades, our Chief Executive Officer.
We cannot assure you we will be successful in raising sufficient capital to implement our full business plan or assuming we can, that we will be able to develop a successful business. For further information please see Part 1, Item 1 “Business.”
Green Construction Division - USA and Canada
Spruce Engineering & Construction, Inc. - Canada
Asset Purchase Agreement
On October 4, 2021, Eco Innovation Group, Inc. (the “Company”) entered into an asset purchase agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Spruce Construction, Inc., an Alberta Business Corporation (“Spruce Construction”) and Timothy Boetzkes (“Boetzkes”), a resident of the Province of Alberta, Canada and the sole shareholder of Spruce Construction, pursuant to which, the Company, Boetzkes and Spruce Construction agreed to to effect an asset purchase agreement for existing construction equipment and form a new Canadian engineering and construction company in Canada.
Under the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Boetzkes one million shares of the Company’s restricted common stock for substantially all of the assets and business of Spruce Construction, consisting of vehicles, tools and equipment for the construction industry, the Spruce Construction name, and the existing book of construction business of Spruce Construction. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company, Boetzkes and Patrick Laurie, the CEO of the Company’s Canadian technology subsidiary, ECOIG Canada, have formed a new Alberta Business Corporation to own and deploy the construction assets, named Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc. The Company will own 85% of the voting interests of Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc., with Boetzkes owning 10% and Patrick Laurie 5%.
The closing of the Asset Purchase Agreement was subject to the satisfaction or waiver of customary conditions to closing, as disclosed in the term sheet for the project disclosed by the Company and filed as Exhibit 10.1 in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 11, 2021.
Lock-Up Leak-Out Agreement
On October 4, 2021, in connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement, Boetzkes entered into a Lock-Up and Leak-Out Agreement with the Company pursuant to which, among other thing, such shareholder agreed to certain restrictions regarding the resale of the common stock issued pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement for a period of six months from the date of the Asset Purchase Agreement, as more fully detailed therein.
Shareholders Agreement
On October 4, 2021, in connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a shareholders agreement (the “Shareholders Agreement”) with Timothy Boetzkes and Patrick Laurie. Under the Shareholders Agreement, Patrick Laurie agreed to serve as the Chief Executive Officer and Timothy Boetzkes agreed to serve as the Chief Operating Officer of Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc. The Shareholders Agreement provides for certain terms of governance, restrictive covenants including confidentiality and noncompetition, and transfer restrictions on the parties’ equity with regards to Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc.
Employment Agreements
On October 4, 2021, in connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement, Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc., of which the Company is the 85% voting equity holder, entered into employment agreements (the “Employment Agreements”) with Timothy Boetzkes and Patrick Laurie, pursuant to which Patrick Laurie shall serve as the Chief Executive Officer and Timothy Boetzkes shall serve as the Chief Operating Officer of Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc. Ancillary to the Employment Agreements, Boetzkes and Laurie also entered into restricted stock award agreements governing their minority equity stakes in Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc., which provide for a repurchase option allowing Spruce Engineering & Construction Inc. to clawback equity in the event of the employees’ for-cause termination.
ECOX Spruce Construction, Inc. - USA
On January 4, 2022, the Company formed a subsidiary, ECOX Spruce Construction, Inc., a California corporation (“ECOX Spruce Construction”), for the purpose of starting a green construction division. Pursuant to a letter of intent (LOI) between ECOX and Edgar E. Aguilar ("Aguilar"), a resident of California and licensed California general contractor, Aguilar agreed to manage the operation of ECOX Spruce Construction’s construction business in California as its Responsible Managing Officer. Under the Company’s existing LOI with Aguilar, Blueprint Construction will own 20% of the equity interests of ECOX Spruce Construction Inc., and the Company will own 80%. ECOX Spruce Construction is in the process of securing a general contractor license in California, with the Company’s Chief Executive Officer as principal applicant. That application was approved and the Company is in the process of securing workman’s compensation insurance and bonding so that the license will become active. Once ECOX Spruce Construction is fully licensed and bonded as a California general contractor, the Company intends to seek certification as a Women’s Business Enterprise.
Going Concern
Because of recurring operating losses, net operating cash flow deficits, and an accumulated deficit, our independent auditors have indicated in their report on our December 31, 2021 financial statements that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
The continuation of our business is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet its obligations, in which we have not been successful, and/or obtaining additional financing from our stockholders or other sources, as may be required. The issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities by us could result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future cash commitments.
We continue to incur ongoing administrative and other expenses, including public company expenses, primarily accounting and legal fees, in excess of corresponding revenue. While we continue to implement our business strategy, we intend to finance our activities through:
· managing current cash and cash equivalents on hand from the Company’s past debt and equity offerings by controlling costs, and
· seeking additional financing through sales of additional securities to investors. The Company sustained continued operating losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern; however, the above conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to do so. The financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets, or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result, should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
While priority is on generating cash from operations through the sale of the Company's products and services, Management is also seeking to raise additional working capital through various financing sources, including the sale of the Company's equity and/or debt securities, which may not be available on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue our business as desired and our operating results will be adversely affected. In addition, any financing arrangement may have potentially adverse effects on us and/or our stockholders. Debt financing (if available and undertaken) will increase expenses, must be repaid regardless of operating results and may involve restrictions limiting our operating flexibility. If we issue equity securities to raise additional funds, the percentage ownership of our existing stockholders will be reduced and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of the current holders of our shares of common stock.
Results of Operations
Year Ending December 31, 2021 Compared December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our sales totaled $95,880 and $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The revenue was related to operations of Spruce Construction since the Company acquired the business. The Company is continuing in its efforts to increase its sales but there is no guarantee that it will be able to do so.
We had $52,320 and $0 costs of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $2020 respectively related to the sales described above.
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll, professional fees, sales and marketing, research and development and other operating expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses totaled $464,822 and $186,934 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $165 in development and manufacturing expenses compared to $757,075 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the category was due to implementation of programs to development new products during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $500,000 in executive compensation and $770,597 in consulting fees compared to $260,000 and 2,635,750 for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company also recognized an impairment loss related to intangible assets of $1,050,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021
The Company also recognized interest expense of $701,596, including amortization of debt discount of $361,727 and interest from derivative liability issuances of $228,706, an impairment loss of $574,167 related to its investments a derivative loss of $1,613,057 during the year ended December 31, 2021 and share payable expense of $866,885. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized interest expense of $46,454, including amortization of debt discount of $43,783, and a derivative loss of $10,525.
As a result of the foregoing, we recorded a net loss of $6,632,146 and $3,896,738 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $28,534 ($84 as of December 31, 2020). Furthermore, the Company had a working capital deficit of $4,509,624 as of December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used $477,088 of cash in operating activities due to its net loss of $6,632,436, partially offset by; amortization of debt discount of $361,727; stock-based compensation expense of $601,600, derivative loss of $1,613,057, interest expense on derivative issuance of $228,706, intangible impairment loss of $1,050,000, investment impairment loss of $574,167, share payable expense of $866,885, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $222,069, and an increase in accounts payable related party of $381,800.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used $56,086 of cash in operating activities due to its net loss of $3,896,738, partially offset by; amortization of debt discount of $43,783; stock-based compensation expense of $3,382,750, derivative loss of $10,525 and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $222,069 as well as an increase in deferred revenue of $181,525.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company did not have cash from investing activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had net cash provided by financing activities of $510,400, primarily from proceeds on convertible debentures of $510,400, proceeds from sale of preferred stock of $206,250 and proceeds from sale of common stock of $50,900, offset by repayments on convertible debentures of $259,250. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had net cash provided by financing activities of $55,924, primarily from proceeds on convertible debentures and convertible notes with related party of $35,924 and proceeds from sale of common stock of $20,000.
Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion, meaning that there is substantial doubt we can continue as an on-going business for the next twelve months unless we obtain additional capital. Our only sources for cash at this time are investments by others in this offering, selling our products and loans from our director. We must raise cash to implement our plan and stay in business.
Limited Operating History; Need for Additional Capital
There is no historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. As our business model and strategy were reinvigorated with our February 2020 change in control and new management, we are in a start-up stage of operations, and in general have generated limited revenues since our inception. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our success and performance are subject to all the normal risks inherent in the development of a new line of business, including our limited capital resources and the strength of our business partners’ business and financial positions, and the market for our green technologies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company's financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. A change in managements’ estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations during the period in which such changes occurred. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our financial statements reflect all adjustments that management believes are necessary for the fair presentation of their financial condition and results of operations for the periods presented.