Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Summary
We invest in a diverse array of real-estate-related and other financial assets, including residential and commercial mortgage loans, residential mortgage-backed securities, or "RMBS," commercial mortgage-backed securities, or "CMBS," consumer loans and asset-backed securities, or "ABS," including ABS backed by consumer loans, collateralized loan obligations, or "CLOs," non-mortgage- and mortgage-related derivatives, equity investments in loan origination companies, and other strategic investments. We are externally managed and advised by our Manager, an affiliate of Ellington. Ellington is a registered investment adviser with a 27-year history of investing in the Agency and credit markets.
We conduct all of our operations and business activities through the Operating Partnership. As of December 31, 2021, we have an ownership interest of approximately 99.0% in the Operating Partnership. The remaining ownership interest of approximately 1.0% in the Operating Partnership represents the interests in the Operating Partnership that are owned by an affiliate of our Manager, our current and certain former directors, and certain current and former Ellington employees and their related parties, and is reflected in our financial statements as a non-controlling interest.
Our primary objective is to generate attractive, risk-adjusted total returns for our stockholders. We seek to attain this objective by utilizing an opportunistic strategy to make investments, without restriction as to ratings, structure, or position in the capital structure, that we believe compensate us appropriately for the risks associated with them rather than targeting a specific yield. Our evaluation of the potential risk-adjusted return of any potential investment typically involves weighing the potential returns of such investment under a variety of economic scenarios against the perceived likelihood of the various scenarios. Potential investments subject to greater risk (such as those with lower credit ratings and/or those with a lower position in the capital structure) will generally require a higher potential return to be attractive in comparison to investment alternatives with lower potential return and a lower degree of risk. However, at any particular point in time, depending on how we perceive the market's pricing of risk both generally and across sectors, we may favor higher-risk assets or we may favor lower-risk assets, or a combination of the two, in the interests of portfolio diversification or other considerations.
Through December 31, 2021, our credit portfolio, which includes all of our investments other than RMBS for which the principal and interest payments are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a U.S. government-sponsored entity, or "Agency RMBS," has been the primary driver of our risk and return, and we expect that this will continue in the near- to medium-term. For more information on our targeted assets, see "-Our Targeted Asset Classes" below. We believe that Ellington's capabilities allow our Manager to identify attractive assets in these classes, value these assets, monitor and forecast the performance of these assets, and opportunistically hedge our risk with respect to these assets.
We continue to maintain a highly leveraged portfolio of Agency RMBS to take advantage of opportunities in that market sector, to help maintain our exclusion from registration as an investment company under the Investment Company Act, and to help maintain our qualification as a REIT. Unless we acquire very substantial amounts of whole mortgage loans or there are changes to the rules and regulations applicable to us under the Investment Company Act and/or to our qualification as a REIT, we expect that we will continue to maintain some amount of Agency RMBS.
The strategies that we employ are intended to capitalize on opportunities in the current market environment. Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT, we intend to adjust our strategies to changing market conditions by shifting our asset allocations across various asset classes as credit and liquidity trends evolve over time. We believe that this flexibility, combined with Ellington's experience, will help us generate more consistent returns on our capital throughout changing market cycles.
Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT, we opportunistically hedge our credit risk, interest rate risk, and foreign currency risk; however, at any point in time we may choose not to hedge all or a portion of these risks, and we will generally not hedge those risks that we believe are appropriate for us to take at such time, or that we believe would be impractical or prohibitively expensive to hedge.
We also use leverage in our credit strategy, albeit significantly less leverage than that used in our Agency RMBS strategy. Through December 31, 2021, we financed the vast majority of our Agency RMBS assets, and a portion of our credit assets, through repurchase agreements, which we sometimes refer to as "repos," which we account for as collateralized borrowings. We expect to continue to finance the vast majority of our Agency RMBS through the use of repos. In addition to financing assets through repos, we also enter into other secured borrowing transactions, which are accounted for as collateralized borrowings, to finance certain of our loan assets. We have also obtained, through the securitization markets, term financing for certain of our non-qualified mortgage, or "non-QM," loans, certain of our consumer loans, and certain of our leveraged corporate loans. Additionally, we have issued unsecured long-term debt.
As of December 31, 2021, outstanding borrowings under repos and Total other secured borrowings (which include Other secured borrowings and Other secured borrowings, at fair value, as presented on our Consolidated Balance Sheet) were $3.6 billion, of which approximately 46%, or $1.6 billion, relates to our Agency RMBS holdings. The remaining outstanding borrowings relate to our credit portfolio.
As of December 31, 2021, we also had $86.0 million outstanding of unsecured long-term debt, maturing in September of 2022, or the "Senior Notes." The Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.50%, subject to adjustment based on changes, if any, in the ratings of the Senior Notes. The indenture governing the Senior Notes contains a number of covenants, including several financial covenants. The Senior Notes are currently rated "A" by Egan-Jones Rating Company1. See Note 11 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further detail on the Senior Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, our book value per share of common stock, calculated using Total Stockholders' Equity less the aggregate liquidation preference of outstanding preferred stock, was $18.39. Our debt-to-equity ratio was 2.7:1 as of December 31, 2021. Our debt-to-equity ratio does not account for liabilities other than debt financings and does not include debt associated with securitization transactions accounted for as sales. Our recourse debt-to-equity ratio was 2.0:1 as of December 31, 2021. Adjusted for unsettled purchases and sales, our debt-to-equity ratio and recourse debt-to-equity ratio were 2.8:1 and 2.0:1, respectively, as of December 31, 2021.
On July 9, 2021, we completed a follow-on offering of 6,000,000 shares of our common stock. On July 29, 2021, we issued an additional 303,000 shares of common stock pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters' option. The issuance and sale of the 6,303,000 shares of common stock generated net proceeds, after underwriters' discounts and commissions and offering costs, of $113.1 million.
On August 6, 2021, we commenced an "at-the-market" offering for shares of our common stock, or the "Common ATM Program," by entering into equity distribution agreements with third party sales agents under which we are authorized to offer and sell up to 10.0 million shares of common stock from time to time. From the commencement of the Common ATM Program through December 31, 2021, we issued 1,549,900 shares of common stock under the Common ATM Program which provided $28.2 million of net proceeds after $0.4 million of agent commissions and offering costs.
On October 15, 2021, we completed a follow-on offering of 5,750,000 shares of our common stock, including 750,000 shares of common stock issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters' option. The issuance and sale of the 5,750,000 shares of common stock generated net proceeds, after underwriters' discounts and commissions and offering costs, of $103.5 million.
On December 13, 2021, we issued 4,800,000 shares of 6.250% Series B Fixed-Rate Reset Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock, $0.001 par value per share ("Series B Preferred Stock"), of which 400,000 shares were issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters' over-allotment option. The issuance and sale of the 4,800,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock resulted in total net proceeds to us of approximately $115.9 million, after underwriters' discounts and offering costs. Our preferred stock is rated "A-" by Egan-Jones Rating Company1.
On January 20, 2022, we commenced an "at-the-market" offering for our preferred stock, or the "Preferred ATM Program," by entering into equity distribution agreements with third party sales agents under which we are authorized to offer and sell up to $100.0 million of Series A Preferred Stock and/or Series B Preferred Stock from time to time. From commencement of the Preferred ATM Program through February 25, 2022, we have issued 20,421 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, which provided $0.5 million of net proceeds after $11 thousand of commissions and offering costs.
On February 18, 2022, we entered into an agreement with Home Point Capital Inc. ("Home Point") to purchase Home Point's 49.6% ownership interest in Longbridge Financial, LLC ("Longbridge"), a reverse mortgage originator in which we also held a 49.6% ownership interest as of December 31, 2021. The consummation of this transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions and is expected to close in the second quarter of 2022. Upon closing of the transaction, we will own substantially all of the equity interests in Longbridge, which will result in the consolidation of Longbridge's financial results in our financial statements following the closing.
1 A rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. Ratings may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
The consolidation of Longbridge, into the financial statements of the Company will impact the Company's financial position, financial reporting, and operations. As of December 31, 2021, Longbridge had total assets of $6.7 billion and total liabilities of $6.6 billion. See Exhibit 99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K for Longbridge's financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019. In addition to the effect on the Company's financial position and operations as a result of consolidation, management anticipates a number of changes to the Company's financial reporting including reporting more than one segment, new asset classes and products such as reverse mortgage loans and MSRs, inclusion of goodwill as a result of the acquisition, and general disclosures related to operating businesses.
We elected to be taxed as a REIT under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or "the Code," commencing with our taxable year ended December 31, 2019. Provided that we maintain our qualification as a REIT, we generally will not be subject to U.S. federal, state, and local income tax on our REIT taxable income that is currently distributed to our stockholders. Any taxes paid by a domestic taxable REIT subsidiary, or "TRS," will reduce the cash available for distribution to our stockholders. REITs are subject to a number of organizational and operational requirements, including a requirement that they currently distribute at least 90% of their annual REIT taxable income excluding net capital gains.
Our Targeted Asset Classes
Our targeted asset classes currently include investments in the U.S. and Europe (as applicable) in the categories listed below. Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT, we expect to continue to invest in these targeted asset classes. Also, we expect to continue to hold certain of our targeted assets through one or more TRSs. As a result, a portion of the income from such assets will be subject to U.S. federal and certain state corporate income taxes, as applicable.
Asset Class Principal Assets
Agency RMBS . Whole pool pass-through certificates;
. Partial pool pass-through certificates;
. Agency collateralized mortgage obligations, or "CMOs," including interest only securities, or "IOs," principal only securities, or "POs," inverse interest only securities, or "IIOs"; and
CLOs . Retained tranches from CLO securitizations, including participating in the accumulation of the underlying assets for such securitization by providing capital to the vehicle accumulating assets; and
. Other CLO debt and equity tranches.
CMBS and Commercial Mortgage Loans . CMBS; and
. Commercial mortgage loans and other commercial real estate debt.
Consumer Loans and ABS . Consumer loans;
. ABS, including ABS backed by consumer loans; and
. Retained tranches from securitizations to which we have contributed assets.
Mortgage-Related Derivatives . To-Be-Announced mortgage pass-through certificates, or "TBAs";
. Credit default swaps, or "CDS," on individual RMBS, on the ABX, CMBX and PrimeX indices and on other mortgage-related indices; and
. Other mortgage-related derivatives.
Non-Agency RMBS . RMBS backed by prime jumbo, Alt-A, non-QM, manufactured housing, and subprime mortgages;
. RMBS backed by fixed rate mortgages, Adjustable rate mortgages, or "ARMs," Option-ARMs, and Hybrid ARMs;
. RMBS backed by mortgages on single-family-rental properties;
. RMBS backed by first lien and second lien mortgages;
. Investment grade and non-investment grade securities;
. Senior and subordinated securities;
. IOs, POs, IIOs, and inverse floaters;
. Collateralized debt obligations, or "CDOs";
. RMBS backed by European residential mortgages, or "European RMBS"; and
. Retained tranches from securitizations in which we have participated.
Asset Class Principal Assets
(continued)
Residential Mortgage Loans . Non-QM loans;
. Residential "transition loans," such as residential bridge loans and residential "fix-and-flip" loans;
. Residential non-performing mortgage loans, or "NPLs";
Re-performing loans, or "RPLs," which generally are loans that were modified and/or formerly NPLs where the borrower has resumed making payments in some form or amount; and
. Retained tranches from securitizations to which we have contributed assets.
Strategic Investments in Loan Originators . Strategic equity and/or debt investments in loan originators and mortgage-related entities;
Other . Real estate, including commercial and residential real property;
. Strategic equity and/or debt investments in entities related to our business;
. Corporate debt and equity securities and corporate loans;
. Mortgage servicing rights, or "MSRs";
. Credit risk transfer securities, or "CRTs"; and
. Other non-mortgage-related derivatives.
Agency RMBS
Our Agency RMBS assets consist primarily of whole pool (and to a lesser extent, partial pool) pass-through certificates, the principal and interest of which are guaranteed by a federally chartered corporation, such as the Federal National Mortgage Association, or "Fannie Mae," the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or "Freddie Mac," or the Government National Mortgage Association, within the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or "Ginnie Mae," and which are backed by ARMs, Hybrid ARMs, or fixed-rate mortgages. In addition to investing in pass-through certificates which are backed by traditional mortgages, we have also invested in Agency RMBS backed by reverse mortgages. Reverse mortgages are mortgage loans for which neither principal nor interest is due until the borrower dies, the home is sold, or other trigger events occur. Mortgage pass-through certificates are securities representing undivided interests in pools of mortgage loans secured by real property where payments of both interest and principal, plus prepaid principal, on the securities are made monthly to holders of the security, in effect "passing through" monthly payments made by the individual borrowers on the mortgage loans that underlie the securities, net of fees paid to the issuer/guarantor and servicers of the securities. Whole pool pass-through certificates are mortgage pass-through certificates that represent the entire ownership of (as opposed to merely a partial undivided interest in) a pool of mortgage loans.
Our Agency RMBS assets are typically concentrated in specified pools. Specified pools are fixed-rate Agency pools consisting of mortgages with special characteristics, such as mortgages with low loan balances, mortgages backed by investor properties, mortgages originated through the government-sponsored "Making Homes Affordable" refinancing programs, and mortgages with various other characteristics. Our Agency strategy also includes RMBS that are backed by ARMs or Hybrid ARMs and reverse mortgages, and CMOs, including IOs, POs, and IIOs.
CLOs
CLOs are a form of asset-backed security collateralized by syndicated corporate loans. We have retained, and may retain in the future, tranches from CLO securitizations for which we have participated in the accumulation of the underlying assets, typically by providing capital to a vehicle accumulating assets for such CLO securitization. Such vehicles may enter into warehouse financing facilities in order to facilitate such accumulation. Securitizations can effectively provide us with long-term, locked-in financing on the related collateral pool, with an effective cost of funds well below the expected yield on the collateral pool. Our CLO holdings may include both debt and equity interests.
CMBS
We acquire CMBS, which are securities collateralized by mortgage loans on commercial properties. The majority of CMBS issued are fixed rate securities backed by fixed rate loans made to multiple borrowers on a variety of property types, though single-borrower CMBS and floating rate CMBS have also been issued.
The majority of CMBS utilize senior/subordinate structures, similar to those found in non-Agency RMBS. Subordination levels vary so as to provide for one or more AAA credit ratings on the most senior classes, with less senior securities rated
investment grade and non-investment grade, including a first loss component which is typically unrated. This first loss component is commonly referred to as the "B-piece," which is the most subordinated (and therefore highest yielding and riskiest) tranche of a CMBS securitization. Much of our focus within the CMBS sector has been on B-pieces, but we also acquire other CMBS with more senior credit priority.
Commercial Mortgage Loans and Other Commercial Real Estate Debt
We acquire commercial mortgage loans, which are loans secured by liens on commercial properties, including hotel, industrial, mixed-use, multi-family, office and retail properties. Loans may be fixed or floating rate and will generally have maturities ranging from one to ten years. We typically acquire first lien loans but may also acquire subordinated loans. As of December 31, 2021, all of our commercial mortgage loans were first lien loans. Commercial real estate debt typically limits the borrower's right to freely prepay for a period of time through provisions such as prepayment fees, lockout, yield maintenance, or defeasance provisions. Some of the commercial mortgage loans that we acquire may be non-performing, underperforming, or otherwise distressed; these loans are typically acquired at a discount both to their unpaid principal balances and to the value of the underlying real estate.
We also participate in the origination of "bridge" loans, which have shorter terms and higher interest rates than more traditional commercial mortgage loans. Bridge loans are typically secured by properties in transition, where the borrower is in the process of either re-developing or stabilizing operations at the property. Property types securing these loans may include hotel, industrial, mixed-use, multi-family, office, and retail.
Within both our loan acquisition and loan origination strategies, we generally focus on smaller balance loans and/or loan packages that are less-competitively-bid. These loans typically have balances that are less than $30 million, and are secured by real estate and, in some cases, a personal guarantee from the borrower.
Consumer Loans and ABS
We acquire U.S. consumer whole loans and ABS, including ABS backed by U.S. consumer loans. Our U.S. consumer loan portfolio consists of unsecured loans and secured auto loans. We are currently purchasing newly originated consumer loans under flow agreements with originators, as well as seasoned consumer loans in the secondary market, and we continue to evaluate new opportunities.
TBAs and Other Mortgage-Related Derivatives
In addition to investing in specified pools of Agency RMBS, we utilize TBA transactions, whereby we agree to purchase or sell, for future delivery, Agency RMBS with certain principal and interest terms and certain types of underlying collateral, but the particular Agency RMBS to be delivered is not identified until shortly before the TBA settlement date. TBAs are liquid, have quoted market prices, and represent the most actively traded class of mortgage-backed securities, or "MBS." TBA trading is based on the assumption that mortgage pools that are eligible to be delivered at TBA settlement are fungible and thus the specific mortgage pools to be delivered do not need to be explicitly identified at the time a trade is initiated.
We generally engage in TBA transactions for purposes of managing certain risks associated with our investment strategies. Other than with respect to TBA transactions entered into by our TRSs, most of our TBA transactions are treated for tax purposes as hedging transactions used to hedge indebtedness incurred to acquire or carry real estate assets, or "qualifying liability hedges." The principal risks that we use TBAs to mitigate are interest rate and yield spread risks. For example, we may hedge the interest rate and/or yield spread risk inherent in our long Agency RMBS by taking short positions in TBAs that are similar in character. Alternatively, we may opportunistically engage in TBA transactions because we find them attractive in their own right, from a relative value perspective or otherwise. For accounting purposes, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or "U.S. GAAP," we classify TBA transactions as derivatives.
We also take long and short positions in various other mortgage-related derivative instruments, including mortgage-related credit default swaps. A credit default swap is a credit derivative contract in which one party (the protection buyer) pays an ongoing periodic premium (and often an upfront payment as well) to another party (the protection seller) in return for compensation for default (or similar credit event) by a reference entity. In this case, the reference entity can be an individual MBS or an index of several MBS, such as an ABX, PrimeX, or CMBX index. Payments from the protection seller to the protection buyer typically occur if a credit event takes place. A credit event can be triggered by, among other things, the reference entity's failure to pay its principal obligations or a severe ratings downgrade of the reference entity.
Non-Agency RMBS
We acquire non-Agency RMBS backed by prime jumbo, Alt-A, non-QM, manufactured housing, subprime residential, and single-family-rental mortgage loans. Our non-Agency RMBS holdings can include investment-grade and non-investment grade classes, including non-rated classes.
Non-Agency RMBS are generally debt obligations issued by private originators of, or investors in, residential mortgage loans. Non-Agency RMBS generally are issued as CMOs and are backed by pools of whole mortgage loans or by mortgage pass-through certificates. Non-Agency RMBS generally are securitized in senior/subordinated structures, or in excess spread/over-collateralization structures. In senior/subordinated structures, the subordinated tranches generally absorb all losses on the underlying mortgage loans before any losses are borne by the senior tranches. In excess spread/over-collateralization structures, losses are first absorbed by any existing over-collateralization, then borne by subordinated tranches and excess spread, which represents the difference between the interest payments received on the mortgage loans backing the RMBS and the interest due on the RMBS debt tranches, and finally by senior tranches and any remaining excess spread.
We also have acquired, and may acquire in the future, European RMBS, including retained tranches from European RMBS securitizations in which we have participated.
Residential Mortgage Loans
Our residential mortgage loans include newly originated non-QM loans, residential transition loans, as well as legacy residential NPLs and RPLs. A non-QM loan is not necessarily high-risk, or subprime, but is instead a loan that does not conform to the complex Qualified Mortgage, or "QM," rules of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. For example, many non-QM loans are made to creditworthy borrowers who cannot provide traditional documentation for income, such as borrowers who are self-employed. There is also demand from certain creditworthy borrowers for loans above the QM 43% debt-to-income ratio limit that still meet all ability-to-repay standards. We hold an equity investment in a non-QM originator, and to date we have purchased the vast majority of our non-QM loans from this originator, although we could potentially purchase a greater share of non-QM loans from other sources in the future.
The residential transition loans that we originate or purchase include: (i) "fix and flip" loans, which are made to real estate investors for the purpose of acquiring residential homes, making value-add improvements to such homes, and reselling the newly rehabilitated homes for a potential profit, and (ii) loans made to real estate investors for a "business purpose," such as purchasing a rental investment property, financing or refinancing a fully rehabilitated home awaiting sale, or securing short-term financing pending qualification for longer-term lower-rate financing. Our residential transition loans are secured by non-owner occupied properties, and are typically structured as fixed-rate, interest-only loans with terms to maturity between 6 and 24 months. Our underwriting guidelines focus on both the "as is" and "as repaired" property values, borrower experience as a real estate investor, and asset verification.
We remain active in the market for residential NPLs and RPLs. The market for large residential NPL and RPL pools has remained highly concentrated, with the great majority having traded to only a handful of large players who typically securitize the residential NPLs and RPLs that they purchase. As a result, we have continued to focus our acquisitions on less-competitively-bid, and more attractively-priced mixed legacy pools sourced from motivated sellers.
Strategic Equity Investments in Loan Originators
We have made, and in the future may make additional, equity investments in loan originators and other related entities; historically, our investments have represented non-controlling interests, although we are not restricted from holding controlling interests in such entities. We have also acquired debt investments and/or warrants in certain of these loan originators. We have also entered into various other arrangements, such as entering into flow agreements or providing guarantees or financing lines, with certain of the loan originators in which we have invested.
On February 18, 2022, we entered into an agreement with Home Point to purchase Home Point's 49.6% ownership interest in Longbridge. The consummation of this transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions and is expected to close in the second quarter of 2022. Upon closing of the transaction, we will own substantially all of the equity interests in Longbridge, which will result in the consolidation of Longbridge's financial results in our financial statements following the closing. See Exhibit 99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K for Longbridge's financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Other Investment Assets
Our other investment assets include real estate, including residential and commercial real property, strategic equity and/or debt investments in entities related to our business, corporate debt and equity securities, corporate loans, which can include
litigation finance loans, CRTs, and other non-mortgage-related derivatives. We do not typically purchase real property directly; rather, our real estate ownership usually results from foreclosure activity with respect to our acquired residential and commercial loans. We have not yet acquired mortgage servicing rights directly, but we may do so in the future.
Hedging Instruments
Interest Rate Hedging
We opportunistically hedge our interest rate risk by using various hedging strategies, subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT. The interest rate hedging instruments that we use and may use in the future include, without limitation:
•TBAs;
•interest rate swaps (including floating-to-fixed, fixed-to-floating, floating-to-floating, or more complex swaps such as floating-to-inverse floating, callable or non-callable);
•CMOs;
•U.S. Treasury securities;
•swaptions, caps, floors, and other derivatives on interest rates;
•futures and forward contracts; and
•options on any of the foregoing.
Because fluctuations in short-term interest rates may expose us to fluctuations in the spread between the interest we earn on certain of our investments and the interest we pay on certain of our borrowings, we may seek to manage such exposure by entering into short positions in interest rate swaps. An interest rate swap is an agreement to exchange interest rate cash flows, calculated on a notional principal amount, at specified payment dates during the life of the agreement. Typically, one party pays a fixed interest rate and receives a floating interest rate and the other party pays a floating interest rate and receives a fixed interest rate. Each party's payment obligation is computed using a different interest rate. In an interest rate swap, the notional principal is generally not exchanged. We generally enter into these transactions to offset the potential adverse effects of rising interest rates on short-term repurchase agreements. Our repurchase agreements generally have maturities of up to 364 days and carry interest rates that are determined by reference to a benchmark rate such as LIBOR or the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or "SOFR." As each then-existing fixed-rate repo borrowing matures, it will generally be replaced with a new fixed-rate repo borrowing based on market interest rates established at that future date.
In the case of interest rate swaps, most of our agreements are structured such that we receive payments based on a variable interest rate and make payments based on a fixed interest rate. The variable interest rate on which payments are received is generally calculated based on various reset mechanisms for a benchmark rate such as LIBOR or SOFR. To the extent that the benchmark rates used to calculate the payments we receive on our interest rate swaps continue to be highly correlated with our repo borrowing costs, our interest rate swap contracts should help to reduce the variability of our overall repo borrowing costs, thus reducing risk to the extent we hold fixed-rate assets that are financed with repo borrowings. While for the time being the majority of our interest rate swaps are LIBOR-based interest rate swap contracts, we have entered into interest rate swap contracts based on other benchmark rates, such as SOFR.
Credit Risk Hedging
We enter into credit-hedging positions in order to protect against adverse credit events with respect to our credit investments, subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT. Our credit hedging portfolio can vary significantly from period to period, and can encompass a wide variety of financial instruments, including corporate debt or equity-related instruments, RMBS- or CMBS-related instruments, or instruments involving other markets. Our hedging instruments can include both "single-name" instruments (i.e., instruments referencing one underlying entity or security) and hedging instruments referencing indices.
Currently, our credit hedges consist primarily of financial instruments tied to corporate credit, such as CDS on corporate bond indices, short positions in and CDS on corporate bonds; and positions involving exchange traded funds, or "ETFs," of corporate bonds. Our credit hedges also currently include CDS tied to individual MBS or an index of several MBS, such as CDS on CMBS indices, or "CMBX."
Foreign Currency Hedging
To the extent that we hold instruments denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars, we may enter into transactions to offset the potential adverse effects of changes in currency exchange rates, subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT. In particular, we may use currency forward contracts and other currency-related derivatives to mitigate this risk.
Trends and Recent Market Developments
Market Overview
•In 2021, the U.S. Federal Reserve, or the "Federal Reserve," maintained the target range of 0.00%-0.25% throughout the year, and for the first ten months of the year, it directed the Open Market Desk to increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities by $80 billion per month, and of Agency RMBS by $40 billion per month. This activity reflected a continuation of the Federal Reserve's response in 2020 to the negative economic effects caused by the COVID-19 pandemic when the Federal Reserve lowered the target range for the federal funds rate to 0.00%-0.25% from 1.50%-1.75%, committed to purchase U.S. Treasury securities and Agency MBS without explicit limits on the amounts purchased, and also announced several funding and liquidity programs.
At the end of the first quarter of 2021, the U.S. Congress passed the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, which provided for an additional $1.9 trillion of COVID-related stimulus and economic aid. Additionally, in July, the Federal Reserve announced the establishment of a standing repurchase agreement facility to support financing markets.
At its November 2021 meeting, citing “the substantial further progress the economy has made,” the Federal Reserve announced a tapering schedule for its asset purchases, beginning with a reduction of its monthly net asset purchases by $10 billion for U.S. Treasury securities and by $5 billion for Agency RMBS in November; by an additional $10 billion for U.S. Treasury securities and $5 billion for Agency RMBS in December; and with an increasing pace of tapering anticipated in subsequent months, until incremental monthly net purchases reach zero. The Federal Reserve also noted that it expected elevated inflation to be “transitory.”
At its final meeting of the year, in December, “in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market,” the Federal Reserve announced that it would further accelerate the tapering of its asset purchases. Beginning in January 2022, it would reduce the monthly pace of net asset purchases by an additional $20 billion per month for U.S. Treasury securities and $10 billion per month for Agency RMBS, with an increasing pace of tapering in subsequent months, until incremental monthly net purchases reach zero. In addition, given the persistently high rate of inflation, the Federal Reserve shifted to a more hawkish position on interest rates, signaling that multiple increases of the target range for the federal funds rate could be imminent, and also that it could begin to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet soon (as opposed to tapering net purchases to zero, but still maintaining the size of its balance sheet).
In December 2021, US consumer prices increased by 7% year-over-year, which was the fastest pace in nearly four decades. In a congressional hearing in January 2022, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, discussed his focus on inflation and stated, “If we have to raise interest rates more over time, we will. The economy no longer needs or wants the very highly accommodative policies we have had in place.”
•During the first quarter of 2021, long-term interest rates rose significantly and the U.S. Treasury yield curve steepened, with the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield increasing 83 basis points to finish the quarter at 1.74%, and the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield up just 4 basis points to 0.16%. The yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury increased to 158 basis points, which was its widest level since 2015. Interest rate volatility also increased in the quarter, with the MOVE Index, which measures U.S. interest rate volatility, reaching a 10-month high in February.
In the second quarter, long-term interest rates reversed course, with the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield falling 27 basis points to 1.47%, while the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 9 basis points to 0.25%. The yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury decreased to 122 basis points at June 30th, but was still meaningfully higher than the 79 basis point spread at the start of the year. Interest rate volatility subsided for most of the quarter, before increasing modestly during the second half of June.
In the third quarter, interest rates declined in July, before reversing course and rising in August and September. For the quarter, the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield rose 2 basis points to 1.49%, while the 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 3 basis points to 0.28%, and the yield spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury was essentially unchanged. Interest rate volatility remained relatively elevated for much of the third quarter.
During the fourth quarter, short-term interest rates spiked, the yield curve flattened significantly, and interest rate volatility rose, as the market reacted to imminent Fed tapering, potential upcoming interest rate increases, and consistently strong inflation reports. The 2-year U.S. Treasury yield increased 46 basis points to 0.73%, its highest level since early March 2020, while the 10-year U.S. Treasury yield rose just 2 basis points to 1.51%. The spread between the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury narrowed to 78 basis points, back to about where it started the year. Meanwhile, the MOVE Index reached its high for the year in November.
•After declining to all-time lows over the course of 2020, mortgage rates reversed course during the first quarter of 2021 as long-term interest rates rose. The Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate rose steadily throughout the quarter, increasing to 3.18% as of April 1st, as compared to 2.67% at year end. Although still elevated on an historical
basis, refinancing applications declined during the quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index decreasing 21.7% between January 1st and April 2nd of 2021. Still, overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments remained well above pre-pandemic levels, declining slightly from a CPR of 35.1 in December 2020 to 30.8 in January 2021, before increasing to 31.8 in February 2021 and 35.4 in March 2021.
In the second quarter, however, mortgage rates declined as long-term interest rates fell. The Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate decreased to 2.98% as of June 30th, while refinancing applications continued to decline. The Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index decreased another 9% between April 2nd and July 2nd. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments declined from a CPR of 35.4 in March to 27.8 in April and 23.4 in May, before increasing moderately to 24.6 in June.
Mortgage rates also declined in July before reversing course and rising in August and September, in sympathy with long-term interest rates. For the third quarter, the Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate increased by 3 basis points to 3.01%. Refinancing applications rose modestly during the quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association's Refinance Index increasing by 9% between July 2nd and October 1st. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments decreased from a CPR of 24.6 in June 2021 to 22.2 in July, before returning to 24.6 in August and declining slightly to 24.1 in September.
Mortgage rates continued to rise in the fourth quarter as the Freddie Mac survey 30-year mortgage rate increased another 10 basis points to finish the year at 3.11%. Refinancing applications declined during the fourth quarter, with the Mortgage Bankers Association’s Refinance Index falling 29% between September 3rd and December 31st. Overall Fannie Mae 30-year MBS prepayments continued to fall throughout the quarter, declining to 22.2 in October, 20.2 in November, and 18.7 in December.
•LIBOR rates declined modestly during the first nine months of 2021. Between December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2021, one-month LIBOR declined 6 basis points to 0.08%, and three-month LIBOR fell 11 basis points to 0.13%. In the fourth quarter, LIBOR ticked up slightly, with one-month LIBOR increasing 2 basis points to 0.10% and three-month LIBOR up by 8 basis points to 0.21%.
•U.S. real GDP increased at an annualized rate of 6.3% in the first quarter and 6.7% in the second quarter, before slowing to 2.3% in the third quarter, but accelerating again to an estimated annualized rate of 6.9% in the fourth quarter.
•Positive economic activity drove steady growth in U.S. employment in each quarter of 2021. The unemployment rate dropped from 6.7% at the end of 2020, to 6.0% on March 31st, 5.9% on June 30th, 4.8% on September 30th, and 3.9% at year end.
•Driven by the economic recovery and strong employment, forbearance rates on residential mortgages steadily declined throughout 2021. According to the Mortgage Bankers Association, the total forbearance rate decreased from 5.5% as of January 3rd, to 4.9% on March 28th, 3.9% on June 27th, 2.9% on September 26th, and 1.4% on December 31st.
•In the first quarter, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. MBS Index (“BB MBS Index”) generated a negative return of (1.10%), driven by rising interest rates, but a positive excess return (on a duration-adjusted basis) of 0.15% relative to the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Treasury Index. In the second quarter, long-term interest rates declined and the BB MBS Index generated a positive return of 0.33%, but a negative excess return of (0.60%). After generating a modest return and positive excess return in the third quarter, the BB MBS Index generated a negative return of (0.37%) and a negative excess return of (0.26%) in the fourth quarter, as volatility increased and short-term Treasury yields spiked. For the full year 2021, the BB MBS Index generated a negative return of (1.04%), and a negative excess return of (0.68%).
•In the first quarter, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Corporate Bond Index (“BB IG Index”) generated a negative return of (4.65%), but an excess return of 0.95%, and in the second quarter, a positive return of 3.38% and positive excess return of 1.09%. In the third quarter, the BB IG Index generated a breakeven return and had a negative excess return of (0.15%), and in the fourth quarter, it generated a positive return of 0.23% but a negative excess return of (0.28%). For the full year 2021, the BB IG Index generated a negative return of (1.04%), but an excess return of 1.61%. Meanwhile, the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Corporate High Yield Bond Index (“BB HY Index”) generated positive returns and positive excess returns in each quarter of 2021. For the year, the BB HY Index generated a gain of 5.28% and an excess return of 6.63%.
•U.S. equities performed well in 2021, driven by the ongoing economic and employment recovery, continued monetary and fiscal policy support, the development and distribution of vaccines, and other positive factors, which outweighed negative factors including supply-chain challenges, uncertainty about the path of the virus, concerns about the quickening pace of inflation, rising interest rates, and the actual and anticipated removal of stimulus measures.
For the year, the S&P 500 rose 26.9%, the Dow Jones Industrial Average increased 18.7%, and the NASDAQ rose 21.4%. Meanwhile, London's FTSE 100 index increased 14.3% and the MSCI World global equity index increased 20.1%.
The VIX volatility index remained relatively low during 2021, as compared to the months surrounding the onset of the pandemic in early 2020, although it did spike toward the end of the fourth quarter in response to the spread of a new COVID variant and a hawkish shift from the Federal Reserve.
Portfolio Overview and Outlook
The following tables summarize our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Credit Portfolio(1)
(1)This information does not include U.S. Treasury securities, interest rate swaps, TBA positions, or other hedge positions.
(2)Includes equity investments in securitization-related vehicles.
(3)Includes a corporate loan to a loan origination entity in which we hold an equity investment.
(4)REO is not considered a financial instrument and, as a result, is included at the lower of cost or fair value, as discussed in Note 2 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
(5)Includes investments in unconsolidated entities holding small balance commercial mortgage loans and REO.
(6)Includes an investment in an unconsolidated entity holding European RMBS.
Agency RMBS Portfolio
Our total long credit portfolio, excluding non-retained tranches of consolidated securitization trusts, grew by 44% during the year, to $2.065 billion as of December 31, 2021, from $1.434 billion as of December 31, 2020, as we deployed proceeds from our common and preferred equity offerings completed in the second half of the year. The majority of the growth occurred in the non-QM, residential transition, and small balance commercial mortgage loan strategies. In addition, our investments in loan origination entities increased, driven by the appreciation in the fair value of our existing investments and the addition of five new equity stakes over the course of the year. Our holdings of consumer loans and non-Agency RMBS also grew during the year. These increases were partially offset by three non-QM loan securitizations completed during the year, loan payoffs and resolutions, and opportunistic sales of CLOs and CMBS.
Our long Agency RMBS portfolio also increased significantly during the year, by 77% to $1.697 billion as of December 31, 2021, from $959.4 million as of December 31, 2020, as we ramped the Agency portfolio back up following a significant reduction in the prior year. During March and April of 2020, in light of the heightened levels of market volatility and systemic liquidity risk associated with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we had strategically reduced the size of our Agency portfolio significantly, in order to lower our leverage, enhance our liquidity position, and avoid forced asset sales. Over the course of 2020, our total long Agency RMBS portfolio decreased by 50%, from $1.937 billion as of December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $92.7 million, along with unencumbered assets of $808.1 million. These amounts compared to cash and cash equivalents of $111.6 million, and unencumbered assets of $442.5 million, as of December 31, 2020.
Credit Portfolio Performance Summary
Our credit portfolio performed well in 2021, driven by higher net interest income year over year, net realized and unrealized gains, and strong results from the loan originators in which we hold strategic equity investments.
The increase in net interest income was driven by the growth and strong credit performance of our proprietary loan portfolios, specifically non-QM loans, residential transition loans, small balance commercial mortgage loans, and consumer loans, as well as by lower financing costs. We also benefited from the results in our CMBS and CLO strategies, which drove our net realized and unrealized gains.
The appreciation in the fair value of our equity investments in loan originators was primarily driven by the sustained strong performance of LendSure Mortgage Corp., a non-QM originator, and of Longbridge. LendSure posted record profitability and origination volume in 2021, while Longbridge increased its market share and delivered strong earnings as well.
Supplemental Credit Portfolio Information
The table below details certain information regarding our investments in commercial mortgage loans as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Excludes commercial mortgage loans in non-accrual status, with a fair value of $15.5 million.
(2)Expected average lives of loans are generally shorter than stated contractual maturities. Average lives are affected by scheduled periodic payments of principal and unscheduled prepayments of principal.
(3)Includes our allocable portion of small-balance commercial loans, based on our ownership percentage, held in variable interest entities. Our equity investments in such variable interest entities are included in Investments in unconsolidated entities, at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(4)As of December 31, 2021 all of our commercial mortgage loans were first lien mortgages, of which 99.8% have floating rates with a rate floor.
The table below summarizes our interests in commercial mortgage loans by property type of the underlying real estate collateral, as a percentage of total outstanding unpaid principal balance, as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Includes our allocable portion of small-balance commercial loans, based on our ownership percentage, held in variable interest entities. Our equity investments in such variable interest entities are included in Investments in unconsolidated entities, at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The table below summarizes our interests in commercial mortgage loans by geographic location of the underlying real estate collateral, as a percentage of total outstanding unpaid principal balance, as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Includes our allocable portion of small-balance commercial loans, based on our ownership percentage, held in variable interest entities. Our equity investments in such variable interest entities are included in Investments in unconsolidated entities, at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The table below summarizes our interests in residential mortgage loans by loan type and REO resulting from the foreclosure of residential mortgage loans as of December 31, 2021:
(1)REO is not considered a financial instrument and, as a result, is included at the lower of cost or fair value, as discussed in Note 2 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
The following table provides additional details about our investments in unconsolidated entities as of December 31, 2021:
Agency RMBS Portfolio Performance Summary
The return on our Agency RMBS portfolio was slightly less than breakeven for the year, in the face of a challenging Agency market marked by rising interest rates, widening yield spreads, and elevated interest rate volatility for much of the year.
During the first quarter of the year, long-term interest rates rose, the yield curve steepened, and interest rate volatility increased. As a result, most Agency RMBS prices declined, with lower-coupon RMBS performing the worst in the face of heightened extension risk. Next, in a reversal from the prior quarter, long-term interest rates declined and the yield curve flattened in the second quarter; most Agency RMBS underperformed U.S. Treasury securities and interest rate swaps, with higher-coupon Agency RMBS faring the worst. Moving to the third quarter, performance of Agency RMBS was again mixed, with incrementally higher mortgage rates leading to reduced expectations for prepayments, which boosted higher-coupon RMBS, while the anticipated withdrawal of Federal Reserve purchases negatively impacted lower-coupon RMBS. As a result, higher coupons outperformed lower coupons for the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter, short-term interest rates rose sharply, actual and implied volatility increased, and the yield curve flattened as the Federal Reserve signaled that interest rate increases could be imminent. The Federal Reserve also began the tapering of its asset purchases in November, and then accelerated the pace of that tapering starting in December. In response to these developments, most Agency RMBS underperformed U.S. Treasury securities during the fourth quarter, with higher-coupon specified pools and other shorter-duration RMBS particularly underperforming in light of the flattening of the yield curve.
Over the course of the year, most Agency RMBS prices declined, which led to net realized and unrealized losses on our Agency RMBS portfolio. Virtually all of these losses were offset, however, by net interest income and net gains on our interest rate hedges.
Pay-ups on our existing specified pool investments declined over the course of the year, while our new purchases during the year primarily consisted of pools with lower pay-ups. As a result, the average pay-ups on our specified pools decreased to 0.82% as of December 31, 2021, from 2.05% as of December 31, 2020. Pay-ups are price premiums for specified pools relative to their TBA counterparts.
During the year, we continued to hedge interest rate risk, primarily through the use of interest rate swaps, and short positions in TBAs, U.S. Treasury securities, and futures. The size of our short TBA position increased significantly in conjunction with the increased size of our Agency RMBS portfolio, year over year, as measured by 10-year equivalents. 10-year equivalents for a group of positions represent the amount of 10-year U.S. Treasury securities that would be expected to experience a similar change in market value under a standard parallel move in interest rates. In addition, we continued to maintain a long TBA portfolio concentrated in lower coupons.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the weighted average net pass-through rate on our fixed-rate specified pools was 3.2% and 3.7%, respectively. Portfolio turnover for our Agency strategy, as measured by sales and excluding paydowns, was approximately 67% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We expect to continue to target specified pools that, taking into account their particular composition and based on our prepayment projections, should: (1) generate attractive yields relative to other Agency RMBS and U.S. Treasury securities, (2) have less prepayment sensitivity to government policy shocks, and/or (3) create opportunities for trading gains once the market recognizes their value, which for newer pools may come only after several months, when actual prepayment experience can be observed. We believe that our research team, proprietary prepayment models, and extensive databases remain essential tools in our implementation of this strategy.
The following table summarizes the prepayment rates for our portfolio of fixed-rate specified pools (excluding those backed by reverse mortgages) for the three-month periods ended December 31, 2021, September 30, 2021, June 30, 2021, March 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
(1)Excludes Agency fixed-rate RMBS without any prepayment history.
The following table provides details about the composition of our portfolio of fixed-rate specified pools (excluding those backed by reverse mortgages) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Our net Agency premium as a percentage of the fair value of our specified pool holdings is one metric that we use to measure the overall prepayment risk of our specified pool portfolio. Net Agency premium represents the total premium (excess of market value over outstanding principal balance) on our specified pool holdings less the total premium on related net short TBA positions. The lower our net Agency premium, the less we believe that our specified pool portfolio is exposed to market-wide increases in Agency RMBS prepayments. Our net Agency premium as a percentage of fair value of our specified pool holdings was approximately 1.8% and 4.8% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These figures take into account the net short TBA positions that we use to hedge our specified pool holdings, which had a notional value of $640.2 million and a fair value of $679.2 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to a notional value of $383.6 million and a fair value of $412.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Excluding these TBA hedging positions, our Agency premium as a percentage of fair value was approximately 4.1% and 7.9% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our Agency premium percentage and net Agency premium percentage may fluctuate from period to period based on a variety of factors, including market factors such as interest rates and mortgage rates, and, in the case of our net Agency premium percentage, based on the degree to which
we hedge prepayment risk with short TBA positions. We believe that our focus on purchasing pools with specific prepayment characteristics provides a measure of protection against prepayments.
Financing
The following table details our borrowings outstanding and debt-to-equity ratios as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, excludes borrowings at certain unconsolidated entities that are recourse to us. Including such borrowings, our debt-to-equity ratio based on total recourse borrowings was 2.0:1 and 1.6:1 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)All of our non-recourse borrowings are secured by collateral. In the event of default under a non-recourse borrowing, the lender has a claim against the collateral but not any of the Operating Partnership's other assets. In the event of default under a recourse borrowing, the lender's claim is not limited to the collateral (if any).
(3)Relates to our non-QM loan securitizations, where we have elected the fair value option on the related debt.
Our debt-to-equity ratio including repos, Total other secured borrowings, and our Senior Notes, increased slightly to 2.7:1 as of December 31, 2021 as compared to 2.6:1 as of December 31, 2020, as borrowings related to our larger portfolio increased roughly in proportion to our larger total equity. Over the same period, the proportion of recourse borrowings increased, causing our recourse debt-to-equity ratio to increase to 2.0:1 from 1.6:1. Our recourse debt-to-equity ratio, adjusted for unsettled purchases and sales, was also 2.0:1 and 1.6:1 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our debt-to-equity ratio may fluctuate period over period based on portfolio management decisions, market conditions, capital markets activities, and the timing of security purchase and sale transactions.
Our financing costs include interest expense related to our repo borrowings, Total other secured borrowings, and Senior Notes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our average cost of funds decreased to 1.29%, as compared to 2.25% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year-over-year decline in our average cost of funds was primarily due to lower financing rates on our both our Agency and credit borrowings.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Ellington Financial Inc., its Operating Partnership, its subsidiaries, and variable interest entities, or "VIEs," for which we are deemed to be the primary beneficiary. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our critical accounting estimates are those which require assumptions to be made about matters that are highly uncertain. Actual results could differ from those estimates and such differences could have a material impact on our financial condition and/or results of operations. We believe that all of the decisions and assessments upon which our consolidated financial statements are based were reasonable at the time made based upon information available to us at that time. We rely on the experience of our Manager and Ellington and analysis of historical and current market data in order to arrive at what we believe to be reasonable estimates. See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies. We have identified our most critical accounting estimates to be the following:
Valuation: We have elected the fair value option for the vast majority of our assets and liabilities for which such election is permitted, as provided for under ASC 825, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825"). For financial instruments that are traded in an "active market," the best measure of fair value is the quoted market price. However, many of our financial instruments are not traded in an active market. Therefore, management generally uses third-party valuations when available. If third-party valuations are not available, management uses other valuation techniques, such as the discounted cash flow methodology.
Summary descriptions, for various categories of financial instruments, of the valuation methodologies management uses in determining fair value of our financial instruments are detailed in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management utilizes such methodologies to assign a good faith fair value (the estimated price that, in an orderly transaction at the valuation date, would be received to sell an asset, or paid to transfer a liability, as the case may be) to each such financial instrument. See the notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information on valuation techniques used by management in the valuation of our assets and liabilities.
Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation, the estimated fair value of our financial instruments may differ significantly from the values that would have been used had a ready market for the financial instruments existed, and the differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
The determination of estimated fair value of those of our financial instruments that are not traded in an active market requires the use of both macroeconomic and microeconomic assumptions and/or inputs, which are generally based on current market and economic conditions. Changes in market and/or economic conditions could have a significant adverse effect on the estimated fair value of our financial instruments. Changes to assumptions, including assumed market yields, may significantly impact the estimated fair value of our investments. Our valuations are sensitive to changes in interest rate; see the interest rate sensitivity analysis included in