ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The objective of this section is to provide an overview of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company by focusing on changes in certain key measures from year to year. It should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and other financial data presented elsewhere in this report, particularly the information regarding the Company’s business operations described in Item 1. A detailed discussion comparing 2020 and 2019 results is incorporated herein by reference to Item 7 of the Company’s 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 19, 2021.
Executive Summary
Our Company offers a broad range of business and personal banking services including wealth management services. Lending services include commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, real estate construction and development, residential real estate, specialty, and other loans. A wide variety of deposit products and a complete suite of treasury management and international trade services complement our lending capabilities. Tax-credit brokerage activities consist of the acquisition of Federal and State tax credits and the sale of these tax credits. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by prevailing economic conditions, competition, government policies and other actions of regulatory agencies.
The Company’s financial condition, operating results and liquidity in 2020 and 2021 were impacted by COVID-19 and the monetary and fiscal policy changes enacted to address the pandemic. Starting in 2020, the Federal Reserve reduced interest rates and reserve requirements, while also increasing quantitative easing through purchases of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities. The federal government’s fiscal support of the economy through the Cares Act, the ARA and other acts have been highly expansionary. Low interest rates, supply chain disruptions and monetary and fiscal policies contributed to higher inflation in 2021, leading the Federal Reserve to begin tapering its quantitative easing in November 2021.
The following table summarizes the significant components of the First Choice and Seacoast transactions at the date of acquisition. See “Item 8. Note 2 - Acquisitions” for more information.
1Common stock consideration for First Choice was $342,280, net of $1,370 for shares withheld on the settlement of share-based awards of First Choice employees.
Financial Performance Highlights
Below are highlights of our financial performance for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
1Non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation has been included in this MD&A section under the caption “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
The Company noted the following trends during 2021:
•The Company reported net income of $133.1 million, or $3.86 per diluted share for 2021, compared to $74.4 million, or $2.76 per diluted share for 2020. In addition to organic growth, contributing to the
increase in net income was a full year of Seacoast operations and a partial year of First Choice operations. Net income also benefited from a reduction in the provision for credit losses of $52.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020, which was partially offset by a $17.9 million increase in merger-related expenses. Acquisition related provision for credit losses of $25.4 million and $8.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, were included in the provision for credit losses. This expense, commonly referred to as the “CECL double-count”, is recognized when a loan portfolio is acquired. Excluding the CECL double-count, the provision for credit losses decreased in 2021 primarily due to strong credit quality, the forward-looking CECL methodology and the improved outlook for forecasted economic factors compared to 2020.
•Net interest income for 2021 totaled $360.2 million, an increase of $90.2 million, or 33%, compared to $270.0 million for 2020. PPP interest and fee income totaled $27.3 million and $19.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The First Choice acquisition added $37.9 million and the Company benefited from a full year of Seacoast operations in 2021 compared to a partial year in 2020. Organic growth in the loan portfolio also contributed to the current year increase in net interest income.
•Net interest margin decreased 15 basis points to 3.41% during 2021, compared to 3.56% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in liquidity from deposit growth. Average interest-bearing cash accounts of $1.1 billion had a yield of 0.14% in 2021, compared to $228.8 million at a yield of 0.27% in 2020.
•Noninterest income increased $13.2 million, or 24%, to $67.7 million in 2021 compared to $54.5 million in 2020. This improvement was primarily due to organic growth and the acquisitions of Seacoast and First Choice.
•Noninterest expenses totaled $245.9 million for 2021, an increase of $78.8 million , or 47%, compared to 2020. Seacoast and First Choice increased noninterest expense $51.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020, in addition to a $17.9 million increase in merger-related expenses year-over-year. The Company’s efficiency ratio was 57.5% in 2021, compared to 51.5% for the prior year. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to merger-related expenses. The Company’s core efficiency ratio1 was relatively stable at 51.6% in 2021, compared to 51.0% for the prior year.
•The Company’s effective tax rate was 21.1% in 2021 compared to 19.1% in 2020. The higher rate in 2021 primarily resulted from higher pre-tax income and the Company’s expanded geographic footprint and the related state apportionment.
1Non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation has been included in this MD&A section under the caption “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
2021 Significant Transactions
During 2021, we announced the following significant transactions:
•On July 21, 2021, the Company announced the completion of its acquisition of First Choice, a commercial bank based in Los Angeles, CA, with $2.3 billion in assets. The overall transaction had a value of $346 million.
•Continued supporting customers through PPP, lending an additional $341 million of PPP loans.
•The Company announced the closing of five branch locations in California and St. Louis. A lease and fixed asset impairment charge of $3.8 million was recognized, including $0.4 million reported in merger-related expenses. The Company expects to realize annual cost savings of approximately $2.3 million related to these closures.
•The Company redeemed $50.0 million of 4.75% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes.
•The Company issued and sold 3,000,000 depositary shares, each representing 1/40th interest in a share of 5% noncumulative, perpetual preferred stock totaling $72.0 million, net of issuance costs.
•The Company repurchased 1,299,527 of its common shares at a weighted-average share price of $46.62. At December 31, 2021, there were 700,473 shares remaining to be purchased under the existing share repurchase plan.
•Dividends paid in 2021 of $0.75 per share increased $0.03 per share, or 4%, compared to $0.72 per share in 2020.
2020 Significant Transactions
During 2020, we announced the following significant transactions:
•On November 12, 2020, the Company announced the completion of its acquisition of Seacoast which operated five full-service retail and commercial banking offices in California and Nevada as well as SBA loan production offices and deposit production offices in various states. Aggregate consideration at closing was 5.0 million shares of Company common stock to Seacoast shareholders. The overall transaction had a value of $169 million.
•Assisted new and existing customers with navigating and accessing PPP loans through the approval of approximately 3,900 loans totaling $859 million.
•In May 2020, the Company issued $63.3 million of 5.75% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due in 2030. The notes are callable beginning in 2025 and are included in tier 2 capital.
•The Company repurchased 456,251 of its common shares at a weighted-average share price of $33.64.
•Dividends paid in 2020 of $0.72 per share increased $0.10 per share, or 16%, compared to $0.62 per share in 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Average Balance Sheet
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, certain information related to our average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as, the corresponding interest rates earned and paid, all on a tax equivalent basis. Average balances are presented on a daily average basis.
1Average balances include non-accrual loans. Interest income includes net loan fees of $28.4 million, $18.4 million, and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. Loan fees in 2021 and 2020 included PPP fees of $21.7 million and $13.8 million, respectively.
2Non-taxable income is presented on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a 25.2% tax rate in 2021 and a 24.7% tax rate in each of 2020 and 2019. The tax-equivalent adjustments were $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Rate/Volume
The following table sets forth, on a tax-equivalent basis for the periods indicated, a summary of the changes in interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in yield/rates and volume.
Net interest income (on a tax equivalent basis) was $365.3 million for 2021, compared to $273.2 million for 2020, an increase of $92.2 million, or 34%. Total interest income increased $80.4 million and total interest expense decreased $11.7 million. The increase in net interest income in 2021 was primarily due to higher loan volumes, which benefited from the Seacoast and First Choice acquisitions, PPP loans, and a decline in the interest rate on interest-bearing liabilities.
Loans issued through the PPP bear interest at 1% and have either a two or five year maturity. As a PPP lender, the Company also receives fees for the issuance of PPP loans that vary based on the size of the loan. Interest income and loan fees included in net interest income from the PPP program totaled $27.3 million and $19.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021, the Company received $14.6 million in PPP loan fees for loans originated in the year. These fees are recognized over the life of the loan, or when the loan is repaid or forgiven. At December 31, 2021, the Company has $272.0 million in PPP loans and $4.2 million in deferred fees, compared to $698.6 million in loans and $11.3 million in fees at the end of 2020.
The tax-equivalent net interest margin was 3.41% for 2021, compared to 3.56% for 2020. The primary driver of the decline in net interest margin from 2020 to 2021 was an increase in liquidity from deposit growth. Average interest-bearing cash balances grew to $1.1 billion, an increase of $856.1 million from 2020. In addition, 2021 was impacted by a full year of low interest rates following the Federal Reserve’s reduction of interest rates in 2020. The federal funds target rate declined 150 basis points in 2020 and one-month LIBOR declined over 160 basis points. The
decline in short-term rates reduced the yield on the Company’s variable-rate loan portfolio, as well as the yield earned on new loan production. As of December 31, 2021, variable-rate loans comprised approximately 63% of total loans. In response to the decline in interest rates, the Company proactively reduced the cost of certain managed money market and interest-bearing accounts, while also reducing certificates of deposit balances and wholesale borrowings.
Average interest-earning assets increased $3.0 billion, or 40%, to $10.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due to growth in average earning assets due to the inclusion of a full year of Seacoast operations, a partial year of First Choice operations and the previously mentioned increase in liquidity from deposit generation. Average securities represented 15% of earnings assets in 2021 and 18% in 2020. The acquisitions of Seacoast and First Choice did not include any significant investment security balances. The Company has taken a measured approach to investing excess liquidity into the investment portfolio, increasing the average balance from $1.4 billion in 2020 to $1.6 billion in 2021. Average interest-earning deposits increased from 3% to 10% of earning assets, primarily due to higher liquidity from deposit growth. Volume growth of the balance sheet drove an increase in interest income on earning assets of $93.8 million. Interest income on interest-earnings assets decreased $13.3 million primarily due the decline in interest rates in 2021 compared to 2020.
Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $1.1 billion, or 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase resulted from $1.2 billion of growth in interest-bearing deposits. While average interest-bearing liabilities increased, interest expense declined $11.7 million due to a 26 basis point decline in the cost of deposits, primarily due to the run-off of higher yielding certificates of deposit. The Company issued $63.3 million of subordinated debentures in May 2020 with an interest rate of 5.75% that was included for a full year in 2021. Partially offsetting this additional expense was the redemption of the $50.0 million subordinated debentures at 4.75% in the fourth quarter 2021. The total cost of interest-bearing liabilities declined 28 basis points, from 0.64% in 2021 to 0.36% in 2021. The shift in the mix of interest-bearing liabilities from certificates of deposit and wholesale borrowings to interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposits reduced interest expense in 2021 by $0.4 million. Interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities decreased $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to lower rates.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents a comparative summary of the major components of noninterest income for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2021:
Noninterest income increased $13.2 million, or 24%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This improvement was primarily due to a $5.4 million increase from Seacoast and First Choice, a $3.6 million increase in other income, primarily private equity and community development investments, a $2.4 million increase in card services income, and a $1.4 million increase in tax credit activity.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents a comparative summary of the components of noninterest expense:
Noninterest expense increased $78.8 million, or 47%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The acquisitions of Seacoast and First Choice added $57.2 million of operating expenses in 2021, compared to $6.0 million from Seacoast in 2020. Excluding First Choice and Seacoast, employee compensation and benefits increased $7.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020, or 8%. The primary components of the increase in compensation and benefits were $2.7 million in salaries from merit increases and net new positions, $1.3 million in employee benefits, and $1.2 million in equity-based compensation.
The Company announced in the third quarter of 2021 the closure of two branch locations in St. Louis and recognized a lease and fixed asset impairment charge of $3.4 million. The branch closures became effective in January 2022. Merger related expenses of $22.1 million on the First Choice and Seacoast acquisitions, including the cost of closing three California locations, were $17.9 million higher than the $4.2 million recorded in 2020 on the Seacoast acquisition. The Company expects to realize annual cost savings of approximately $2.3 million related to these closures.
The Company did not earn a full year of operating income, or incur a full year of expense, from First Choice in 2021, but will do so in 2022. The Company does not expect to incur any additional merger expenses on First Choice or Seacoast.
The Company expects to continue to invest in its associates and other infrastructure that supports growth. In addition, low unemployment, inflationary pressures and a shift in employee work arrangements to a virtual/hybrid model are expected to impact future operating expenses.
Income Taxes
The Company’s blended federal and state tax rate is approximately 25.2% at the end of 2021, compared to 24.9% at the end of 2020. Permanent differences between pre-tax income and taxable income along with tax planning initiatives reduced the effective income tax rate in 2021 to 21.1% compared to 19.1% in 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2021 was primarily due to higher pretax income in 2021 and an increase in state taxable income due to the Company’s expanded geographic footprint. Additionally, in 2020, the Company was able to carryback a net operating loss to a prior period with a higher tax rate, reducing the effective tax for that year.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Summary Balance Sheet
Assets
Loans by Type
The Company has a diversified loan portfolio, with no particular concentration of credit in any one economic sector; however, a substantial portion of the portfolio, including the C&I category, is secured by real estate. The ability of the Company’s borrowers to honor their contractual obligations is partially dependent upon the local economy and its effect on the real estate market.
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio by type of loans:
C&I loans are made based on the borrower’s ability to generate cash flows for repayment from income sources, general credit strength, experience, and character, even though such loans may also be secured by real estate or other assets. The credit risk related to commercial loans is largely influenced by general economic conditions and the resulting impact on a borrower’s operations. PPP loans of $272.0 million and $698.6 million were included in C&I loans in the tables above at the end of 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company continues to focus on originating high-quality C&I relationships as they typically have variable interest rates and allow for cross selling opportunities involving other banking products. C&I loan growth also
supports our efforts to maintain the Company’s asset-sensitive interest rate risk position. Additionally, our specialized products, especially sponsor finance, life insurance premium financing, and tax credit financing/lending, consist of primarily C&I loans, and have contributed significantly to the Company’s C&I loan growth. These loans are sourced through relationships developed with wealth and estate planning firms and private equity funds and are not bound geographically by our markets. As a result, these specialized loan products offer opportunities to expand and diversify our overall geographic concentration by entering into new markets.
Real estate loans place an emphasis on the estimated cash flows from the operation of the property and/or the underlying collateral value.
•Our commercial real estate loans, including investor-owned and owner-occupied categories, primarily represent multifamily and other commercial property loans on which the primary source of repayment is income from the property. These loans are principally underwritten based on the cash flow coverage of the property, the Company’s loan to value guidelines, and generally require either the limited or full guaranty of principal sponsors of the credit. Commercial real estate loans also represent owner-occupied C&I loans for which the primary source of repayment is dependent on sources other than the underlying collateral.
•Construction and land development loans relating primarily to residential and commercial properties, represent financing secured by real estate under development for eventual sale or undeveloped ground. At December 31, 2021, $289.8 million of these loans include the use of interest reserves and follow standard underwriting guidelines. Construction projects are monitored by the loan officer and a centralized independent loan disbursement function is employed.
•Residential real estate loans include residential mortgages, which are loans that, due to size or other attributes, do not qualify for conventional home mortgages available-for-sale in the secondary market, second mortgages and home equity lines. Residential mortgage loans are usually limited to a maximum of 80% of collateral value at origination.
Other loans represent loans to individuals, loans to state and political subdivisions, loans to nondepository financial institutions, and loans to purchase or are fully secured by investment securities. Credit risk is managed by thoroughly reviewing the creditworthiness of the borrowers prior to origination and thereafter.
The following table presents a breakdown of loans by NAICS code at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following table presents a breakdown of commercial & industrial loans by size at December 31, 2021.
The following table presents a breakdown of commercial real estate loans by size at December 31, 2021.
The following table presents a breakdown of construction loans by size at December 31, 2021.
The following table presents a breakdown of residential loans by size at December 31, 2021.
The following table presents a breakdown of other loans by size at December 31, 2021.
The following table presents a breakdown of total loans by geographic region at December 31, 2021:
The following table illustrates selected specialty lending detail, at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The sponsor finance portfolio is primarily comprised of loans in the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors. It includes mid-market company mergers and acquisitions, targeted private equity firms, principally SBICs, and senior debt financing to portfolio companies.
The life insurance premium financing category specializes in financing whole life insurance premiums utilized in high net worth estate planning, through relationships with boutique estate planners throughout the United States.
The tax credit portfolio includes tax credit-related lending on affordable housing projects funded through the use of
federal and state low income housing tax credits. In addition, we provide leveraged and other loans on projects funded through the CDFI New Markets Tax Credit Program. This portfolio also includes tax credit brokerage through 10-year streams of Missouri state tax credits from affordable housing development funds. The tax credits are sold to clients and other individuals for tax planning purposes.
SBA 7(a) loans are primarily owner-occupied, commercial real estate loans secured by a 1st lien. These loans predominantly have a 75% portion guaranteed by the SBA.
SBA PPP loans originated in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and are guaranteed by the SBA. The loans may be forgivable by the SBA if certain requirements are met.
Significant loan concentrations are considered to exist for a financial institution when there are amounts loaned to numerous borrowers engaged in similar activities that would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. At December 31, 2021, no significant concentrations exceeding 10% of total loans existed in the Company’s loan portfolio, except as described above.
The following table presents the maturity distribution of loans at December 31, 2021 categorized by fixed or variable interest rates, net of unearned loan fees:
(1) Includes loans with no stated maturity and overdraft lines of credit.
The majority of variable loans are based on the prime rate or LIBOR. At December 31, 2021, $3.2 billion or 57% of variable rate loans were subject to an interest rate floor. Most loan originations have one-to three-year maturities. Management monitors this mix as part of its interest rate risk management. See “Interest Rate Risk” of this MD&A section.
Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses
The adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020 increased the ACL on loans by $28.4 million, or 65%, and the allowance for unfunded commitments by $2.4 million as compared to 2019. These increases were offset in retained earnings and did not impact the consolidated statement of operations.
The provision for credit losses, which includes a provision for losses on unfunded commitments, is a charge to earnings to maintain the ACL at a level consistent with management’s assessment of expected losses in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The Company also records reversals of interest on nonaccrual loans and interest recoveries directly through the provision of credit losses. CECL requires economic forecasts to be factored into determining estimated losses. As a result, CECL will typically require a higher level of provision at the start of an economic downturn. The decrease in the provision for credit losses in 2021 was primarily due to a change in economic forecasts, which has significantly improved since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. Two of the primary economic loss drivers used in estimating the ACL include the percentage change in GDP and unemployment. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s forecast of the percentage change in GDP included a range of (2.2)% to 6.7% and the percentage change in unemployment included a range of 3.0% to 8.7%. At the beginning of the pandemic at March 2020, the forecast of the percentage change in GDP included a range of (9.6)% to 2.1% and the percentage change in unemployment included a range of 6.0% to 13.0%. The Company utilizes a one-year reasonable and supportable forecast and a one-year reversion period.
In the acquisition of First Choice, we recognized an allowance of $7.6 million on PCD loans and an allowance of $23.9 million on non-PCD loans. Similarly, in the acquisition of Seacoast we recognized an allowance of $3.5 million on PCD loans and $8.6 million on non-PCD loans. Pursuant to the CECL accounting methodology, the allowance on PCD loans is recorded as part of the acquired loan portfolio. The allowance on non-PCD loans is established through a charge to the provision for credit losses in the post-combination financial statements.
To the extent the Company does not recognize charge-offs and economic forecasts improve in future periods, the Company could recognize a reversal of provision for credit losses. Conversely, if economic conditions and the Company’s forecast worsens, the Company could recognize elevated levels of provision for credit losses. The provision is also reflective of charge-offs in the period.
The following table presents the components of the provision for credit losses for the periods indicated:
1 2021 includes $1.5 million as part of the First Choice acquired commitments.
The following table is a summary of the allocation of the allowance for credit losses for the periods indicated:
The allowance for credit losses was 1.61% of total loans at December 31, 2021, compared to 1.89%, and 0.81%, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decline in the allowance to total loans ratio in 2021 was primarily due to the comparatively lower ACL on the First Choice loan portfolio, net loan charge-offs of $11.6 million, improved credit metrics, and continued improvement in economic forecasts. The increase in the ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to the adoption of CECL and higher provision expense due to the pandemic, partially offset by the acquisition of Seacoast and PPP loans which included $1.3 billion in government-guaranteed loans with no allowance.
The following table is a summary of net charge-offs (recoveries) to average loans for the periods indicated:
(1) Excludes loans held for sale.
See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” of this MD&A section for more information on the allowance for credit losses methodology.
Nonperforming loans and assets
See “Item 8. Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for more information on impaired loans and other real estate.
The following table presents the categories of nonperforming assets, excluding government guaranteed portions:
Nonperforming loans based on loan type were as follows:
The following table summarizes the changes in nonperforming loans:
Nonperforming loans at December 31, 2021 decreased $10.5 million, or 27%, when compared to December 31, 2020. The decrease in nonperforming loans during 2021 was primarily from principal payments of $36.6 million and charge-offs of $17.2 million.
The Company implemented several loan programs to assist its customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including providing short-term payment deferrals, primarily for 90 days or less. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of these loans have returned to a paying status.
Other real estate
Other real estate at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $3.5 million and $5.3 million, respectively.
The following table summarizes the changes in other real estate:
Writedowns in fair value were recorded in loan, legal, and other real estate expense.
Investments
At December 31, 2021, our portfolio of investment securities was $1.8 billion, or 13%, of total assets, compared to $1.4 million, or 14%, of total assets as of December 31, 2020. The portfolio is comprised of both available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities.
The table below sets forth the carrying value of investment securities held by the Company:
The allowance for credit losses on held-to-maturity debt securities was $0.6 million and $0.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company had no debt securities classified as trading at December 31, 2021, or 2020.
The following table summarizes expected maturity and tax-equivalent yield information on the investment portfolio at December 31, 2021:
Yields on tax-exempt securities are computed on a taxable equivalent basis using a tax rate of 25.2%. Expected maturities will differ from contractual maturities, as borrowers may have the right to call or repay obligations with or without prepayment penalties.
Other investments primarily consist of the FHLB capital stock, common stock investments related to our trust preferred securities, community development funds, and other investments in private equity funds, primarily SBICs.
The following table summarizes expected maturity and tax-equivalent yield information on other investments at December 31, 2021:
Deposits
The following table shows the breakdown of the Company’s deposits by type:
The following table shows the average balance and average rate of the Company’s deposits by type:
Average total deposits were $9.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.0 billion, or 45%, from December 31, 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to the First Choice and Seacoast acquisitions and the high level of liquidity in the economy. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to the Seacoast acquisition and PPP loan fundings.
The following table sets forth the maturities of estimated uninsured certificates of deposit as of December 31, 2021:
As of December 31, 2021, estimated uninsured deposits totaled $5.9 billion, including $93.7 million of certificates of deposit. At December 31, 2020, estimated uninsured deposits totaled $3.3 billion.
Shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity totaled $1.5 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $450.1 million, or 42%, from December 31, 2020.
Significant activity during the year ended December 31, 2021 included the following:
•increase from the issuance of approximately 7.8 million shares of common stock for the First Choice acquisition reflecting $342.3 million of consideration;
•increase from net income of $133.1 million;
•increase from issuance of preferred stock of $72.0 million, net;
•decrease from share repurchases of $60.6 million, pursuant to the Company’s publicly-announced stock repurchase program;
•decrease from dividends paid on common stock of $26.2 million; and
•net decrease in fair value of available-for-sale securities and cash flow hedges of $18.3 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The objective of liquidity management is to ensure we have the ability to generate sufficient cash or cash equivalents in a timely and cost-effective manner to meet our commitments as they become due. Typical demands on liquidity are changes in deposit levels, maturing time deposits which are not renewed, and fundings under credit commitments to customers. Funds are available from a number of sources, such as the core deposit base and loan and security repayments and maturities.
Additionally, liquidity is provided from lines of credit with the FHLB, the Federal Reserve, and correspondent banks; the ability to acquire large and brokered deposits; sales of the securities portfolio; and the ability to sell loan participations to other banks. These alternatives are an important part of our liquidity plan and provide flexibility and efficient execution of the asset-liability management strategy.
The Company’s Asset-Liability Management Committee oversees our liquidity position, the parameters of which are approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors. Our liquidity position is monitored daily. Our liquidity management framework includes measurement of several key elements, such as a loan to deposit ratio, a liquidity ratio, and a dependency ratio. The Company’s liquidity framework also incorporates contingency planning to assess the nature and volatility of funding sources and to determine alternatives to these sources. While core deposits and loan and investment repayments are principal sources of liquidity, funding diversification is another key element of liquidity management and is achieved by strategically varying depositor types, terms, funding markets, and instruments.
Liquidity from assets is available primarily from cash balances and the investment portfolio. Cash and interest-bearing deposits with other banks totaled $2.0 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $537.7 million at December 31, 2020. The low interest rate environment, coupled with an uncertain outlook and government stimulus, such as the PPP, has increased liquidity within the banking industry, including the Company. Investment securities are another important tool to the Company’s liquidity objectives. Securities totaled $1.8 billion at December 31, 2021, and included $753 million pledged as collateral for deposits of public institutions, treasury, loan notes, and other requirements. The remaining $1.0 billion could be pledged or sold to enhance liquidity, if necessary.
Liability liquidity funding sources are available to increase financial flexibility. In addition to amounts borrowed at December 31, 2021, the Company could borrow an additional $709 million from the FHLB of Des Moines under blanket loan pledges and has additional real estate loans of approximately $970.0 million that could be pledged. The Company also has $1.1 billion available from the Federal Reserve Bank under a pledged loan agreement. The Company also has unsecured federal funds lines with six correspondent banks totaling $90 million.
In the normal course of business, the Company enters into certain forms of off-balance sheet transactions, including unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit. These transactions are managed through the Company’s various risk management processes. Management considers both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet transactions in its evaluation of the Company’s liquidity. The Company has $2.6 billion in unused commitments as of December 31, 2021. While this commitment level would exhaust the majority the Company’s current liquidity resources, the nature of these commitments is such that the likelihood of funding them in the aggregate at any one time is low.
At the holding company level, our primary funding sources are dividends and payments from the Bank and proceeds from the issuance of equity (i.e. stock option exercises, stock offerings) and debt instruments. The main use of this liquidity is to provide the funds necessary to pay dividends to shareholders, service debt, invest in subsidiaries as necessary, and satisfy other operating requirements. In 2021, the holding company maintained a revolving line of credit for an aggregate amount up to $25 million, all of which was available at December 31, 2021. The line of credit has a one-year term that was renewed in February 2022. The proceeds can be used for general corporate purposes.
The Company has an effective automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 allowing for the issuance of various forms of equity and debt securities. The Company’s ability to offer securities pursuant to the registration statement depends on market conditions and the Company’s continuing eligibility to use the Form S-3 under rules of the SEC.
Strong capital ratios, credit quality and core earnings are essential to retaining cost-effective access to the wholesale funding markets. Deterioration in any of these factors could have a negative impact on the Company’s ability to access these funding sources and, as a result, these factors are monitored on an ongoing basis as part of the liquidity management process. The Bank is subject to regulations and, among other things, may be limited in its ability to pay dividends or transfer funds to the parent company. Accordingly, consolidated cash flows as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows may not represent cash immediately available for the payment of cash dividends to the Company’s shareholders or for other cash needs.
Through the normal course of operations, the Company has entered into certain contractual obligations and other commitments. Such obligations relate to funding of operations through deposits or debt issuances, as well as leases for premises and equipment. As a financial services provider, the Company routinely enters into commitments to extend credit. While contractual obligations represent future cash requirements of the Company, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans made by the Company. The Company also enters into derivative contracts under which the Company either receives cash from or pays cash to counterparties depending on changes in interest rates. Derivative contracts are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet with the fair value representing the net present value of expected future cash receipts or payments based on market interest rates as of the balance sheet date. The fair value of these contracts changes daily as market interest rates change. For additional information on the Company’s contractual obligations and commitments see the following footnotes in Item 8: “Note 6 - Leases,” “Note 7 - Derivative Financial Instruments,” “Note 11 - Subordinated Debentures,” “Note 12 - Federal Home Loan Bank Advances,” “Note 13 - Other Borrowings,” and “Note 18 - Commitments.”
Capital Resources
The Company and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the state and federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the financial statements and results of operations of the Company. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and its bank affiliate must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The banking affiliate’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Company and the Bank to maintain minimum amounts and ratios (set forth in the following table) of total and tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, and of tier 1 capital to average assets. To be categorized as “well-capitalized”, banks must maintain minimum total risk-based (10%), tier 1 risk-based (8%), common equity tier 1 risk-based (6.5%), and tier 1 leverage ratios (5%). As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company and the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject.
The Bank met the definition of “well-capitalized” at each of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Refer to “Item 8. Note 15 - Regulatory Capital” for a summary of our risk-based capital and leverage ratios.
The following table summarizes the Company’s capital ratios:
The Company believes the tangible common equity and regulatory capital ratios are important measures of capital strength even though they are considered to be non-GAAP measures. The tables included in this MD&A section under the caption “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” reconcile these ratios to U.S. GAAP.
Risk Management
Market risk arises from exposure to changes in interest rates and other relevant market rate or price risk. The Company faces market risk in the form of interest rate risk through transactions other than trading activities. Market risk from these activities, in the form of interest rate risk, is measured and managed through a number of methods. The Company uses financial modeling techniques to measure interest rate risk. These techniques measure the sensitivity of future earnings due to changing interest rate environments. Guidelines established by the Bank’s Asset/Liability Management Committee and approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors are used to monitor exposure of earnings at risk. General interest rate movements are used to develop sensitivity as management believes it has no primary exposure to a specific point on the yield curve. These limits are based on the Company’s exposure to immediate and sustained parallel rate movements, either upward or downward. The Company does not have any direct market risk from commodity exposures.
Interest Rate Risk
Our interest rate risk management practices are aimed at optimizing net interest income, while guarding against deterioration that could be caused by certain interest rate scenarios. Interest rate sensitivity varies with different types of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. We attempt to maintain interest-earning assets, comprised primarily of both loans and investments, and interest-bearing liabilities, comprised primarily of deposits, maturing or repricing in similar time horizons in order to manage any impact from market interest rate changes according to our risk tolerance. The Company uses an earnings simulation model to measure earnings sensitivity to changing rates.
The Company determines the sensitivity of its short-term future earnings to a hypothetical plus or minus 100 to 300 basis point parallel rate shock through the use of simulation modeling. The simulation of earnings includes the modeling of the balance sheet as an ongoing entity. Future business assumptions involving administered rate products, prepayments for future rate-sensitive balances, and the reinvestment of maturing assets and liabilities are included. These items are then modeled to project net interest income based on a hypothetical change in interest rates. The resulting net interest income for the next 12-month period is compared to the net interest income amount calculated using flat rates. This difference represents the Company’s earnings sensitivity to a positive or negative parallel rate shock.
The following table summarizes the projected impact of interest rate shocks on net interest income at December 31, 2021:
In addition to the rate shocks shown in the table above, the Company models net interest income under various dynamic interest rate scenarios. In general, changes in interest rates are positively correlated with changes in net interest income.
The Company occasionally uses interest rate derivative instruments as an asset/liability management tool to hedge mismatches in interest rate exposure indicated by the net interest income simulation described above. They are used to modify the Company’s exposures to interest rate fluctuations and provide more stable spreads between loan yields and the rate on their funding sources. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $62.0 million in derivative contracts used to manage interest rate risk. Derivative financial instruments are also discussed in “Item 8. Note 7 - Derivative Financial Instruments.”
The FCA has announced that the most common USD LIBOR settings (overnight, 1-month. 3-month, 6-month and 12-month) will cease publication after June 30, 2023. LIBOR is the most liquid and common interest rate index in the world and is commonly referenced in financial instruments. The Federal Reserve’s Alternative Reference Rates Committee has proposed that SOFR replace LIBOR. The Company expects to select a replacement index and provide customer notification in early 2023, prior to the cessation of the USD LIBOR settings. While a replacement index has not yet been selected, the Company ceased using LIBOR and ICE swap rates in new contracts and began issuing SOFR based loans in December 2021.
We have exposure to LIBOR in various financial contracts. Instruments that may be impacted include loans, securities, debt instruments and derivatives, among other financial contracts indexed to LIBOR and that mature after December 31, 2021. We also have loans that are indirectly linked to LIBOR through reference to the ICE swap rate. We have an internal working group composed of members from legal, credit, finance, operations, risk and audit to monitor developments, develop policies and procedures, assess the impact to the Company, consider relevant options and to determine an appropriate replacement index for affected contracts that expire after the expected discontinuation of LIBOR on June 30, 2023. We are actively working to amend and address impacted contracts to allow for a replacement index. However, amending certain contracts indexed to LIBOR may require consent from the counterparties which could be difficult and costly to obtain in certain circumstances. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s financial contracts indexed to LIBOR included $2.8 billion in loans (including $618.4 million indirectly linked to LIBOR through reference to an ICE swap rate), $125.3 million in borrowings, and $889.0 million (notional) in derivatives.
In addition, LIBOR is used in the Company’s analysis of the fair value of tax credits and may be referenced in other financial contracts not included in the discussion above.
The Company had $5.7 billion in variable rate loans as of December 31, 2021. Of these loans, $3.2 billion have an interest rate floor and 95% of those loans were at the floor. $2.8 billion in variable rate loans are indexed to LIBOR, $2.4 billion are indexed to the prime rate, and $382.8 million are indexed to other rates.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The following accounting policies are considered most critical to the understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. These critical accounting policies require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. Because these estimates and judgments are based on current circumstances, they may change over time or prove to be inaccurate based on actual experience. In the event that different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending upon the severity of such changes, the possibility of a materially different financial condition and/or results of operations could reasonably be expected. The impact and any associated risks related to our critical accounting policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see “Item 8. Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
The Company has prepared all of the consolidated financial information in this report in accordance with GAAP. The Company makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates and assumptions are based on management’s best estimates and judgment. Management evaluates its estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using loss experience and other factors, including the current economic environment, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. We adjust such estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in estimates resulting from continuing changes in the economic environment will be reflected in the financial statements in future periods. There can be no assurances that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standard Update 2016-13 “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” This standard, referred to as CECL, requires an estimate of lifetime expected credit losses on certain financial assets measured at amortized cost.
The Company maintains separate allowances for funded loans, unfunded loans, and held-to-maturity securities, collectively the ACL. The ACL is a valuation account to adjust the cost basis to the amount expected to be collected, based on management’s estimate of experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. For purposes of determining the allowance for funded and unfunded loans, the portfolios are segregated into pools that share similar risk characteristics that are then further segregated by credit grades. Loans that do not share similar risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis and are not included in the collective evaluation. The Company estimates the amount of the allowance based on loan loss experience, adjusted for current and forecasted economic conditions, including unemployment, changes in GDP, and commercial and residential real estate prices. The Company’s forecast of economic conditions uses internal and external information and considers a weighted average of a baseline, upside, and downside scenarios. Because economic conditions can change and are difficult to predict, the anticipated amount of estimated loan defaults and losses, and therefore the adequacy of the allowance, could change significantly and have a direct impact on the Company’s credit costs. The Company’s allowance for credit losses on loans was $145.0 million at December 31, 2021 based on the weighting of the different economic scenarios. As a hypothetical example, if the Company had only used the upside scenario, the allowance would have decreased $20.5 million. Conversely, the allowance would have increased $43.9 million using only the downside scenario.
Acquisitions
Acquisitions and Business Combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. The assets and liabilities of the acquired entities have been recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets.
The purchase price allocation process requires an estimation of the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. When a business combination agreement provides for an adjustment to the cost of the combination contingent on future events, the Company includes an estimate of the acquisition-date fair value as part of the cost of the combination. To determine the fair values, the Company relies on third party valuations, such as appraisals, or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques. The results of operations of the acquired business are included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements from the respective date of acquisition. Merger-related costs are costs the Company incurs to effect a business combination. Merger-related expenses include costs directly related to merger or acquisition activity and include legal and professional fees, system consolidation and conversion costs, and compensation costs such as severance and retention incentives for employees impacted by acquisition activity. The Company accounts for merger-related costs as expenses in the periods in which the costs are incurred and the services are received.
Income Taxes
Management uses certain assumptions and estimates in determining income taxes payable or refundable for the current year, deferred income tax assets and liabilities and income tax expense. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. If current available information raises doubt as to the realization of the deferred tax assets, a valuation allowance may be established. We consider the determination of this valuation allowance to be a critical accounting policy because of the need to exercise significant judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets, including projections of future taxable income. These judgments and estimates are reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets may be required in the future if the amounts of taxes recoverable through loss carry backs decline, if we project lower levels of future taxable income, or we project lower levels of tax planning strategies. Such valuation allowance would be established through a charge to income tax expense that would adversely affect our operating results.
Effects of New Accounting Pronouncements
See “Item 8. Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” for information on recent accounting pronouncements and their impact, if any, on our consolidated financial statements.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company’s accounting and reporting policies conform to U.S. GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, the Company provides other financial measures, such as core efficiency ratio, tangible common equity ratio, return on average tangible common equity, and tangible book value per common share, in this report that are considered “non-GAAP financial measures.” Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position, or cash flows that exclude (or include) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
The Company considers its core efficiency ratio, tangible common equity ratio, return on average tangible common equity, and tangible book value per common share, collectively “core performance measures” presented in this report, as relevant measures of financial performance, even though they are non-GAAP measures, as they provide supplemental information by which to evaluate the impact of certain non-comparable items, and the Company’s operating performance on an ongoing basis. Core performance measures exclude certain other income and expense items such as merger-related expenses, facilities charges, and the gain or loss on sale of investment securities, which
the Company believes to be not indicative of or useful to measure the Company’s operating performance on an ongoing basis. The attached tables contain a reconciliation of these core performance measures to the GAAP measures. The Company believes that the tangible common equity ratio provides useful information to investors about the Company’s capital strength even though it is considered to be a non-GAAP financial measure and is not part of the regulatory capital requirements to which the Company is subject.
The Company believes these non-GAAP measures and ratios, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP measures and ratios, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding the Company’s performance and capital strength. The Company’s management uses, and believes investors benefit from referring to, these non-GAAP measures and ratios in assessing the Company’s operating results and related trends and when forecasting future periods. However, these non-GAAP measures and ratios should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or preferable to, ratios prepared in accordance with GAAP. The Company has provided a reconciliation of, where applicable, the most comparable GAAP financial measures and ratios to the non-GAAP financial measures and ratios, or a reconciliation of the non-GAAP calculation of the financial measure for the periods indicated.
Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Core Efficiency Ratio
Tangible Common Equity and Tangible Common Equity Ratio
Return on Average Tangible Common Equity
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share