Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon our current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on pioneering the development of a new class of oncology drugs we refer to as STRIs. Translation is the process in cells whereby the synthesis of proteins is directed by information contained in genetic sequences. We utilized our proprietary selective translation regulation technology platform to internally discover a portfolio of small molecule STRI product candidates. Our product candidates target the eIF4F complex and its activating kinase, mitogen-activated protein interacting kinase (“MNK”). The eIF4F complex is a central node where two of the most frequently mutated signaling pathways in cancer, the PI3K-AKT and RAS-MEK pathways, converge to activate the translation of select mRNA into proteins that are frequent culprits in key disease-driving processes. Inhibition of any one of these targets simultaneously downregulates multiple disease-driving proteins before they are synthesized. Each of our product candidates is designed to act on a single protein that drives the expression of multiple functionally related proteins, including oncoproteins, immunosuppressive proteins in T cells and proteins known to drive drug resistance that together control tumor growth, survival and immune evasion.
On August 25, 2021, LWAC completed the acquisition of Old eFFECTOR, a private company, pursuant to the Merger Agreement dated May 26, 2021. Our principle operations commenced in 2012 upon incorporation of Old eFFECTOR in the state of Delaware.
Our lead product candidate, tomivosertib, is an oral small-molecule inhibitor of MNK that we are developing in combination with inhibitors of anti-PD-(L)1 therapy, for the treatment of patients with solid tumors. In June 2021, we initiated dosing in KICKSTART, our randomized Phase 2b clinical trial evaluating tomivosertib in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (“NSCLC”). We recently updated our trial design to focus on the largest segment of that market, patients who are undergoing their initial, or frontline, course of treatment. The revised trial includes the following two cohorts: (1) “PD-L1 ≥50% cohort”, for patients with PD-(L)1 expression ≥50% who will receive tomivosertib or placebo in combination with pembrolizumab as their initial therapy; and (2) a new “PD-L1 ≥1% cohort” for patients with PD-(L)1 expression ≥1% who will receive tomivosertib or placebo in combination with pembrolizumab as maintenance therapy immediately after completing the platinum-based chemotherapy doublet phase of their frontline treatment without disease progression. We anticipate reporting topline data from both cohorts in the first half of 2023. Our second product candidate, zotatifin, is an inhibitor of eIF4A, a component of the eIF4F complex, and is currently being evaluated in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in patients with certain solid tumors. We have completed the Phase 1 portion of this trial and are currently enrolling patients in multiple Phase 2a open-label expansion cohorts in biomarker-selected patients with tumors driven by multiple proteins shown in our preclinical studies to be downregulated by zotatifin. We are also conducting a Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating zotatifin as an antiviral agent against SARS-CoV-2. We have entered into a global research collaboration and license agreement with Pfizer for our earliest stage program, inhibitors of eIF4E, and Pfizer is currently conducting IND-enabling studies for this program.
Since our inception in 2012 we have devoted substantially all of our resources to raising capital, identifying potential product candidates, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, establishing arrangements with third parties for the manufacture of our product candidates and related raw materials, and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. As of December 31, 2021, we have raised a total of $295.4 million to fund our operations, comprised of aggregate gross proceeds of $150.0 million from the sale and issuance of convertible preferred stock, gross proceeds of $67.0 million from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Business Combination in August 2021, $42.0 million in collaboration revenue under our research collaboration and license agreement with Pfizer ("Pfizer Agreement"), $35.0 million from loans under
credit facilities, and $1.4 million in grant revenue under the a Research Subaward Agreement with The Regents of the University of California, on behalf of its San Francisco campus ("UCSF"). Other than with respect to the net income generated as a result of revenue under the Pfizer Agreement generated in 2020 and the net income generated in 2021 as a result of the change in valuation of the earn-out liability in 2021, we have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. In April 2021, we entered into the Research Subaward Agreement with UCSF, whereby up to $5.0 million in costs are reimbursable for clinical and manufacturing activities performed to determine the effectiveness of zotatifin in the treatment of COVID-19. Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $15.8 million and our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $120.9 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with the research and development of our product candidates and development programs, and general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and losses for at least the next several years. We anticipate our expenses will increase substantially as we continue our development of, seek regulatory approval for and potentially commercialize any approved product candidates, hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property and incur additional costs associated with being a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and preclinical studies and our expenditures on other research and development activities. As of December 31, 2021, we had $49.7 million in cash and cash equivalents. To fund further operations, we will need to raise additional capital. The net proceeds from the Business Combination will not be sufficient for us to complete the clinical development of any of our product candidates or, if applicable, to prepare for commercializing any product candidate which may receive approval from the FDA or comparable foreign regulatory authority. Accordingly, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, or other capital sources, including potential additional collaborations, licenses, and other similar arrangements. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our research and development programs or other operations, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
The COVID-19 worldwide pandemic continues to evolve, and we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation. To date, we have not experienced material disruptions in our business operations. However, while it is not possible at this time to estimate the impact that COVID-19 could have on our business in the future, particularly as we advance our product candidates through clinical development, the continued spread of COVID-19 and the measures taken by governmental authorities, and any future epidemic disease outbreaks, could: disrupt the supply chain and the manufacture or shipment of drug substances and finished drug products for our product candidates for use in our clinical trials and preclinical studies; delay, limit or prevent our employees and CROs from continuing research and development activities; impede our clinical trial initiation and recruitment and the ability of patients to continue in clinical trials, including the risk that participants enrolled in our clinical trials will contract COVID-19 or other epidemic disease while the clinical trial is ongoing, which could impact the results of the clinical trial, including by increasing the number of observed adverse events; impede testing, monitoring, data collection and analysis and other related activities; any of which could delay our clinical trials and preclinical studies and increase our development costs, and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Business Combination Transaction
On August 25, 2021, we completed the Business Combination pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger dated May 26, 2021, among LWAC, LWAC Merger Sub Inc., and Old eFFECTOR. Upon closing of the Business Combination, the combined company was renamed eFFECTOR Therapeutics, Inc.
Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, our shareholders exchanged their interests in LWAC and Old eFFECTOR for shares of common stock of eFFECTOR. In addition, awards under the our existing equity incentive plans, including the eFFECTOR Therapeutics, Inc. 2013 Equity Incentive Plan (the "2013 Plan"), continue in full force and effect on the same terms and conditions as were previously applicable to such awards, subject to adjustments to the exercise price and number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise based on the final exchange ratio calculated in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
Gross proceeds from this transaction totaled approximately $67.0 million, which included funds held in LWAC’s trust and operating accounts and the completion of a concurrent PIPE Financing in which certain investors agreed to subscribe for and purchased an aggregate of $60.7 million of common stock of eFFECTOR. The shareholders of LWAC approved the transaction on August 24, 2021. The transaction was previously approved by the boards of directors of both LWAC and Old eFFECTOR.
The transaction was accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization” in accordance with GAAP. Under the reverse recapitalization model, the Business Combination was treated as Old eFFECTOR issuing equity for the net assets of LWAC, with no goodwill or intangible assets recorded. Under this method of accounting, LWAC was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. This determination is primarily based on the fact that subsequent to the Business Combination, Old eFFECTOR stockholders have a majority of the voting power of the combined company, comprise all of the ongoing operations of the combined entity, comprise a majority of the governing body of the combined company, and Old eFFECTOR senior management comprise all of the senior management of the combined company. Reported results from operations included herein prior to the Business Combination are those of Old eFFECTOR. The shares and corresponding capital amounts, options and related per share amounts, and loss per share related to Old eFFECTOR’s outstanding convertible preferred stock and common stock prior to the Business Combination have been retroactively restated to reflect the exchange ratio established in the Merger Agreement (1.00 share of Old eFFECTOR for 0.09657 shares of eFFECTOR) (the “Exchange Ratio”).
The Combined Company’s cash on hand after giving effect to these transactions, together with Old eFFECTOR’s existing cash and cash equivalents will be used to fund the research and development of our development programs and for working capital and general corporate purposes. We may also use a portion of the remaining net proceeds and our existing cash and cash equivalents to in-license, acquire or invest in complementary businesses, technologies, products or assets. However, we have no current commitments or obligations to do so.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We currently have no products approved for sale, and all revenue generated has been from the Pfizer Agreement along with grant revenue. In the future, we may generate additional revenue from collaboration, grant or license agreements we have entered into, or may enter into, with respect to our product candidates, as well as product sales from any approved product. Our ability to generate product revenues will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of our product candidates. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or to obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates, our ability to generate future revenue and our results of operations and financial position would be materially adversely affected.
Pfizer Agreement
In December 2019, we entered into the Pfizer Agreement, to research and develop small molecules that target eIF4E. Pursuant to the Pfizer Agreement, we granted Pfizer a worldwide, exclusive license, with a right to sublicense, under certain of our patents, know-how, and materials to use, develop, manufacture, commercialize, and otherwise exploit compounds or products targeting eIF4E, for any and all indications. Under the agreement, we were responsible for initial research in collaboration with Pfizer, and Pfizer is responsible for all further development of this development program, including submission of an IND and conducting all clinical development and commercialization activities.
Pursuant to the Pfizer Agreement, we received an upfront, one-time, non-refundable, non-creditable payment of $15 million dollars from Pfizer. Pfizer was obligated to reimburse us for costs incurred for research performed, up to a specified cap in the low double-digit millions. Upon the achievement of specified development, regulatory and sales milestones, Pfizer will be obligated to pay us up to $480 million dollars in the aggregate, as well as to pay us high single-digit percentage royalties on annual net sales of each licensed product. See “Business of eFFECTOR - Our Collaboration and License Agreements” included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information about this agreement, including with respect to potential payments to us thereunder.
DARPA Grant
In April 2021, we entered into a Research Subaward Agreement with UCSF, whereby up to $5.0 million in allowable costs are reimbursable for clinical and manufacturing activities related to zotatifin for the treatment of COVID-19 under the DARPA grant. The initial award period ended in December 2021 and we have recently submitted a request to DARPA to extend such award period, with the same maximum $5.0 million reimbursement amount, to December 2022. Under the terms of Research Subaward Agreement, we are obligated to provide financial and technical reports to UCSF on a periodic basis.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses include:
•external costs, including:
•expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as CROs and consultants and advisors that perform biology, chemistry, toxicology, clinical and regulatory functions;
•costs related to acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial materials, including continued testing such as process validation and stability of drug product;
•costs related to toxicology testing and other research and preclinical studies; and
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements and license fees.
•internal costs, including:
•salaries and related overhead expenses, which include stock-based compensation and benefits, for personnel in research and development functions; and
•facilities, depreciation, insurance and other expenses related to research and development.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. We track external expenses on a development program and other program specific basis. However, we do not track internal costs on a program specific basis because these costs primarily relate to personnel, facilities and laboratory consumables, which are deployed across multiple programs under development.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands).
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates, particularly as we move into later stages of clinical development which typically cost more. The process of conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval
for any of our product candidates. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of any of our product candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these product candidates may commence. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which product candidates and programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate and program on an ongoing basis in response to clinical and preclinical results, regulatory developments, ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s and program’s commercial potential, and our ability to enter into collaborations, to the extent we determine the resources or expertise of a collaborator would be beneficial for a given product candidate or program.
Our development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number and scope of trials required for approval and preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•the extent of reimbursement for the costs of approved therapies used in our combination trials;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•the number and complexity of procedures, analyses and tests performed during the trial;
•the phase of development of the product candidate;
•the impact of any interruptions to our operations or to those of the third parties with whom we work due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or any future epidemics;
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate; and
•the extent to which we establish additional collaboration, license or other arrangements.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation and benefits, and consulting fees for finance, accounting, and human resources functions. Other costs include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, insurance, and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we increase our administrative headcount to operate as a public company and as we advance our product candidates through clinical development. We also will incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and the Nasdaq listing rules, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur expenses associated with building a sales and marketing team if we choose to commercialize such product candidates on our own.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our outstanding debt facilities. All interest expense in 2020 is related to the outstanding term loans with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”). We entered into a new debt facility with Oxford Financial LLC (“Oxford”) in March 2021. Interest expense recorded in 2021 consisted of amounts attributable to the SVB and Oxford loans.
Loss of Debt Extinguishment
In March 2021, we repaid the SVB terms loans using the proceeds from the Oxford term loan. We recorded a loss on debt extinguishment in the amount of $0.5 million in connection with the transaction, which includes the unamortized debt discount and final payment associated with outstanding SVB term loans at the time of extinguishment along with the $0.1 million prepayment fee.
Other Income (Expense)
We issued preferred stock warrants in connection with our SVB and Oxford debt facilities and assumed private placement warrants in connection with the Business Combination transaction that are required to be accounted for as liabilities and remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported as a component of other income (expense).
Change in Fair Value of Earn-Out Liability
We determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Old eFFECTOR shareholders is not indexed to our stock under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 815-40 and are therefore required to be accounted for as liabilities and remeasured at fair value each reporting period, with changes in fair value reported as a component of other income (expense).
Income Taxes
Income tax expense consists of net income (loss), taxed at federal and state tax rates and adjusted for certain permanent differences. We maintain a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. Changes in the valuation allowance when they are recognized in the provision for income taxes may result in a change in the estimated annual effective tax rate.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Collaboration and Grant Revenue
Collaboration revenue was zero and $42.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Grant revenue was $1.4 million and zero for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in collaboration revenue during this period is due to the recognition of revenue related to the Pfizer Agreement for the development of eIF4E in 2020 with no such revenues in 2021, and the increase in grant revenue is due to the DARPA grant agreement with UCSF that was entered into during the second quarter of 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $20.0 million and $21.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in research and development expenses during this period of $1.8 million, was primarily due to a $3.0 million decrease in external costs, including $3.3 million less in the development of eIF4E in 2021 compared to 2020 due to development activities for eIF4E in 2020 under the Pfizer Agreement, and $0.4 million less in development of eFT226 due to higher costs during 2020 associated with upfront costs for the eFT226-003 (COVID) trial and more activity within the eFT226-002 trial as compared to the same period in 2021. These decreases in external costs are partially offset by $0.7 million of increased development costs for eFT508 primarily related to increased safety toxicology activities in 2021. Additionally, there was a decrease of $1.5 million in lab, facilities and overhead costs for the period due to removal of lab space at the end of 2020, and $0.6 million less in consultant costs. These decreases were partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in license fees due to a one-time payment made to UCSF in connection with the completion of the Business Combination and a $2.3 million increase in employee related costs related to increased stock-based compensation in connection with the Earn-Out Shares issued to option holders as part of the Business Combination.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $13.4 million and $4.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses during this period of $9.1 million was related to an increase of $6.2 million in personnel-related costs attributable to increased headcount to support public company activities along with increase stock-based compensation, which included $4.7 million for the period associated with the Earn-Out Shares issued to option holders as part of the Business Combination, $2.1 million increase in audit and legal expenses to support public company activities, and $0.8 million increase in other general and administrative costs primarily related to insurance costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and other expense was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other income during this period of $49.0 million was mostly due to the gain on change in fair value of the earn-out liability for the period.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was zero and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The income tax expense in 2020 was due to the state tax impact of the collaboration revenue recorded for the period which was not applicable for 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have raised a total of $295.4 million to fund our operations, comprised of aggregate gross proceeds of $150.0 million from the sale and issuance of convertible preferred stock, gross proceeds of $67.0 million from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Business Combination in August 2021, $42.0 million in collaboration revenue under our research collaboration and license agreement with Pfizer, $35.0 million from loans under credit facilities, and $1.4 million in grant revenue under the Research Subaward Agreement with UCSF.
Prior to the Business Combination, our operations were funded primarily from the issuance of convertible preferred stock and common stock. Upon the closing of the Business Combination in August 2021, we received net proceeds totaling approximately $52.9 million.
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $49.7 million as of December 31, 2021. Until required for use in our business, we typically invest our cash in investments that are highly liquid, readily convertible to cash with original maturities of 90 days or less at the date of purchase. We attempt to minimize the risks related to our cash and cash equivalents by maintaining balances in accounts only with accredited financial institutions and, consequently, we do not believe we are subject to unusual credit risk beyond the normal credit risk associated with ordinary commercial banking relationships.
SVB Credit Facility
In August 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (“LSA”) with SVB, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $20.0 million, issuable in three separate tranches of $7.5 million (“Term Loan A”), $7.5 million (“Term Loan B”) and $5.0 million (“Term Loan C”), collectively referred to as the Term Loans. The Term Loan A became available at the effective date of the LSA and we borrowed the $7.5 million under the Term Loan A on that date, receiving the cash proceeds in September 2018. Term Loan B was immediately available commencing on the effective date of the LSA and ending on the earlier of 1) August 31, 2019, and 2) the occurrence of an event of default. We borrowed the $7.5 million under Term Loan B in November 2018. Term Loan C was not drawn. The Term Loans had an interest-only period that commenced upon the borrowing of each tranche of the Term Loans with interest due and payable upon the first day of each month. The interest-only period ended August 31, 2020. The Term Loans had a maturity date of February 1, 2023. In connection with the LSA, we issued two separate warrants, each to purchase up to 46,970 shares of Series C Preferred Stock at an exercise price of $5.33 per share, to SVB and Life Science Loans II, LLC (life science loan sector of SVB). The number of shares subject to the warrant are dependent on whether Term Loan A, Term Loan B and Term Loan C are drawn. The number of shares subject to each warrant as of December 31, 2020, was 35,227 in connection with the Term Loan A and Term Loan B. Each warrant was automatically cashless exercised on August 25, 2021, in connection with the completion of the Business Combination, for 16,477 shares of Common Stock.
In March 2021, we repaid the SVB Term Loans using the proceeds from Oxford Term A Loans (defined below). The aggregate outstanding principal balance of SVB Term Loans A and B was $11.5 million at the date of repayment. We paid the entire outstanding principal balance, along with a final payment in the amount of $0.8 million (equal to 5.5% of the original aggregate principal amount), a prepayment fee of $0.1 million (equal to 1% of
the original aggregate principal amount), and $37,000 of accrued interest. We recorded a loss on debt extinguishment in the amount of $0.5 million in connection with the transaction, which has been recorded in Loss on debt extinguishment on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income for the period. The loss on debt extinguishment includes the unamortized debt discount and final payment associated with Term Loan A and Term Loan B at the time of extinguishment along with the $0.1 million prepayment fee.
Oxford Loan Facility
In March 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (“Oxford LSA”) with Oxford, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $30.0 million, issuable in two separate tranches of $20.0 million (“Term A Loan”) and $10.0 million (“Term B Loan”), collectively referred to as the Oxford Loans. The Term A Loan became available at the effective date of the Oxford LSA and $12.5 million of the proceeds were used to pay off the outstanding SVB Term Loans. The remaining net proceeds from Term A Loan of $7.4 million, after taking into effect specified issuance and legal fees designated within the distribution letter, were distributed in March 2021. Term B Loan will only become available upon achievement of certain clinical development milestones (“Phase II Milestones”) and is available until the earlier of (i) May 31, 2022, (ii) forty-five days after the occurrence of the Phase II Milestones, and (iii) the occurrence of an event of default. The Term A Loan has an interest-only period that commences upon the borrowing with interest due and payable upon the first day of each month. The interest-only period ends May 1, 2023, provided that upon the funding of the Term B Loan the end date will be extended to May 1, 2024. We are required to make a final payment equal to 5.5% of each funded tranche at maturity, which has been recorded as a debt discount and is being amortized over the term of the debt arrangements. The Oxford Loans have a maturity date of March 18, 2026. In connection with the Oxford LSA, we issued warrants to purchase a total of 37,575 shares of Series C Preferred Stock at an exercise price of $5.33 per share. The warrants were automatically cashless exercised on August 25, 2021, in connection with the completion of the Business Combination, for 17,575 shares of Common Stock.
DARPA Grant
In April 2021, we entered into a Research Subaward Agreement with UCSF, whereby up to $5.0 million in allowable costs are reimbursable for clinical and manufacturing activities related to zotatifin for the treatment of COVID-19 under the DARPA grant. Under the terms of Research Subaward Agreement, we are obligated to provide financial and technical reports to UCSF on a periodic basis. The subaward can be terminated by either party upon written notice and also in the event that DARPA suspends or terminates its award to UCSF. The initial award period for the DARPA grant ended in December 2021 and we have submitted a request to DARPA to extend such award period, with the same maximum $5.0 million reimbursement amount, to December 2022. As of December 31, 2021, $3.6 million remains unused under the grant.
Lincoln Park Facility
On January 24, 2022, we entered into an equity purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement” or “Equity Purchase Agreement”) and a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), which provides for the sale to Lincoln Park of up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock over the thirty-six (36) month term of the Purchase Agreement. In connection with the Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park made an initial purchase of $3.0 million worth of shares of common stock (the “Initial Purchase”), which equated to 557,610 shares of common stock, and we issued an additional 142,939 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park as a commitment fee in connection with entering into the Purchase Agreement.
Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had $49.7 million in cash and cash equivalents. Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operations for at least twelve months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Furthermore, our operating plans may change and we may need additional funds sooner than planned. Additionally, the process of testing
product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results of and timing of clinical trials and preclinical studies of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our clinical and preclinical activities increase;
•the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•any delays and cost increases that result from the COVID-19 pandemic or future epidemic diseases;
•the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining additional collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements; and
•the costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire.
We have no other committed sources of capital, other than potential additional draw downs under the Lincoln Park and Oxford facilities. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, if ever, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential additional collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other collaborations or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research and development programs or other operations, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We have prepared cash flow forecasts which indicate that based on our expected operating cash flows, including net proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing discussed above, there is sufficient cash-on-hand to fund planned operations for at least twelve months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K. In particular, we expect our cash flows will allow us to read out initial response and topline results from the ongoing Phase 2a dose-expansion cohorts in the zotatifin program as well as topline data from the ongoing Phase 2b KICKSTART trial, including from the new cohort, which will evaluate tomivosertib in the frontline maintenance PD-L1≥1% patient population.
Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants
LWAC issued public warrants and private placement warrants (collectively, the Warrants) in its initial public offering in January 2021. The Warrants became exercisable beginning on January 12, 2022. Warrants may only be exercised for a whole number of shares. No fractional shares will be issued upon exercise of the warrants. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
We will use commercially reasonable efforts to maintain the effectiveness of our registration statement and a current prospectus relating to those common shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants until the warrants expire or are redeemed, as specified in the Warrant Agreement, dated on January 7, 2021, between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company (the "Warrant Agreement"). If the common stock at the time of any exercise of a warrant is not listed on a national securities exchange, we may, at our option, require holders of the warrants who exercise their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis.” We are not required to file or maintain in effect a registration statement. In no event will the Company be required to net cash settle any warrant.
As the Warrants are now exercisable, we may redeem the outstanding warrants in whole and not in part at a price of $0.01 per warrant upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption, and, if and only if the last sale price of our common stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period ending three business days before the Company sends the notice of redemption to the Warrant holders.
The private placement warrants are identical to the public warrants except that, so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees: (i) they will not be redeemable by the Company; (ii) they may be exercised by the holders on a cashless basis; and (iii) they are subject to registration rights.
The Warrants will expire five years after the completion of the Business Combination, or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $24.9 million, which resulted from net income of $15.8 million adjusted for changes in operating assets and liabilities and non-cash charges. Non-cash charges included $48.9 million from a gain recorded from the change in fair value of the earn-out liability, $1.0 million from a gain recorded from change in fair value of liability-classified warrants, $0.5 million from a loss recorded on debt extinguishment, $8.7 million in stock-based compensation and $0.3 million in non-cash interest expense. Changes in operating assets and liabilities included a $2.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets and other non-current assets related to the payment of public company insurance policies and a $1.8 million increase in accrued expenses primarily related to legal and public company accounting fees, along with the accrued bonus.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $13.8 million, which resulted from net income of $14.2 million adjusted for changes in operating assets and liabilities and non-cash charges. Non-cash charges included $0.5 million in stock-based compensation, $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization expense, and $0.1 million in non-cash interest expense, partially offset by $0.3 million gain on disposal
of fixed assets recorded during the period. Changes in operating assets and liabilities included a $0.9 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses, collectively, partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $0.6 million as a result of proceeds received in connection with the sale of laboratory equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million as a result of fixed asset purchases during the year.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $58.8 million, which was the result of net proceeds of $19.8 million from the issuance of the Oxford Term A Loans, partially offset by the $13.9 million repayment of the previously outstanding SVB Term A and Term B Loans, and net proceeds of $52.9 million as a result of the completion of the Business Combination during the period.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $1.9 million, which was the result of $2.0 million repayment of outstanding SVB Term A and Term B Loans, partially offset by $0.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options during the period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and demanding of management’s judgment. Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements required estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report , we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We evaluate collaboration arrangements to determine whether units of account within the collaboration arrangement exhibit the characteristics of a vendor and customer relationship. For arrangements and units of account where a customer relationship exists, we apply the revenue recognition guidance. We recognize revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the performance obligations. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct and determines those that are performance obligations.
We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
If a license our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other performance obligations, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition on a prospective basis.
For research and development services performed under a collaboration agreement in which the performance obligation is satisfied over time, we measure the progress of the activities using an input method. The input methods used are based on the effort expended or costs incurred toward the satisfaction of the related performance obligation. We estimate the amount of effort expended, including the time we estimate it will take to complete the activities, or costs incurred in a given period, relative to the estimated total effort or costs to satisfy the performance obligation. This results in a percentage that is multiplied by the consideration allocated to the research and development services to determine the amount of revenue recognized each period. This approach requires estimates and the use of significant judgement. If the estimates or judgements change over the course of the collaboration, they may affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized in the current and future periods.
Milestones
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments (variable consideration), we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our or our collaboration partner’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are allocated on a cumulative catch-up basis to satisfied and partially satisfied performance obligations, with the consideration allocated to an ongoing performance obligation being recognized over the period of performance.
Clinical Trial Accruals and Preclinical Studies
We are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors and consultants, CROs and clinical sites in connection with conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. We reflect clinical trial and preclinical study expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the clinical trial or preclinical study as measured by the timing of various aspects of the clinical trial, preclinical study, or related activities. We determine accrual estimates through review of the underlying contracts along with preparation of financial models taking into account correspondence with clinical and other key personnel and third-party service providers as to the progress of the clinical trials, preclinical studies, or other services being conducted. During the course of a clinical trial or preclinical study, we adjust our rate of expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount incurred. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials, preclinical studies or other research activities.
Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants
Upon completion of the Business Combination, we assumed public warrants and private placement warrants that were issued by LWAC in connection with their IPO in January 2021 whereby holders of the public warrants and private placement warrants are entitled to acquire common stock of the Company. We have concluded that the public warrants are equity-classified. Since the settlement value of the private placement warrants is dependent, in part, on who holds the warrants at the time of settlement, they are not considered indexed to the Company's stock and are therefore recorded as liabilities. Warrants classified as liabilities are recorded at their estimated fair value on the date of issuance and are revalued at each subsequent balance sheet date, with fair value changes recognized in other income (expense), net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. We estimate the fair value of these warrants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Earn-Out Shares
In accordance with the Merger Agreement, 5,000,000 shares are contingently issuable to Old eFFECTOR stockholders and option holders upon the occurrence of the Triggering Event, defined within the Merger Agreement as the date on which the common stock price equals or exceeds $20.00 over at least 20 trading days out of 30 consecutive trading day period for the two-year period following the close date of the Business Combination. The estimated fair value of the Earn-Out Shares was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model using a distribution of potential outcomes on a monthly basis over the earn-out period using the most reliable information available.
We have determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Old eFFECTOR shareholders is not indexed to the Company's stock under ASC 815-40 and therefore equity treatment is precluded. The Triggering Event that determines the issuance of the Earn-Out Shares includes terms that are not solely indexed to our common stock, and as such liability classification is required. Equity-linked instruments classified as liabilities are recorded at their estimated fair value on the date of issuance and are revalued at each subsequent balance sheet date, with fair value changes recognized in other income (expense), net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
We have determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Old eFFECTOR option holders falls within the scope of ASC 718, Share-based Compensation, because the option holders are required to continue providing service until the occurrence of the Triggering Event. The fair value of the option holder Earn-Out Shares is recorded as share-based compensation over the derived service period of the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model, recognized in research and development and general and administrative expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the grant date fair value of employee stock option grants recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight- line basis. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We account for stock options granted to non-employees using the fair value approach.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the risk- free interest rate, the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of stock options, and the expected dividend yield. The fair value of the underlying common stock used within the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Emerging growth company and smaller reporting company status
Following the Business Combination, we qualify as an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act. As such, we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until
those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We also intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of Sarbanes-Oxley.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2026; (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion; (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year; or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report for information concerning recent accounting pronouncements.