Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Exchange Act, as amended. Forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements as to industry trends, our future expectations, operations, financial condition and prospects, business strategies and other matters that do not relate strictly to historical facts. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” set forth in Part I, Item 1A and in the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” preceding Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. Prior period information has been modified to conform to current year presentation. All information is presented in thousands, except per share amounts, client count and where specifically noted.
Overview
We were founded in 2001 as a provider of content delivery network services to deliver digital content over the internet. We began development of our infrastructure in 2001 and began generating meaningful revenue in 2002. Today, we are a leading provider of content delivery services and AppOps. Our coordinated complete solution delivers instant, secure website applications that provides powerful tools and we provide a client-first approach to optimize and deliver digital experiences at the edge. We are a trusted partner to some of the world’s notable brands and serve their global customers with experiences such as livestream sporting events, global movie launches, video games, and file downloads for new phone Apps. We offer one of the largest, best-optimized private networks coupled with a global team of industry experts to provide edge services that are fast, secure, and reliable. Our mission is to securely manage and globally deliver digital content, building client satisfaction through exceptional reliability and performance.
Our business is dependent on creating an exceptional digital experience by providing our clients with fast, safe, efficient, and reliable edge access, distribution of content delivery and digital asset management services over the internet every minute of every day. Because of this, we operate a globally distributed network with services that are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and 365 days a year. Our sophisticated and powerful network is fully redundant and includes extensive diversity through data centers and telecommunication suppliers within and across regions.
Our delivery services represented approximately 74% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. We also generate revenue through the sale of professional services and other infrastructure services, such as transit, rack space services, and hardware to help our clients build out edge solutions.
In early 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 as a global pandemic. This pandemic has disrupted the normal operations of many businesses, including ours. Despite such disruption, our level of client service has remained uninterrupted. There also has been no material impact to our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures. The future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain and while it is difficult to predict what the world will look like when this pandemic has run its course, we currently do not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have a material adverse impact on our balance sheet, financial condition, and results of operations, nor do we expect any impairment of goodwill, long-lived assets or right of use assets.
We provide our services in a highly competitive industry in which differentiation is primarily measured by performance and cost and the difference between providers can be as small as a fraction of a percent. We have experienced the commoditization of our once innovative and highly valued content delivery service, which, when combined with the low switching costs in a multi-CDN environment, results in on-going price compression, despite the large, unmet market need for our services. In 2021, we continued to see a decline in our average selling price, primarily due to the on-going price compression with our multi-CDN clients.
In February 2021, Bob Lyons joined the company as Chief Executive Officer, and Director. Since that date and under Mr. Lyon’s leadership, we have implemented a go-forward strategy designed to simultaneously address short-term headwinds and to position us to achieve near- and long-term success by building upon and more fully leveraging our ultra-low latency, global network, and operational expertise. We are focused on three key areas:
• Improving Our Core. Our ability to consistently grow revenue requires us to anticipate and provide our clients with reliable performance and the tools they need and to provide them sooner and better than our competitors and do a better job at managing the cost structure of our network. In early 2021, our revenue and profitability trends were adversely impacted by
lower network performance and operating expenses. Improvements in our networks performance led to increased traffic volumes in the second half of 2021. Our operating expenses are largely driven by payroll and related employee costs. We have implemented a broader and more detailed operating model built on metrics, process discipline, and improvements to client satisfaction, performance, and cost. We are working towards building an internal culture that embraces speed, transparency, and accountability. We also announced tangible steps to improve our cost competitiveness, with a reduction in workforce by approximately 16% in March of 2021. As a result, our employee headcount decreased from 618 on December 31, 2020, to 510 on March 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our employee headcount was 552. We recorded a restructuring charge of $13,425 during the year ended December 31, 2021, and also incurred $4,827, in transition related expenses for a total of $18,252 in restructuring and transition related costs during 2021. We believe these actions will result in approximately $15,000 of recurring annual savings, primarily in selling, general and administrative expense. We also implemented other cost saving measures across the enterprise which result in another $15,000 of recurring annual expenses. We continue to seek opportunities to be more efficient and productive in order to achieve cost savings and improve our profitability. The performance of our network has also improved significantly in the last year, as measured by third-party services.
• Expanding Our Core. We have rebuilt our sales team and installed senior leadership to evolve a team that is focused on growth. We are redesigning our commercial and product approaches to strengthen and broaden our key client relationships, to support a land, perform and expand strategy. We believe that this, coupled with new edge-based tools and solutions we anticipate bringing to market, will assist in our ability to re-accelerate growth. Key elements of our plan to Expand the Core include tightening the alignment between our sales and marketing organizations, moving to a “client success” model that pairs client relationship managers with client performance managers to ensure proactive client success and exploring ways to dynamically optimize how we price our services that gives us more flexibility and a renewed ability to sell more broadly into our existing client base. We have seen significant growth as a result of this strategy with bookings and pipeline expanding significantly. Productivity improvements and expanded capacity have led to a strong pipeline in both product lines. We continue to attract large media companies for content delivery and our AppOps solution continues to see adoption by companies of various sizes and types that are seeking a better solution for their high stakes web applications. These companies were out of reach with our previous strategy.
• Extending Our Core. Longer-term, we believe we can drive meaningful improvements to profitability and growth by diversifying our capabilities, clients, and revenue mix. We need to enable digital builders to easily load content faster, personalize it more and protect it outside of a controlled environment. We believe we have an opportunity of extending the use of our network to new clients with new solutions that utilize non-peak traffic solutions. In September 2021, we announced the acquisition of Moov, a California corporation doing business as Layer0, a sub-scale SaaS based application acceleration and developer support platform, for total purchase consideration of $52,487. We believe this platform coupled with our global CDN network will be a catalyst in our pursuit of positioning us as an Edge Solutions platform. Following the acquisition of Moov:
• We launched a new web application acceleration solution in the fourth quarter of 2021, which combined the powerful elements of the Limelight CDN as well as Moov’s software to deliver a substantially improved performance.
• We have identified approximately $3,000 of recurring cost synergies.
• We believe that this acquisition meaningfully improves our product management and development
capabilities and sets us on a path of continuous product innovation.
Additionally, Ajay Kapur, Moov’s co-founder, became our Chief Technology Officer, and other
Moov leadership assumed important roles at Limelight.
In our earnings release on January 20, 2022, we recognized share-based compensation expense related to our 2021 management bonus plan based on our expected payout at that time. After the release, our compensation committee determined that the actual bonus payments would be less than managements original expectation. As a result, we reversed approximately $2,100 of share-based compensation expense and approximately $200 of related employer payroll taxes, which resulted in our previously reported net loss of $57,065, decreasing by approximately $2,300 to $54,761.
The following table summarizes our revenue, costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands of dollars and as a percentage of total revenue).
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To evaluate our business, we consider and use non-generally accepted accounting principles (Non-GAAP) net loss, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental measures of operating performance. These measures include the same adjustments that our management takes into account when it reviews and assesses operating performance on a period-to-period basis. We consider Non-GAAP net loss to be an important indicator of overall business performance. We define Non-GAAP net loss to be U.S. GAAP net loss, adjusted to exclude share-based compensation, non-cash interest expense, restructuring and transition related charges, acquisition and legal related expenses, and amortization of intangible assets. We believe that EBITDA provides a useful metric to investors to compare us with other companies within our industry and across industries. We define EBITDA as U.S. GAAP net loss, adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest expense, interest and other (income) expense, and income tax expense. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted to exclude share-based compensation, restructuring and transition related charges, and acquisition and legal related expenses. We use Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to review and assess operating performance. Our management uses these Non-GAAP financial measures because, collectively, they provide valuable information on the performance of our on-going operations, excluding non-cash charges, taxes and non-core activities (including interest payments related to financing activities). These measures also enable our management to compare the results of our on-going operations from period to period, and allow management to review the performance of our on-going operations against our peer companies and against other companies in our industry and adjacent industries. We believe these measures also provide similar insights to investors, and enable investors to review our results of operations “through the eyes of management.”
Furthermore, our management uses these Non-GAAP financial measures to assist them in making decisions regarding our strategic priorities and areas for future investment and focus.
In our January 20, 2022, earnings press release, as furnished on Form 8-K, we included Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. The terms Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not defined under U.S. GAAP, and are not measures of operating income, operating performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for net income (loss) or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations include, but are not limited to:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•These measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Non-GAAP net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the cash requirements necessary for litigation costs, including provision for litigation and litigation expenses;
•These measures do not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt that we may incur;
•These measures do not reflect income taxes or the cash requirements for any tax payments;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will be replaced sometime in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•While share-based compensation is a component of operating expense, the impact on our financial statements compared to other companies can vary significantly due to such factors as the assumed life of the options and the assumed volatility of our common stock; and
•Other companies may calculate Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental support for management’s analysis of business performance. Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are calculated as follows for the periods presented.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In accordance with the requirements of Item 10(e) of Regulation S-K, we are presenting the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and reconciling the unaudited Non-GAAP financial metrics to the comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Loss to Non-GAAP Net Loss
(Unaudited)
Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Loss to EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA
(Unaudited)
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial
statements and accompanying notes. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
Business Combinations
In accounting for acquisitions through which a set of assets and activities are transferred to us, we perform an initial test to determine whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets transferred are concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets, such that the acquisition would not represent a business. If the initial test does not result in substantially all of the fair value concentrated in a single or group of similar assets, we then perform a second test to evaluate whether the assets and activities transferred include inputs and substantive processes that, together, significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs, which would constitute a business. If the result of the second test indicates that the acquired assets and activities constitute a business, we account for the transaction as a business combination.
For our business combinations, we allocate the purchase consideration of the acquisition, which includes the estimated acquisition date fair value of contingent consideration (if applicable), to the tangible assets, liabilities and identifiable intangible assets acquired based on each of the estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase consideration over the fair values is recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of such items requires judgment, including estimating future cash flows or the cost to recreate an acquired asset.
Acquisition-related expenses are expensed as incurred, except for those costs incurred to issue debt or equity securities (if applicable), and are included in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations. During and up to the one-year period beginning with the acquisition date, we may record certain purchase accounting adjustments related to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed against goodwill. After the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities assumed from an acquisition are remeasured each reporting period after the acquisition date and the changes in the estimated fair value, if any, are recorded within operating expenses in our consolidated statement of operations for such period. In accounting for income taxes in a business combination, changes in the deferred tax asset valuations allowance and income tax uncertainties after the acquisition date will be recognized through income tax expense in our consolidated statement of operations each reporting period.
The results of operations of the acquired business are included in our consolidated statement of operations since the date of acquisition.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
For contracts that contain minimum commitments over the contractual term, we estimate an amount of variable consideration by using either the expected value method. We include estimates of variable consideration in revenue only when we have a high degree of confidence that revenue will not be reversed in a subsequent reporting period. We believe that the expected value method is the most appropriate estimate of the amount of variable consideration. These clients have entered into contracts with contract terms generally from one to four years. As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $2,635 of remaining unsatisfied performance obligations. We recognized revenue of approximately $8,859 and $7,896, respectively, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, related to these types of contracts with our clients. We expect to recognize approximately 95% of the remaining unsatisfied performance obligations in 2022 and the remainder in 2023.
We recorded deferred revenue of $3,107 in accordance with the allocation of purchase consideration related to the acquisition of Moov Corporation. Deferred revenue is primarily driven by payments received in advance of satisfying our performance obligations. We recognized approximately $1,656 in 2021 that was included in the deferred revenue purchase consideration allocation. The deferred revenue balance of approximately $1,451 as of December 31, 2021, represents our aggregate remaining performance obligations that will be recognized as revenue over the period in which the performance obligations are satisfied. We expect to recognize approximately 99% of the remaining unsatisfied performance obligations in 2022, and the remainder in 2023.
We may charge the clients an activation fee when services are first activated. We do not charge activation fees for contract renewals. Activation fees are not distinct within the context of the overall contractual commitment with the client to
perform our content delivery service and are therefore recognized initially as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the client arrangement.
At the inception of a client contract for service, we make an assessment as to that client’s ability to pay for the services provided. If we subsequently determine that collection from the client is not probable, we record an allowance for credit losses or deferred revenue for that clients’ unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until it is probable that revenue will not be reversed in a subsequent reporting period. Our standard payment terms vary by the type and location of our client but do not contain a financing component.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
Certain of our revenue arrangements include multiple promises to our clients. Revenue arrangements with multiple promises are accounted for as separate performance obligations if each promise is distinct. Such arrangements may include a combination of some or all of the following: content delivery services, video content management services, performance services for website and web application acceleration and security, professional services, cloud storage, edge computing services, and sale of equipment.
Judgment may be required in determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as one combined performance obligation. Revenue is recognized over the period in which the performance obligations are satisfied, which is generally over the contract term. We have determined that generally most of our products and services do not constitute an individual service offering to our clients, as our promise to the client is to provide a complete edge services platform, and therefore have concluded that it represents a single performance obligation. We have determined that professional services and hardware sales represent separate performance obligations from that of our edge services platform.
Consideration is allocated to the performance obligations using the relative standalone selling price method. Generally, arrangements with performance obligations are provided over the same contract period, and therefore, revenue is recognized over the same period.
We determine standalone selling price by evaluating the overall pricing objectives and market conditions. Consideration includes our discounting practices, the size and volume of our transactions, the area where services are sold, price lists, historical sales and contract prices.
Goodwill
We have recorded goodwill as a result of business acquisitions. Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. In each of our acquisitions, the objective of the acquisition was to expand our product offerings and client base and to achieve synergies related to cross selling opportunities, all of which contributed to the recognition of goodwill.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We concluded that we have one reporting unit and assigned the entire balance of goodwill to this reporting unit. The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is determined using our market capitalization as of our annual impairment assessment date or more frequently if circumstances indicate the goodwill might be impaired. Items that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect key assumptions used in estimating fair value include but are not limited to:
•sustained decline in our stock price due to a decline in our financial performance due to the loss of key clients, loss of key personnel, emergence of new technologies or new competitors and/or unfavorable outcomes of intellectual property disputes;
•decline in overall market or economic conditions leading to a decline in our stock price; and
•decline in observed control premiums paid in business combinations involving comparable companies.
The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is determined using a market approach. Our market capitalization is adjusted for a control premium based on the estimated average and median control premiums of transactions involving companies comparable to us. As of the annual impairment testing date of October 31, 2021, we determined that goodwill was not impaired.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for our share-based compensation awards using the fair-value method. The grant date fair value was determined using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The Black-Scholes-Merton valuation calculation requires us to
make key assumptions such as future stock price volatility, expected terms, risk-free rates, and dividend yield. Our expected volatility is derived from our volatility rate as a publicly traded company. The expected term is based on our historical experience. The risk-free interest factor is based on the United States Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant for zero coupon United States Treasury notes with maturities of approximately equal to each grant’s expected term. We have never paid cash dividends and do not currently intend to pay cash dividends, and therefore, we have assumed a 0% dividend yield.
We apply the straight-line attribution method to recognize compensation costs associated with awards that are not subject to graded vesting. For awards subject to graded vesting, we recognize expense separately for each vesting tranche. We regularly estimate when and if performance-based award will be earned and record expense over the estimated service period only for awards considered probable of being earned. Any previously recognized expense is reversed in the period in which an award is determined to no longer be probable of being earned.
Results of Continuing Operations
Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below.
Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from the sale of our digital content delivery, video delivery, website development and acceleration, cloud security, edge compute, and origin storage services. We also generate revenue through the sale of professional services and other infrastructure services, such as transit, rack space services, and hardware to help our clients build out edge solutions.
The following table reflects our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020:
Our revenue decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021, versus 2020 primarily due to a decrease in our delivery services revenue. In addition to price compression, which is expected in the industry, the decrease in delivery services revenue was primarily due to lower traffic volumes with our largest client as a result of easing COVID-19 lockdown restrictions and a reduced amount of new content released for consumption. We believe that we have improved our performance with many of our largest clients, and we are positioned to take advantage of volume growth as new content is released. Our active clients worldwide increased to 580 as of December 31, 2021, compared to 527 as of December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by our acquisition of Moov in September 2021.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, sales to our top 20 clients accounted for approximately 74% and 75%, respectively of our total revenue. The clients that comprised our top 20 clients change from time to time, and our large clients may not continue to be as significant going forward as they have been in the past.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had two clients, Amazon which represented approximately 29% and 36%, respectively, and Sony which represented 11% and 11%, respectively, of our total revenue.
Revenue by geography is based on the location of the client from which the revenue is earned. The following table sets forth revenue by geographic area (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and backbone, costs incurred for non-settlement free peering and connection to internet service providers, and fees paid to data center operators for housing of our network equipment in third party network data centers, also known as co-location costs. Cost of revenue also includes leased warehouse space and utilities, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our content delivery services, payroll and related costs, and share-based compensation for our network operations and professional services personnel. Other costs include hardware costs, professional fees and outside services, travel and travel-related expenses and royalty expenses.
Cost of revenue was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our cost of revenue increased in both aggregate dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the comparable 2020 period. The changes in cost of revenue were primarily a result of the following:
•Bandwidth and co-location fees increased in aggregate dollars due to higher transit fees, as well as continued expansion in existing and new geographies.
•Depreciation expense increased due to increased capital expenditures over the last two years.
•Payroll and related employee costs were lower as a result of decreased network operations and professional services personnel and lower variable compensation.
•Share-based compensation decreased primarily as a result of lower variable compensation paid out in restricted stock units, and the impact of the reduction in workforce in March 2021 versus the comparable 2020 period. These decreases were off-set by equity related to our recently completed business combination.
•Other costs increased primarily due to costs associated with the sale of hardware, increased international re-seller costs, professional fees, and increased fees and licenses. These increases were partially off-set by decreased contract royalties, travel and entertainment expense, office supplies, and facilities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our general and administrative expense increased in both aggregate dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the comparable 2020 period.
The increase in aggregate dollars for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the comparable 2020 period was primarily driven by an increase in share-based compensation, acquisition and legal related expenses, professional fees, and bad debt expense, which is included in other costs. The increase in share-based compensation was the result of a transition agreement entered into between us and our former CEO who retired in January 2021, which modified existing share-based awards and resulted in additional share-based compensation. Share-based compensation also increased as a result of our acquisition of Moov in September 2021, and for a sign-on bonus converted from cash to restricted stock units for our current CEO. Professional fees increased due to higher legal fees associated with corporate and governance matters, casual labor, and other outside services.
We expect our general and administrative expenses for 2022 to remain consistent as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our sales and marketing expense decreased in both aggregate dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the comparable 2020 period.
The decrease in aggregate dollars was primarily driven by decreased payroll and related employee costs, decreased share-based compensation, marketing programs, and decreased other costs. The decrease in payroll and related employee costs was due to the impact of the reduction in workforce in March 2021 and lower variable compensation. Share-based compensation decreased primarily as a result of lower equity variable compensation in 2021 versus the comparable 2020 period. The decrease in other costs was due to decreased facility costs, decreased other employee costs, decreased fees and licenses, and decreased travel and entertainment. These decreases were off-set by increases in casual labor and recruiting.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses for 2022 to increase as a percentage of revenue as compared to 2021 due to increased marketing related initiatives and personnel costs to drive revenue growth.
Research and Development
Research and development expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our research and development expense increased in aggregate dollars and increased as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus the comparable 2020 period.
The increase in aggregate dollars was primarily due to an increase in other costs, which was mainly due to increased fees and licenses and other employee costs off-set by lower facility costs and lower professional fees. The decrease in payroll and related employee costs was due to reduced salaries and variable compensation due to lower headcount.
We expect our research and development expenses for 2022 to increase in aggregate dollars and as a percentage of revenue as many of the employees from Moov are engineers that will drive development of future growth initiatives.
Depreciation and Amortization (Operating Expenses)
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on equipment and furnishings used by general administrative, sales and marketing, and research and development personnel. Amortization expense consists of amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Depreciation and amortization expense was $2,794, or 1.3% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus $1,591, or 0.7% of revenue for the comparable 2021 period. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets acquired in the business combination in September. For the year ended December 31, 2021, amortization of intangibles was approximately $1,048. Based on our intangible assets at December 31, 2021, we expect amortization of other intangible assets to be approximately $3,144, $3,144, $3,134, 3,114, and $2,076 for fiscal years 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026, respectively.
Restructuring Charges
The restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2021, were the result of management's commitment to restructure certain parts of the company to focus on cost efficiencies, improved growth and profitability, and align our workforce and facility requirements with our continued investment in the business. As a result, certain headcount reductions were made, as well as incurring certain charges for facilities, right of use assets, outside service contracts, share-based compensation, and professional fees. Please refer to Note 11 "Restructuring Charge" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We expect to incur approximately $2,000 of additional restructure charges primarily for consulting fees to restructure our datacenter architecture over the next 12 months.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $5,245 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus $3,939 for the comparable 2020 period. Interest expense includes expense associated with the issuance of the Notes and fees associated with the Credit Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank.
Interest Income
Interest income was $134 for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $69 for the comparable 2020 period. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $1,106 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus other expense of $368 for the comparable 2020 period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income/expense consisted primarily of foreign currency transaction
gains and losses, legal settlement, and the gain/loss on sale of fixed assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income/expense consisted primarily of foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and the gain/loss on sale of fixed assets.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1,154 versus $645 for the comparable 2020 period. Income tax expense on net income (loss) before taxes was different than the statutory income tax rate primarily due to our providing for a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions, and recording of state and foreign tax expense for the year. The effective income tax rate is based primarily upon income or loss for the year, the composition of the income or loss in different countries, and adjustments, if any, for the potential tax consequences, benefits or resolutions for tax audits.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have evaluated the impact of the CARES Act, and do not expect the provisions of the CARES Act to have an impact on us.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities classified as current totaled $79,325. Included in this amount is approximately $9,521 of cash and cash equivalents held outside the United States. Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as deferred revenues, accounts payable, accounts receivable, accrued provision for litigation, and various accrued expenses, as well as purchases of property and equipment and changes in our capital and financial structure due to debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments, and similar events.
Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled “Risk Factors”. However, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and available borrowing capacity will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities.
The major components of changes in cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $14 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus net cash provided by operating activities of $21,328 for 2020, a decrease of $21,314. Changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5,740 during the year ended December 31, 2021, versus $(1,750) in 2020 were primarily due to:
•accounts receivable increased $9,109 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of timing of collections as compared to a $2,000 decrease in the comparable 2020 period;
•prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased $1,966 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an increase of $5,717 in the comparable 2020 period. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in prepaid bandwidth and backbone expenses, and prepaid expenses and insurance. These decreases were offset by an increase in VAT receivable;
•accounts payable and other current liabilities increased $8,903 during the year ended December 31, 2021, versus a decrease of $1,069 for the comparable 2020 period due to increased accounts payable, accrued compensation and benefits, accrued account payable, accrued legal fees, and our restructuring charge accrual.
Cash provided by operating activities may not be sufficient to cover new purchases of property and equipment during 2022 and beyond. The timing and amount of future working capital changes and our ability to manage our days sales outstanding will also affect the future amount of cash used in or provided by operating activities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $8,847 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus $102,665 for 2020. Net cash used in investing activities was related to the acquisition of a business, the purchase of marketable securities, and capital expenditures primarily for servers and network equipment associated with the build-out and expansion of our global computing platform, partially offset by cash received from the sale and maturities of marketable securities.
In September 2021, we acquired Moov. The purchase price included both cash and shares of our common stock. Cash paid, net of cash acquired, was approximately $30,968.
We expect to have ongoing capital expenditure requirements as we continue to invest in and expand our network. During 2021, we made capital expenditures of $15,810, which represented approximately 7% of our total revenue. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2022 to be approximately 10% of revenue, as we continue to increase the capacity of our global network and re-fresh our systems.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,529 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus net cash provided by financing activities of $109,518 for 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily relates to cash received from the exercise of stock options and our employee stock purchase plan of $6,185, offset by the payments of employee tax withholdings related to the net settlement of vested restricted stock units of $1,626.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily relates to cash received from the issuance of the Notes of $121,600, and the exercise of stock options and our employee stock purchase plan of $10,068, offset by $16,413 premium paid related to our capped call transactions, $859 payment of debt issuance costs, and the payments of employee tax withholdings related to the net settlement of vested restricted stock units of $4,878.
Convertible Senior Notes and Capped Call Transactions
In July 2020, we issued $125,000 aggregate principal amount of the Notes, with an initial conversion rate of 117.2367 shares of our common stock (equal to an initial conversion rate of $8.53 per share), subject to adjustment in some events. The Notes will be senior, unsecured obligations of ours and will be equal in right of payment with our senior, unsecured indebtedness; senior in right of payment to our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Notes; effectively subordinated to our senior, secured indebtedness, including future borrowings, if any, under our $20,000 credit facility with SVB, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent we are not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of our subsidiaries. The Notes are governed by an indenture (the Indenture) between us, as the issuer, and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee. The Indenture does not contain any financial covenants.
The Notes mature on August 1, 2025, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their term prior to the maturity date. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, beginning on February 1, 2021. We may not redeem the Notes prior to August 4, 2023.
On or after August 4, 2023, and on or before the 40th scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Notes if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption. The redemption price will equal 100% of the principal amount of the Notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the conditions allowing holders of the Notes to convert were not met and therefore the Notes are not yet convertible.
In connection with the offering of the Notes, we also entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions (collectively, the Capped Calls). The Capped Calls have an initial strike price of approximately $8.53 per share, subject to certain adjustments, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the Notes. The Capped Calls have an initial cap price of $13.38 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The capped call transactions cover, subject to anti-dilution adjustments, approximately 14.7 million shares of our common stock and are expected to offset the potential economic dilution to our common stock up to the initial cap price.
Line of Credit
In November 2015 we entered into the Credit Agreement with SVB. Since the inception, there have been eight amendments, with the most recent amendment being in September 2021. The maximum principal commitment amount remains at $20,000. The Eighth Amendment modified language within the Credit Agreement, which permitted us enter into the business combination in September 2021. Our borrowing capacity is the lesser of the commitment amount or 80% of eligible accounts receivable. All outstanding borrowings owed under the Credit Agreement become due and payable no later than the
final maturity date of November 2, 2022. As long as our Adjusted Quick Ratio remains above 1.5 to 1, we no longer are required to submit quarterly borrowing base reports.
As of December 31, 2021, borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at the current prime rate minus 0.25%. In the event of default, obligations shall bear interest at a rate per annum which is 3% above the then applicable rate. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings, and we had availability under the Credit Agreement of $20,000.
Financial Covenants and Borrowing Limitations
The Credit Agreement requires, and any future credit facilities will likely require, us to comply with specified financial requirements that may limit the amount we can borrow. A breach of any of these covenants could result in a default. Our ability to satisfy those covenants depends principally upon our ability to meet or exceed certain financial performance results. Any debt agreements we enter into in the future may further limit our ability to enter into certain types of transactions.
We are required to maintain an Adjusted Quick Ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0. We are also subject to certain customary limitations on our ability to, among other things, incur debt, grant liens, make acquisitions and other investments, make certain restricted payments such as dividends, dispose of assets or undergo a change in control. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our covenant under the Credit Agreement.
For a more detailed discussion regarding our Credit Agreement, please refer to Note 10 "Debt - Line of Credit" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We may be prevented from taking advantage of business opportunities that arise because of the limitations imposed on us by restrictive covenants within the Credit Agreement. These restrictions may also limit our ability to plan for or react to market conditions, meet capital needs or otherwise restrict our activities or business plans and adversely affect our ability to finance our operations, enter into acquisitions, execute our business strategy, effectively compete with companies that are not similarly restricted or engage in other business activities that would be in our interest. In the future, we may also incur debt obligations that might subject us to additional and different restrictive covenants that could affect our financial and operational flexibility. We cannot assure you that we will be granted waivers or amendments to the indenture governing the Credit Agreement, or such other debt obligations if for any reason we are unable to comply with our obligations thereunder or that we will be able to refinance our debt on acceptable terms, or at all, should we seek to do so. Any such limitations on borrowing under the Credit Agreement, including payments related to litigation, could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and our ability to continue as a going concern could be impaired.
Share Repurchases
On March 14, 2017, our board of directors authorized a $25,000 share repurchase program. Any shares repurchased under this program will be canceled and returned to authorized but unissued status. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we did not repurchase any shares under the repurchase programs. As of December 31, 2021, there remained $21,200 under this share repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities, and Commercial Commitments
In the normal course of business, we make certain long-term commitments for right-of-use (ROU) assets, (primarily office facilities) and purchase commitments for bandwidth, and computer rack space. These commitments expire on various dates ranging from 2022 to 2030. We expect that the growth of our business will require us to continue to add to and increase our ROU assets and long-term commitments in 2022 and beyond. As a result of our growth strategies, we believe that our liquidity and capital resources requirements will grow.
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, as of December 31, 2021 over the next five years and thereafter (in thousands):
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Standards.”