ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes set forth in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and the risk factors identified in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report. For further discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
General Overview
Eagle Bulk Shipping Inc. (“Eagle” or the “Company”) is a U.S. based fully integrated shipowner-operator providing global transportation solutions to a diverse group of customers including miners, producers, traders, and end users. Headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut, with offices in Singapore and Copenhagen, Eagle focuses exclusively on the versatile mid-size drybulk vessel segment and owns one of the largest fleets of Supramax/ Ultramax vessels in the world. The Company performs all management services in-house such as strategic, commercial, operational, technical, and administrative services and employs an active management approach to fleet trading with the objective of optimizing revenue performance and maximizing earnings on a risk-managed basis. Typical cargoes we transport include both major bulk cargoes, such as iron ore, coal and grain coal, grain, and iron ore, and minor bulk cargoes such as fertilizer, steel products, petcoke, cement, and forest products. As of December 31, 2021, we owned and operated a modern fleet of 53 Supramax/Ultramax drybulk vessels. We chartered-in four Ultramax vessels on a long term basis with a remaining lease term of less than one year. In addition, the Company charters-in third-party vessels on a short to medium term basis.
Our owned fleet totals 53 vessels, with an aggregate carrying capacity of 3.19 million dwt and had an average age of 9.3 years as of December 31, 2021.
Financing
In March 2021, the Company entered into an at market issuance sales agreement with B. Riley Securities, Inc., BTIG, LLC and Fearnley Securities, Inc., as sales agents (each, a “Sales Agent” and collectively, the “Sales Agents”), to sell shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million, from time to time through an “at-the-market” offering program (the “ATM Offering”). During the second quarter of 2021, the Company sold and issued an aggregate of 581,385 shares at a weighted-average sales price of $47.97 per share under the ATM Offering for aggregate net proceeds of $27.1 million after deducting sales agent commissions and other offering costs. The proceeds were used for partial financing of vessel acquisitions and other corporate purposes.
On March 26, 2021, Eagle Bulk Holdco LLC (“Holdco”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company entered into a Credit Agreement ("Holdco Revolving Credit Facility”) made by and among (i) Holdco, as borrower, (ii) the Company and certain wholly-owned vessel-owning subsidiaries of Holdco, as joint and several guarantors, (iii) the banks and financial institutions named therein as lenders (together with their successors and assigns, the “RCF Lenders”), (iv) Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank and Nordea Bank ABP, New York Branch, as mandated lead arrangers, (v) Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank, as arranger, facility agent and security trustee for the RCF Lenders. Pursuant to the Holdco Revolving Credit Facility, the RCF lenders agreed to make available an aggregate principal amount of up to the lesser of (a) $35,000,000 and (b) 65% of the Fair Market Value of the Initial Vessels (as defined below). Borrowings under the Holdco Revolving Credit Facility, which were repaid in full on October 1, 2021, bore interest at a rate of 2.4% plus LIBOR for the relevant interest period.
On October 1, 2021, Eagle Bulk Ultraco LLC (“Eagle Ultraco”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, along with certain of its vessel-owning subsidiaries, as guarantors, entered into a new senior secured credit facility (the “Global Ultraco Debt Facility”) with the lenders party thereto (the “Global Ultraco Lenders”) Credit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank (“Credit Agricole”), Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (PUBL), Danish Ship
Finance A/S, Nordea Bank ABP, Filial I Norge, DNB Markets Inc., Deutsche Bank AG, and ING Bank N.V., London Branch. The Global Ultraco Debt Facility provides for an aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million, which consists of (i) a term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $300.0 million (the “Global Ultraco Term Facility”) and (ii) a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million (the “Global Ultraco Revolving Facility”) to be used for refinancing the outstanding debt including accrued interest and commitment fees under the Norwegian Bond Debt and the New Ultraco Debt Facility and Holdco Revolving Credit Facility ("Previous Debt Facilities") and for general corporate purposes. The Company paid fees of $5.8 million to the lenders in connection with the transaction and incurred an additional $0.4 million as third party legal costs.
Pursuant to the Global Ultraco Debt Facility, the Company borrowed $350.0 million and together with cash on hand repaid the outstanding debt, accrued interest and commitment fees under the Previous Debt Facilities. Concurrently, the Company issued a ten day call notice to redeem the outstanding bonds under the Norwegian Bond Debt at a redemption price of 102.475% of the nominal amount of each bond. Pursuant to the bond terms, the Company paid $185.6 million consisting of $176.0 million par value of the outstanding bonds, accrued interest of $5.2 million and $4.4 million of a call premium into a defeasance account to be further credited to the bondholders upon expiry of the notice period. The bonds outstanding under the Norwegian Bond Debt were repaid in full on October 18, 2021 after the expiry of the requisite notice period. Additionally, the Company entered into four interest rate swaps for the notional amount of $300.0 million of the term loan under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility at a fixed interest rate ranging between 0.83% and 1.06% to hedge the LIBOR based floating interest rate.
The following are certain significant events with respect to our vessels that occurred during 2021:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold one vessel (Tern) for total net proceeds of $9.2 million after brokerage commissions and associated selling expenses. The Company recorded a net gain of $4.0 million from the sale of the Tern in its Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company entered into a series of memorandum of agreements to purchase three high specification scrubber-fitted Ultramax bulk carriers for a total purchase price of $51.5 million including direct expenses of acquisition. The Company paid a deposit of $3.3 million related to the acquisition of these vessels as of December 31, 2020 and took delivery of the vessels during the first quarter of 2021.
During the first quarter of 2021, the Company entered into another series of memorandum of agreements to purchase four vessels. The first vessel is a high-specification scrubber-fitted Ultramax bulk carrier for a total purchase price of $15.3 million and a warrant convertible into 212,315 common shares of the Company. The remaining three vessels are 2011-built Crown-58 Supramax bulk carriers that were purchased for a total purchase price of $20.5 million and a warrant convertible into 329,583 common shares of the Company. The above mentioned prices include direct expenses of acquisition. Common shares were issuable upon exercise of warrants on a pro-rata basis in connection with each vessel delivery. The warrants were measured at fair value on the date of the memorandum of agreement and recorded as Vessels and vessel improvements on the Consolidated Balance Sheet when the Company took delivery of the vessels. The fair value of the warrants for the total of 541,898 common shares was approximately $10.7 million as of the date of the memorandum of agreement for each vessel. The Company took delivery of the four vessels during the second and third quarters of 2021 and issued 541,898 shares of common stock upon conversion of outstanding warrants.
During the second quarter of 2021, the Company entered into memorandum of agreements to acquire two high-specification 2015-built scrubber-fitted Ultramax bulk carriers. This acquisition was partially financed with cash on hand, which included proceeds raised from equity issued under the Company's ATM Offering. The total cost of the vessels acquired including the direct costs of acquisition was $42.2 million. The Company took delivery of the two vessels in each of the third and fourth quarters of 2021.
Business Strategy and Outlook:
We believe our strong balance sheet allows us the flexibility to opportunistically make investments in the drybulk segment that will drive shareholder growth. In order to accomplish this, we intend to:
•Maintain a highly efficient and quality fleet in the drybulk segment;
•Maintain a revenue strategy that takes advantage of a rising rate environment and at the same time mitigate risk in a declining rate environment;
•Maintain a cost structure that allow us to be competitive in all economic cycles without sacrificing safety and maintenance;
•Continue to grow our relationships with our charterers and vendors; and
•Continue to invest in our on-shore operations and development of processes.
Our financial performance is based on the following key elements of our business strategy:
(1)Concentration in one vessel category: Supramax/Ultramax drybulk vessels, which we believe offer certain size, operational and geographical advantages relative to other classes of drybulk vessels, such as Handysize, Panamax and Capesize vessels,
(2)An active owner-operator model where we seek to operate our own fleet and develop contractual relationships with cargo interests. These relationships and the related cargo contracts have the dual benefit of providing greater operational efficiencies and act as a balance to the Company’s naturally long position to the market. Notwithstanding the focus on short term chartering, we consistently monitor the drybulk shipping market and, based on market conditions, will consider taking advantage of long-term time charters on our owned fleet at higher rates when appropriate.
(3)Maintain high quality vessels and improve standards of operation through improved standards and procedures, crew training and repair and maintenance procedures.
Business Outlook
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic, has had, and continues to have, widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Governments have implemented measures such as social distancing, mask and vaccine mandates, travel restrictions, COVID testing guidelines and quarantine regulations. These measures taken to slow the spread of COVID-19 led to a significant short-term slowdown in the worldwide economic activity and decline in demand for drybulk cargoes. This impacted charter rates and shipping revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In 2021, drybulk trade increased by 3.8% compared to a decrease of 1.6% in 2020, as measured in metric tons of cargo. This was a result of increased demand for nearly all drybulk cargoes compared to 2020, which was severely restricted by lockdowns, travel restrictions, and other economic shocks from the COVID-19 pandemic. Of particular note, coal demand experienced a strong rebound due to both the general effects of the economic recovery and due to high natural gas prices, leading to commodity substitutions. The BSI averaged $26,768 for 2021, compared to $8,189 for 2020, which represents the highest BSI index level since 2008.
The Company continued to experienced delays in cargo operations due to port restrictions and additional protocols. Our crew on our ships were exposed to risk of exposure to COVID-19. The travel restrictions imposed at various ports severely impeded our crew rotation plans during the year. We experienced some disruptions to our normal vessel operations and incurred additional off-hire time due to deviations our vessels had to take to allow for crew changes. As a result of the spread of COVID-19, the Company incurred some additional expenses relating to procurement of personal protective equipment, COVID-19 testing, and crew travel, which is included in our vessel operating expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company experienced some delays in operations, drydocking and BWTS installations as a result of protocols regarding COVID-19, as well as limitations on labor. We also experienced loss of revenues due to a number of off-hire days relating to crew changes and quarantine restrictions as a number of our crew members tested
positive for COVID-19 during 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred 115 days of off-hire related to crew changes. For additional discussion regarding the impact of COVID-19, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources- Summary of Liquidity and Capital Resources” and “Item 1A Risk Factors.”
While the average BSI was at $22,718 per day as of March 9, 2022, the economic activity levels as well as the demand for drybulk cargoes may be negatively impacted by COVID-19. We have instituted measures to reduce the risk of spread of COVID-19 for our crew members on our vessels as well as our onshore offices in Stamford, Connecticut, Singapore, and Copenhagen. However, if the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy on a prolonged basis, or vaccination program goes slower than expected, the rate environment in the drybulk market and our vessel values may deteriorate and our operations and cash flows may be negatively impacted as well as our ability to meet the debt covenants under our existing debt facility.
The impact of recent developments in Ukraine
In February 2022, as a result of the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, economic sanctions were imposed by the U.S., the European Union, the United Kingdom and a number of other countries on Russian financial institutions, businesses and individuals, as well as certain regions within the Donbas region of Ukraine. While it is difficult to estimate the impact of current or future sanctions on the Company’s business and financial position, these sanctions could adversely impact the Company’s operations. In the near term, we expect increased volatility in the region due to these geopolitical events. The Black Sea region is a major export market for grains with the Ukraine and Russia exporting a combined 15% of the global seaborne grain trade. While uncertainty remains with respect to the ultimate impact of the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, we anticipate seeing significant changes in trade flows. A reduction or stoppage of grain out of the Black Sea or cargoes from Russia will negatively impact the markets in those areas. At the same time, it is possible for us to see an increase in ton miles as end users find alternative sources for cargo. For more information regarding the risks relating to economic sanctions as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as well as the impact on retaining and sourcing our crew, see Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" - If our vessels call on ports located in countries or territories that are subject to comprehensive sanctions imposed by the UN, the United States, the EU or other relevant authorities, or if we are found to be in violation of sanctions, there could be an adverse effect on our reputation, business position, financial condition or results of operations, or the market for our common shares; see also Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" - The conflict between Russia and Ukraine may impact our ability to retain and source crew, and in turn, could adversely affect our revenue, expenses, and profitability.
Market Overview
The international shipping industry is highly competitive and fragmented with no single owner accounting for more than 2.6% of the on-the-water drybulk fleet, measured by vessel count. As of December 31, 2021, there are approximately 12,700 drybulk vessels over 10,000 dwt totaling 945 million dwt. We compete with other owners of drybulk vessels, primarily in the Supramax/Ultramax segment and (to a lesser extent) the Handysize and Panamax segments. Many of our competitors are privately-held companies.
Competition in the shipping industry varies according to the nature of the contractual relationship as well as the specific commodity being shipped. Our business will fluctuate as a result of changes in the supply and demand for drybulk commodities and also the main patterns of trade in these commodities. Competition in virtually all bulk trades is intense and based primarily on supply of ships and demand for our ocean transportation services. We compete for charters on the basis of price, vessel location, size, age, and condition of the vessel, as well as on our reputation as an owner and operator. Increasingly, major customers are demonstrating a preference for modern vessels based on concerns about the environmental and operational risks associated with older vessels. Consequently, owners of large modern fleets have gained a competitive advantage over owners of older fleets.
Our strategy is to focus on the Supramax/Ultramax asset class, defined as drybulk vessels that range in size from approximately 50,000 to 65,000 dwt. These vessels have the cargo loading and unloading flexibility offered by their on-board cranes, while the cargo carrying capacity approaches that of Panamax, which ranges in size between 65,000 and 100,000 dwt but which require onshore facilities to load and offload their cargoes. We believe that the cargo handling flexibility and cargo carrying capacity of the Supramax/Ultramax class makes it the preferred type of
ship attractive to potential charterers. As of December 31, 2021, all of our owned vessels range in size between 50,000 and 64,000 dwt.
The supply of drybulk vessels depends primarily on the size of the orderbook and the scrapping of older or less efficient vessels. During 2021, fleet growth decreased slightly to 3.6% in 2021 from 3.8% in 2020. In 2021, vessels totaling 37.9 million dwt were delivered, a decrease of 11.0 million dwt from 2020. Scrapping in 2021 totaled 5.1 million dwt, a decrease of 10.2 million dwt from 2020.
The typical trading life of a Supramax/Ultramax vessel is approximately 25 years. As of December 2021, 11% of the world's drybulk fleet (by vessel count) was 20 years or older.
Fleet Growth for 2022 is expected to continue at low levels of 2.0% for the drybulk fleet and 2.9% for Supramax/Ultramax vessels. The orderbook as of January 2022 stands at approximately 7.0% of the total drybulk fleet, with the orderbook for the Supramax/Ultramax segment at 6.5% of the on-the-water fleet, with both figures at or near the smallest orderbook in approximately 30 years. As of January 2022, the IMF forecasted world GDP growth at 4.4% for 2022, as the global economy continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. Drybulk trade is expected to grow by approximately 1.7% in 2022 on continuing modest levels of growth across most drybulk commodities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP” or “GAAP”). The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those that reflect significant judgments of uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We have described below what we believe are our most critical accounting policies, because they generally involve a comparatively higher degree of judgment in their application. For a description of all our accounting policies, see Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included herein.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are generated from time charters and voyage charters. Time charter revenues are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the respective time charter agreements as service is provided. Voyage revenues for cargo transportation are recognized ratably over the estimated relative transit time of each voyage. Voyage revenue is deemed to commence upon the commencement of loading of the charterer's cargo and is deemed to end upon the completion of discharge of the cargo, provided the charter rate is fixed and determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. The costs incurred during the period prior to commencement of loading the cargo, primarily bunkers, are deferred as they represent setup costs and recorded as a current asset and are amortized on a straight-line basis as the related performance obligations are satisfied.
Revenue is based on contracted charter parties, including spot-market related time charters for which rates fluctuate based on changes in the spot market. However, there is always the possibility of dispute over terms and payment of hires and freights. In particular, disagreements may arise as to the responsibility for third party costs incurred by the customer and revenue due to us as a result. Additionally, there are certain performance parameters included in contracted charter parties, which if not met, can result in customer claims.
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, (or "ASC 326"). The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses for expected uncollectible accounts receivable, which is recorded as an offset to accounts receivable and changes in such are classified as voyage expense in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Upon adoption of ASC 326, the Company assessed collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. In determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses, the Company considered historical collectability based on past due status and made judgments about the creditworthiness of customers based on ongoing credit evaluations. The Company also considered customer-specific information, current market conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions to inform adjustments to historical loss data. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our assessment considered business and market disruptions caused by COVID-19 and estimates of expected emerging credit and collectability trends. The continued volatility in market conditions and evolving shifts in credit trends are difficult to predict causing variability and volatility that may have a material impact on our allowance for credit losses in future periods.
Vessel Lives and Impairment
The Company estimates the useful life of the Company's vessels to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard to the original owner. In addition, the Company estimates the scrap rate to be $300 per lwt, to compute each vessel's residual value, which is based on the 15-year average scrap value of steel.
The carrying values of the Company's vessels may not represent their fair market value at any point in time since the market prices of second-hand vessels tend to fluctuate with changes in charter rates and the cost of new buildings. Historically, both charter rates and vessel values tend to be cyclical. The volatility in the drybulk market is heavily impacted by growth rate and demand for commodities such as coal and iron ore in the world economy and Chinese economy in particular. We evaluate the carrying amounts and periods over which long-lived assets are depreciated to determine if events have occurred which would require modification to their carrying values or useful lives. In evaluating useful lives and carrying values of long-lived assets, we review certain indicators of potential impairment, such as carrying value of the vessels lower than their fair market value, vessel sales, business plans and overall market conditions.
If indicators of impairment are present, we perform an analysis of the undiscounted projected net operating cash flows for each vessel and compare it to the vessel’s carrying value. This assessment is made at the individual vessel level since we can separately identify cash flow information for each vessel. In developing estimates of future cash flows, the Company must make assumptions about future charter rates, vessel operating expenses, and the estimated remaining useful lives of the vessels. These assumptions are based on historical trends as well as future expectations. The Company annually reviews all the assumptions that are used in the calculation of projected net operating cash flows. Specifically, we utilize the rates currently in effect for the duration of their current charters. Based on our annual review of assumptions, for periods of time where our vessels are not fixed on charters, we utilized an estimated daily time charter equivalent for our vessels’ unfixed days based on a historical average of the last fifteen years of one and three years’ time charter rates as published by a third party. Historically, the Company utilized the 25 year average of one and three year time charters for the unfixed days of the remaining useful life in its impairment analysis. This is considered a change in accounting estimate and it was done primarily to closely align with our peers and also based on our annual evaluation of assumptions used in the undiscounted projected net operating cash flows analysis, we believe that the 15 year average is more representative of future rate environment for our vessels. The change in accounting estimate did not have any impact on the impairment analysis and the consolidated financial statements.
The undiscounted projected net operating cash flows are determined by considering the future charter revenues from the existing charters for the fixed fleet days and for the unfixed days, projected FFA rates up to 2023 and an estimated daily time charter equivalent over the estimated remaining life of the vessel, assumed to be 25 years from the delivery of the vessel from the shipyard, reduced by commissions, expected outflows for vessels’ maintenance and vessel operating expenses (including planned drydocking and special survey expenditures) and any planned capital expenditures such as scrubbers and BWTS.
The Company evaluated if any impairment indicators existed as of December 31, 2021. Based on the evaluation, the Company determined that there were no impairment indicators for our vessels in the Company's fleet for which the
average vessel prices based on vessel valuations received from third party brokers were greater than their carrying values. The Company determined that there were no impairment indicators and no further impairment analysis was required.
Of the inputs that the Company uses for its impairment analysis, future time charter rates are the most significant and most volatile. We utilize historical averages as discussed above in our impairment tests due to the highly cyclical nature of the drybulk shipping industry. Our vessels range from very new to eighteen years old, and we believe that utilizing rates over a long period of time incorporates numerous shipping cycles and reflects our strategy of operating our vessels over a long time period, and in line with the overall useful economic life of our vessels. As disclosed elsewhere herein, we also consider whether utilizing ten or five year averages would impact our impairment assessment. Our vessels remain fully utilized and have a relatively long average remaining useful life of approximately 16 years in which to provide sufficient cash flows on an undiscounted basis to recover their carrying values as of December 31, 2021. Management will continue to monitor developments in charter rates in our participatory markets with respect to the expectation of future rates over an extended period.
As of December 31, 2016, as part of our fleet renewal program, management considered it probable that we would divest some of our older vessels as well as certain less efficient vessels from its fleet to achieve operating cost savings. Based on our projected undiscounted cash flows prior to sale, factoring the probability of sale, such vessels were determined to be impaired, and written down to their current fair value as of December 31, 2016, which was determined by obtaining broker quotes from two unaffiliated ship brokers. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $122.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2016. The carrying value of these vessels prior to impairment was $234.9 million. In addition to the above, in 2015, we identified six vessels as probable sales, and recognized an impairment charge in 2015 of $50.9 million. As the value of such vessels further declined in the first quarter of 2016, we recorded an additional impairment charge of $6.2 million in that quarter. All vessels identified as probable sales in 2015 have been sold as of December 31, 2021. Out of the sixteen vessels impaired in 2016, fourteen vessels have been sold as of December 31, 2021.
Although management believes that the assumptions used to evaluate potential impairment are reasonable and appropriate, such assumptions are highly subjective. In the event that any future impairment were to occur, we would determine the fair value of the related asset and record a charge to operations calculated by comparing the asset's carrying value to its estimated fair value. We estimate fair value primarily through the use of third party valuations performed on an individual vessel basis. Such valuations are not necessarily the same as the amount any vessel may bring upon sale, which may be more or less, and should not be relied upon as such.
The table set forth below indicates the carrying value of each of our vessels as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. We believe, based on broker quotes recently obtained, our vessels have a basic charter free market value greater than its carrying value by approximately $289.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and a basic charter free market value lower than its carrying value by approximately $223.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Please note that the carrying values of vessels sold during the year 2021 have been excluded from the table. When the carrying value exceeds the basic charter free market value, the difference represents the approximate amount by which we believe we would have to adjust our net income if we sold all of such vessels, excluding commissions, on industry standard terms, in cash transactions, and to a willing buyer where we are not under any compulsion to sell, and where the buyer is not under any compulsion to buy.
* Indicates drybulk carriers for which we believe the basic charter-free market value is lower than the vessel’s carrying value.
Deferred Drydock Cost
There are two methods that are used by the shipping industry to account for drydockings: (a) the deferral method where drydock costs are deferred when incurred and amortized over the period to the next scheduled drydock; and (b) expensing drydocking costs in the period it is incurred. We use the deferral method of accounting for drydock expenses. Under the deferral method, drydock expenses are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis until the next drydock, which we estimate to be a period of two and a half to five years. We believe the deferral method better matches costs with revenue than expensing the costs as incurred. We use judgment when estimating the period between drydock performed, which can result in adjustments to the estimated amortization of drydock expense. If the vessel is disposed of before the next drydock, the remaining balance in deferred drydock is written-off to the gain or loss upon disposal of vessels in the period when contracted. We expect that our vessels will be required to be drydocked approximately every 60 months for vessels younger than 15 years and 30 months for vessels older than 15 years.
Costs deferred as part of the drydocking include direct costs that are incurred as part of the drydocking to meet regulatory requirements. During drydocking, we capitalize into the cost basis of the vessel any expenditures that add economic life to the vessel, increase the vessel’s earnings capacity or improve the vessel’s efficiency. Expenditures for normal maintenance and repairs, whether incurred as part of the drydocking or not, are expensed as incurred. Unamortized drydocking costs are written off as drydocking expense if the vessels are drydocked earlier than the applicable amortization period. Unamortized drydocking costs of vessels that are sold are written off and included in the calculation of the resulting gain or loss in the year of the vessels’ sale.
Vessel acquisition
Where we identify any intangible assets or liabilities associated with the acquisition of a vessel, we record all identified tangible and intangible assets or liabilities at fair value. Fair value is determined by reference to market data and the amount of expected future cash flows. We value any asset or liability arising from the market value of the time charters assumed when an acquired vessel is delivered to us.
Where we have assumed an existing charter obligation or enter into a time charter with the existing charterer in connection with the purchase of a vessel at charter rates that are less than market charter rates, we record a liability in fair value below contract value of time charters acquired based on the difference between the assumed charter rate and the market charter rate for an equivalent vessel. Conversely, where we assume an existing charter obligation or enter into a time charter with the existing charterer in connection with the purchase of a vessel at charter rates that are above market charter rates, we record an asset in fair value above contract value of time charters acquired, based on the difference between the market charter rate and the contracted charter rate for an equivalent vessel. This determination is made at the time the vessel is delivered to us, and such assets and liabilities are amortized to revenue over the remaining period of the charter. The determination of the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities requires us to make significant assumptions and estimates of many variables including market charter rates, expected future charter rates, future vessel operation expenses, the level of utilization of our vessels and our weighted average cost of capital. The use of different assumptions could result in a material change in the fair value of these items, which could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In the event that the market charter rates relating to the acquired vessels are lower than the contracted charter rates at the time of their respective deliveries to us, our net earnings for the remainder of the terms of the charters may be adversely affected although our cash flows will not be affected.
Results of operations for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 results and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. A discussion of 2020 results of operations compared to 2019 has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in “Part II, Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021.
Net Income/(Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company reported net income of $184.9 million, or basic and diluted income of $14.91 per share and $11.79 per share, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported a net loss of $35.1 million, or $3.40 per basic and diluted share. The net income/(loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are the result of the items described below.
Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
The following tables represent the operating data and certain financial statement data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 on a consolidated basis.
We believe that the important measures for analyzing future trends in our results of operations consist of the following:
•Ownership days: We define ownership days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which each vessel in our fleet has been owned by us. Ownership days are an indicator of the size of our fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of expenses that we record during a period.
•Chartered-in days: We define chartered-in days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which the Company chartered-in vessels.
•Available days: We define available days as the number of our ownership days and chartered-in days less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to vessel familiarization upon acquisition, repairs, vessel upgrades or special surveys and other reasons which prevent the vessel from performing under the relevant charter party such as surveys, medical events, stowaway disembarkation, etc. The shipping industry uses available days to measure the number of days in a period during which vessels should be capable of generating revenues. We completed drydock for 11 vessels during 2021 and two vessels were in drydock as of December 31, 2021 and 11 vessels completed drydock during 2020.
•Operating days: We define operating days as the number of our available days in a period less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to any reason, including unforeseen circumstances. The shipping industry uses operating days to measure the aggregate number of days in a period during which vessels actually generate revenues.
•Fleet utilization: We calculate fleet utilization by dividing the number of our operating days during a period by the number of our available days during the period. The shipping industry uses fleet utilization to
measure a company's efficiency in finding suitable employment for its vessels and minimizing the amount of days that its vessels are off-hire for reasons other than scheduled repairs or repairs under guarantee, vessel upgrades, special surveys or vessel positioning. Our fleet continues to perform at very high utilization rates.
Time Charter and Voyage Revenue
Shipping revenues are highly sensitive to patterns of supply and demand for vessels of the size and design configurations owned and operated by a company and the trades in which those vessels operate. In the drybulk sector of the shipping industry, rates for the transportation of drybulk cargoes such as ores, grains, steel, fertilizers, and similar commodities, are determined by market forces such as the supply and demand for such commodities, the distance that cargoes must be transported, and the number of vessels available or expected to be available at the time such cargoes need to be transported. The demand for shipments is significantly affected by the state of the global economy and in discrete geographical areas. The number of vessels is affected by newbuilding deliveries and by the removal of existing vessels from service, principally due to scrapping.
The mix of charters between voyage charters and time charters also affects revenues. Because the mix between voyage charters and time charters significantly affects shipping revenues and voyage expenses, vessel revenues are benchmarked based on net charter hire income. Net charter hire income comprises revenue from vessels operating on time charters, and voyage revenue less voyage expenses from vessels operating on voyage charters in the spot market and charter hire expenses. Net charter hire income serves as a measure of analyzing fluctuations between financial periods and as a method of equating revenue generated from a voyage charter to time charter revenue.
The following table represents the reconciliation of Net charter hire income, a non-GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our economic decisions are primarily based on anticipated net charter hire rates and we evaluate financial performance based on net charter rates achieved. Our revenues are driven primarily by the number of vessels in our fleet, the number of days during which our vessels operate and the net charter hire that our vessels earn under charters, which, in turn, are affected by a number of factors, including:
•the duration of our charters;
•our decisions relating to vessel acquisitions and disposals;
•the amount of time that we spend positioning our vessels;
•the amount of time that our vessels spend in drydock undergoing repairs;
•maintenance and upgrade work;
•the age, condition and specifications of our vessels;
•levels of supply and demand in the drybulk shipping industry; and
•other factors affecting spot market charter rates for drybulk carriers.
Our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were earned from time and voyage charters. As is common in the shipping industry, we pay commissions ranging from 1.25% to 5.00% of the total daily charter hire rate of each charter to unaffiliated ship brokers and in-house brokers associated with the charterers, depending on the number of brokers involved with arranging the charter. We record such broker commissions as voyage expenses.
Revenues, net
Revenues, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $594.5 million, an increase of 116% compared to the prior year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in charter hire rates as rates recovered from the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, partly offset by a decrease in available days. The available days including chartered-in days for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 19,538 as compared to 19,612 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Voyage expenses
To the extent that we employ our vessels on voyage charters, we incur expenses that include but are not limited to bunkers, port charges and canal tolls, as these expenses are borne by the vessel owner on voyage charters. Bunkers, port charges, and canal toll expenses primarily increase in periods during which more vessels are employed on voyage charters.
Voyage expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $104.6 million, compared with $89.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Voyage expenses have primarily increased due to an increase in bunker consumption expense, an increase in broker commission expense and an increase in port expenses.
Vessel operating expenses
Vessel operating expenses include expenses relating to crewing costs, vessel operations, general vessel maintenance, regulatory and classification society compliance, insurance, repairs, stores, supplies, spare parts, and technical consultants.
Vessel operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $103.9 million, compared with $86.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in vessel operating expenses is primarily attributable to an increase in lubes expense, an increase in stores and spares delivery costs, crew wages, and crew changes due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and vessel start-up expenses as the Company purchased and took delivery of nine vessels during 2021. The ownership days for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 18,258 compared to 18,065 for the prior year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe daily vessel operating expenses are a good measure for comparative purposes over a 12-month period in order to take into account all of the expenses that each vessel in our fleet will incur over a full year of operation.
Average daily vessel operating expenses for our fleet for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $5,689 as compared to $4,790 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Insurance expense varies with overall insurance market conditions as well as the insured's loss record, level of insurance and desired coverage. The main insurance expenses include hull and machinery insurance (i.e. asset insurance) costs, loss of hire insurance, Protection, and Indemnity ("P&I") insurance (i.e. liability insurance) costs. Certain other insurances, such as basic war risk premiums based on voyages into designated war risk areas are often for the account of the charterers for time charter voyages and on owners’ account for voyage charters.
Our vessel operating expenses, which generally represent costs under the vessel operating budgets, cost of insurance and vessel registry and other regulatory fees, will increase with the enlargement of our fleet. Other factors beyond our control, some of which may affect the shipping industry in general, may also cause these expenses to increase, including, for instance, developments relating to market prices for crew, insurance, lubricants, and supplies.
Charter hire expense
Charter hire expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $37.1 million compared to $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in charter hire expenses in 2021 compared with 2020 was mainly due to an increase in charter hire rates due to improvement in the charter hire market and an increase in the number of chartered-in days. The chartered-in days for 2021 were 2,331 compared to 2,179 in 2020. Between 2017 and 2021, the Company entered into a series of agreements to charter five Ultramax vessels on a long term basis. The minimum chartered-in periods ranged between one and four years with an option to extend the duration between three and 24 months. Four and three of those five vessels were chartered-in as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The remaining vessel will be delivered during the second quarter of 2022.
Depreciation and amortization
We depreciate the cost of our vessels on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of each vessel. Depreciation is based on the cost of the vessel less its estimated residual value. We estimate the useful life of our vessels to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard to the original owner. We estimate the scrap rate to be $300/lwt to compute each vessel's residual value.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $53.5 million and $50.2 million, respectively. The increase in depreciation expense is due to an increase in the cost base of our owned fleet due to the capitalization of scrubbers and BWTS on our vessels, and the acquisition of nine vessels in 2021, offset by the sale of five vessels in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and the sale of one vessel in the third quarter of 2021. The increase in drydock amortization is due to the completion of eleven additional drydocks since the end of 2020. Total depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $44.9 million of vessel and other fixed asset depreciation and $8.7 million of deferred drydocking amortization. Total depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $42.8 million of vessel and other fixed asset depreciation and $7.4 million of amortization of deferred drydocking costs.
Drydocking relates to our regularly scheduled maintenance program necessary to preserve the quality of our vessels as well as to comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations. Management anticipates that vessels are to be drydocked every two and a half years for vessels older than 15 years and every five years for vessels younger than 15 years, accordingly, these expenses are deferred and amortized over that period.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses include legal, professional expenses, recurring administrative and other expenses including payroll and expenses relating to our executive officers and office staff, office rent, directors fees, and directors and officers insurance. General and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expenses.
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $35.2 million and $31.5 million, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in legal expenses, compensation and benefits and an increase in stock-based compensation expense.
General and administrative expenses include stock-based compensation charges of $3.5 million and $3.0 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These stock-based compensation charges relate to the stock options, restricted stock units and performance-based stock awards granted to certain members of management, employees, and certain directors of the Company under the 2016 Plan. The stock-based compensation expense is higher primarily due to higher stock grants during the year. Please see Note 13, Stock Incentive Plans, to the consolidated financial statements.
Other operating expense
Other operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.8 million, with no comparable amount for the year ended December 31, 2020. In March 2021, the U.S. government began investigating an allegation that one of our vessels may have improperly disposed of ballast water that entered the engine room bilges during a repair. The Company posted a surety bond as security for any fines, penalties or other associated costs. Other operating expense consists of expenses incurred relating to this incident, which include legal fees, surety bond expenses, vessel off-hire, crew changes and travel costs.
(Gain)/loss on sale of vessels
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded a gain of $4.0 million and a loss of $0.5 million, respectively. The gain for the year ended December 31, 2021, includes a gain on the sale of the vessel Tern. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes a loss on the sale of five vessels - Goldeneye, Shrike, Skua, Osprey I and Hawk I.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $32.3 million and $35.4 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a decrease in outstanding debt and lower interest rates due to the refinancing of the Company's debt in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Amortization of debt issuance costs is included in interest expense. These financing costs relate to costs associated with our various outstanding debt facilities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amortization of debt issuance costs was $7.1 million and $6.3 million, respectively. The interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 includes $4.1 million and $3.9 million, respectively, of interest expense representing the amortization of the equity component of the Convertible Bond Debt. Please refer to Note 6, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Realized and unrealized loss/(gain) on derivative instruments, net
Realized and unrealized loss on derivative instruments, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.2 million compared to a realized and unrealized gain on derivatives instruments, net of $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in realized and unrealized losses on derivative instruments was primarily due to the sharp increase in charter hire rates. Please refer to Note 7, Derivative Instruments, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Loss on debt extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.1 million, with no comparable amount for the year ended December 31, 2020. On October 18, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding debt together with accrued interest as of that date under the Norwegian Bond Debt and discharged the debt in full from the proceeds of the Global Ultraco Debt Facility and cash on hand. As a result, the Company recognized $1.6 million representing the outstanding balance of debt discount and debt issuance costs, as well as a $4.4 million call premium on the Norwegian Bond Debt as a loss on debt extinguishment in the fourth quarter of 2021. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company cancelled the Super Senior Facility. There was no outstanding debt under the Super Senior Facility. The Company recognized $0.1 million representing the outstanding balance of debt issuance costs as a loss on debt extinguishment. Please see Note 6, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Selected Financial Data
The selected financial data presented below have been derived in part from, and should be read in conjunction with, the consolidated financial statements
(Dollars, Shares, and Weighted average shares outstanding amounts in thousands except Per Share amounts and Fleet Data)
(1) In March 2021, the U.S. government began investigating an allegation that one of our vessels may have improperly disposed of ballast water that entered the engine room bilges during a repair. The Company posted a surety bond as security for any fines, penalties or other associated costs. Other operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists of expenses incurred relating to this incident, which include legal fees, surety bond expenses, vessel off-hire, crew changes and travel costs. Other operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.1 million. The expense relates to our legal settlement with OFAC.
(2) During the second quarter of 2020, the Company determined that there were impairment indicators present for one of our chartered-in vessel contracts and, as a result, we recorded an operating lease impairment of $0.4 million.
(3) On October 18, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding debt together with accrued interest as of that date under the Norwegian Bond Debt and discharged the debt in full using the proceeds of the Global Ultraco Debt Facility and cash on hand. As a result, the Company recognized $6.0 million representing a bond call premium and the outstanding balance of debt discount and debt issuance costs, as Loss on debt extinguishment in the fourth quarter of 2021. See Note 6, Debt, to the consolidated financial statements.
During the third quarter of 2021, the Company cancelled the Super Senior Revolving Facility. There were no outstanding amounts under the facility and the Company recorded $0.1 million as Loss on debt extinguishment in the third quarter of 2021. Please see Note 6, Debt, to the consolidated financial statements.
On January 25, 2019, the Company repaid the outstanding debt together with accrued interest as of that date under the New First Lien Facility and the Original Ultraco Debt Facility and discharged the debt in full from the proceeds of the New Ultraco Debt Facility. As a result, the Company recognized $2.3 million representing the outstanding balance of debt issuance costs, as a loss on debt extinguishment in the first quarter of 2019. Please see Note 6, Debt, to the consolidated financial statements.
On December 8, 2017, the Company repaid the amounts outstanding under the First Lien Facility and the Second Lien Facility by issuance of $200.0 million of the Norwegian Bond Debt and $65.0 million of the New First Lien Facility. As a result, the Company recognized a $15.0 million loss on debt extinguishment in the fourth quarter of 2017.
(4) Adjusted to give effect for the 1-for-7 Reverse Stock Split that became effective as of September 15, 2020, see Note 1, General Information, to the consolidated financial statements.
(a) The 2021 amount represents $49.8 million under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility to be repaid in 2022.
(b) Effective as of September 15, 2020, the Company completed the 1-for-7 Reverse Stock Split of the Company's issued and outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share. All references herein to common stock and per share data for all periods presented in these consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, have been retrospectively adjusted to reflect the Reverse Stock Split. See Note 1, General Information, to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(c) Ratio of Total debt to Total capitalization was calculated as debt divided by capitalization (debt plus stockholders' equity).
Effects of Inflation
The Company believes that its business benefits during periods of elevated inflation and positive demand growth, as higher charter rates, and net revenues, more than offset increases in costs relating to vessel operating expenses, drydocking, and general and administrative.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents the cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $209.2 million, compared with $12.6 million in 2020. The increase in cash flows provided by operating activities resulted primarily from the increase in revenues due to higher charter hire rates.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $125.5 million, compared to $5.5 million in the prior year. During 2021, the Company purchased nine vessels for $126.2 million. The Company paid $6.7 million for the purchase of ballast water treatment systems on our fleet. Additionally, the Company paid $2.1 million for vessel improvements. This use of cash was partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of one vessel for $9.2 million and $0.4 million of insurance proceeds received on hull and machinery claims.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $86.3 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $22.6 million in the prior year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, the Company received (i) $300.0 million in proceeds from the Global Ultraco Debt Facility, (ii) $50.0 million in proceeds from the revolver loan under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility, (iii) $55.0 million in proceeds from the revolver loan under the New Ultraco Debt Facility, (iv) $16.5 million in proceeds from the New Ultraco Debt Facility, (v) $24.0 million in proceeds from the Holdco Revolving Credit Facility and (vi) $27.1 million in net proceeds from the ATM Offering. The Company repaid (i) $182.9 million of the New Ultraco Debt Facility, (ii) $184.4 million of the Norwegian Bond Debt, (iii) $12.5 million of the Global Ultraco Debt Facility, (iv) $55.0 million of the revolver loan under the New Ultraco Debt Facility, (v) $24.0 million of the Holdco Revolving Credit Facility, (vi) $15.0 million of the revolver loan under the Super Senior Facility and (vii) $50.0 million of the revolver loan under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility. Additionally, the Company paid (i) $6.4 million in financing costs to lenders, (ii) $0.7 million in other financing costs, and (iii) $0.5 million of financing costs related to the equity offerings in December 2020. Additionally, the Company paid $25.8 million in dividends to its shareholders and $1.9 million to settle net share equity awards.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents balance was $86.1 million, compared to a cash and cash equivalents balance of $69.9 million at December 31, 2020. In addition, our restricted cash balance at December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million which includes $0.1 million for collateralizing letters of credit relating to our office leases. As of December 31, 2020, our restricted cash balance was $18.9 million and includes $18.8 million in proceeds from the sale of vessels which were restricted pursuant to the terms under the Norwegian Bond Debt and $0.1 million for collateralizing letters of credit relating to our office leases.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s debt, net of $21.6 million debt discount and debt issuance costs totaled $380.0 million of which $49.8 million is shown in the current portion of long-term debt and $330.2 million in noncurrent liabilities.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had $100.0 million in an undrawn revolver facility available under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility.
Our principal sources of funds are operating cash flows, long-term bank borrowings and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our principal use of funds is capital expenditures to establish and grow our fleet, maintain the quality of our vessels, comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations, fund working capital requirements and repayments of interest and principal on our outstanding debt facilities.
We believe that our current financial resources, together with the undrawn revolver under the Global Ultraco Debt Facility and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our ongoing business needs and other obligations over the next twelve months and for the foreseeable future thereafter. Our ability to generate sufficient cash depends on many factors beyond our control including, among other things, general charter rate environment.
Dividends
During 2021, the Company adopted a dividend policy which allows for a minimum dividend of 30% of its net income, but not less than $0.10 per share, subject to approval from its board of directors. During the year ended December 31, 2021, a quarterly cash dividend for the third quarter of 2021 of $2.00 per share was declared and paid on November 24, 2021 to the shareholders of record as of November 15, 2021. On February 22, 2022, a quarterly cash dividend for the fourth quarter of 2021 of $2.05 per share was declared and is to be paid on March 25, 2022 to the shareholders of record as of March 15, 2022. We expect to continue paying cash dividends on a quarterly basis; however, in the future, the declaration and payment of dividends, if any, will always be subject to the discretion of the board of directors, restrictions contained in the Company’s debt facilities, and the requirements of Marshall Islands law. The timing and amount of any dividends declared will depend on, among other things, the Company's earnings, financial condition and cash requirements and availability, the ability to obtain debt and equity financing on acceptable terms as contemplated by the Company's growth strategy, the terms of its outstanding indebtedness and the ability of the Company's subsidiaries to distribute funds to it.
Debt Agreements
Refer to Note 6, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements above for a summary of our credit agreements.
Contractual Obligations
Information about the Company's contractual obligations can be found within Note 3, Vessels, Note 6, Debt, and Note 10, Leases, in addition to the information presented below. We believe that funds from future operating cash flows and cash on hand and available to us through our financing transactions will be sufficient for future operations and commitments, and for capital acquisitions and other strategic transactions for the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future thereafter.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures relate to the purchase of vessels and capital improvements to our vessels, which are expected to enhance the revenue earning capabilities and compliance with new regulations.
In addition to acquisitions that we may undertake in future periods, the Company's other major capital expenditures include funding the Company's program of regularly scheduled drydocking and vessel improvements necessary to comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations. Although the Company has some flexibility regarding the timing of its drydocking, the costs are relatively predictable. In accordance to the statutory requirements, management anticipates that vessels are to be drydocked every five years for vessels younger than 15 years and two and a half years for vessels older than 15 years. Funding of these requirements is anticipated to be met with cash from operations. We anticipate that the process of recertification will require us to reposition these vessels from a discharge port to shipyard facilities, which will reduce our available days and operating days during that period.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company entered into a contract for the purchase of BWTS on 39 of our owned vessels. The projected costs, including installation, are approximately $0.5 million per BWTS. The Company intends to complete the installation during scheduled drydockings. The Company completed installation of BWTS on 23 vessels and recorded $11.5 million in Vessels and vessel improvements in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company recorded $4.4 million as advances paid towards installation of BWTS as a noncurrent asset in its Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021. We intend to fund the remaining BWTS installations with cash on hand.
Drydocking costs incurred are deferred and amortized to expense on a straight-line basis over the period through the date of the next scheduled drydocking for those vessels. In 2021, 11 of our vessels completed drydock and two vessels were in drydock as of December 31, 2021 and we incurred $21.9 million in drydocking related costs. In 2020, 11 of our vessels completed drydock and we incurred $14.3 million in drydocking related costs. The increase in drydocking costs was primarily due to additional required upgrades including the installation of BWTS, discretionary vessel upgrades, and an increase in shipyard costs due to shipyard congestion caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table represents certain information about the estimated costs for anticipated vessel drydockings, BWTS, and vessel upgrades in the next four quarters, along with the anticipated off-hire days:
(1) Actual costs will vary based on various factors, including where the drydockings are actually performed. We expect to fund these costs with cash on hand.
(2) Actual duration of off-hire days will vary based on the age and condition of the vessel, yard schedules and other factors.
(3) Vessel upgrades represents capital expenditures relating to items such as high-spec low friction hull paint which improves fuel efficiency and reduces fuel costs, NeoPanama Canal chock fittings enabling vessels to carry additional cargo through the new Panama Canal locks, as well as other retrofitted fuel-saving devices. Vessel upgrades are discretionary in nature and evaluated on a business case-by-case basis. We expect to fund these upgrades with cash on hand.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Other Contingencies
We refer you to Note 9, Commitment and Contingencies, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for a discussion of our contingencies related to claim litigation. The potential impact from legal proceedings on our business, liquidity, results of operations, financial position and cash flows, could change in the future.