ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Unless otherwise indicated, references to the terms the “combined company,” “Eiger,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, Inc. (formerly known as Celladon Corporation) and its subsidiaries after the merger described herein. The term “Private Eiger” refers to privately-held Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, Inc. prior to its merger with Celladon Merger Sub, Inc. a wholly-owned subsidiary of Celladon Corporation. The term “Celladon” refers to Celladon Corporation and its subsidiaries prior to the Merger.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of innovative therapies to treat and cure Hepatitis Delta Virus (HDV) and other serious diseases. All five of our rare disease programs have FDA Breakthrough Therapy Designation.
Our HDV platform includes two first-in-class therapies in Phase 3 that target critical host processes involved in viral replication. Lonafarnib is a first-in-class oral farnesylation inhibitor and lambda is a first-in-class, type III, well-tolerated interferon.
D-LIVR is the pivotal Phase 3 study of lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir for HDV. The study recently completed enrollment of 407 patients and we expect topline data by the end of 2022. LIMT-2 is the pivotal Phase 3 study of lambda for HDV.
We previously reported positive Phase 2 proof of concept data in HDV for the following treatment regimens: lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir; lambda; and the combination of lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir and lambda.
We are also developing avexitide, a first in class, well-characterized GLP-1 antagonist, as a targeted treatment for two metabolic diseases with high unmet medical needs and no approved therapies: congenital hyperinsulinism (HI) and post-bariatric hypoglycemia (PBH). Avexitide has completed Phase 2 for both indications and we are planning for Phase 3 in 2022.
The FDA approved our first commercial product, Zokinvyâ (lonafarnib) to reduce risk of mortality of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS or Progeria) and for treatment of processing-deficient progeroid laminopathies with either heterozygous LMNA mutation with progerin-like protein accumulation, or homozygous or compound heterozygous ZMPSTE24 mutations, ultra-rare and rapidly fatal genetic conditions of accelerated aging in children, on November 20, 2020. Our Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) is under review with the EMA, and we expect an opinion from the CHMP in the first half of 2022.
We commercially launched Zokinvy in the U.S. in January 2021 and started to record product revenue in first quarter 2021. We have historically incurred operating losses in each year since inception but were profitable during the three months ended March 31, 2021 due to the one-time gain from the sale of a priority review voucher issued upon the FDA approval of Zokinvy. However, we expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We had net loss of $33.9 million, $65.1 million, and $70.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $340.4 million. Substantially all of our operating losses have resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, and seek regulatory approval for, and potentially commercialize our product candidates, which will require the addition of new personnel and upgrades to our information technology systems. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year due to timing of clinical development programs and efforts to achieve additional regulatory approvals.
Recent Developments
Update on Ukraine and Russia Clinical Trial Sites in D-LIVR, a Phase 3 Study of Lonafarnib-based Regimens in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis Delta Virus (HDV) Infection
In March 2022, we provided an update on the D-LIVR clinical trial sites in Ukraine and Russia. D-LIVR is a global Phase 3 study that has enrolled 407 patients across 116 clinical trial sites in 22 countries, including 5 sites in Ukraine. The D-LIVR design includes conservative powering assumptions, modeling response rates well below what was demonstrated in Phase 2. We believe that the study remains more than adequately powered to demonstrate statistical significance over placebo if these patients discontinue from the study.
In Russia, where there are 11 D-LIVR clinical trial sites, to date, there have been no interruptions to patient visits, safety monitoring, or drug supply. Eiger maintains a D-LIVR depot in Russia which will have sufficient drug supply for all patients through week 48. We have also developed contingency plans with our CRO to ensure continuity of drug supply, sample storage and analysis to preserve the integrity of the results.
Enrollment of First Patient in LIMT-2, a Phase 3 Study of Lambda in Patients with HDV Infection
In December 2021, we announced that the first patient was enrolled in LIMT-2, a Phase 3 study of 48-week treatment with lambda in patients with chronic hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infection. LIMT-2 will include 50 sites across 13 countries and a target enrollment of 150 patients.
Second Positive Interim Analysis and Continuation of Dosing of Lambda in Phase 3 TOGETHER Study of Newly Diagnosed COVID-19 Outpatients
In December 2021, we announced that an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) recommended that investigators continue enrollment of the lambda arm in the Phase 3 TOGETHER investigator-sponsored platform study. This second, per protocol interim futility analysis was based on a sample size of 1,003 patients, randomized 1:1 active treatment to placebo.
Update on Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Clinical Development Activities and Business Operations
We have taken proactive steps to ensure the safety of patients and the integrity of our clinical studies. We have adequate clinical drug product supply for our studies and do not anticipate any interruption in availability of study drug to patients.
We do not anticipate any impact to our sales of Zokinvy, including availability of commercial drug supply. We previously announced that the EMA review of our MAA will follow a standard review timeline with a CHMP opinion expected in the first half of 2022.
We have put into place remote operations and new policies, which are in-line with local, state and federal guidelines, to maintain the safety and well-being of our employees, while working to maintain business continuity as this
unprecedented global situation continues to evolve. We continue to monitor the situation closely, including its potential effect on our clinical development plans and timelines.
Financial Operations Overview
Product Revenue, Net
Our product revenue, net consists of sales of Zokinvy (lonafarnib) for Progeria and processing deficient progeroid laminopathies in the United States and under a reimbursed early access program, or cohort ATU program, in France. Prior to 2021, we did not have any product revenue.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists primarily of direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing of Zokinvy for commercial sale, including third-party manufacturing costs, third party logistics costs, write down of inventories, and other period costs. Costs incurred prior to FDA approval in November 2020 have been recorded as research and development expense.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research and development, such as the development of our product candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, contract research organizations and clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of clinical trials;
•
contract manufacturing expenses, primarily for the production of clinical trial supplies;
•
license fees associated with our license agreements; and
•
internal costs that are associated with activities performed by our research and development organization and generally benefit multiple programs. These costs are not separately allocated by product candidate. Unallocated internal research and development costs consist primarily of:
o
personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
o
allocated facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and depreciation expense; and
o
regulatory expenses and technology license fees related to development activities.
The largest component of our operating expenses has historically been the investment in clinical trials, including contract manufacturing arrangements, clinical trial material related costs and other research and development activities. However, we do not allocate internal research and development costs, such as salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and indirect costs to product candidates on a program-specific basis. The following table shows our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
We expect research and development expenses will continue to be significant and may increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through later stage clinical trials and pursue regulatory approvals, which will require a significant investment in regulatory support and contract manufacturing and clinical trial material related costs. In addition, in the future we may evaluate opportunities to acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies, which may result in higher research and development expenses due to license fees and/or milestone payments.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in timely developing and achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of our product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, intellectual property rights, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates. The COVID-19 pandemic presents additional risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including:
•
delays in trial activities and patient enrollment or diversion of healthcare resources as a result of the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
production shortages or other supply interruptions in clinical trial materials resulting from the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
our ability to hire and retain key research and development personnel;
•
the scope, rate of progress, results and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities; and
•
the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses, expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit, accounting services, insurance costs and costs associated with being a public company, and commercial related expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist of facilities and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies. Our expenses include costs related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq, insurance, investor relations, banking fees and other administrative expenses and professional services. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in the future due to sales and marketing activities from the commercialization of our product candidates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest and amortization of the debt discount related to the Oxford Loan.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our investments in debt securities and cash equivalents.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of the gain we recognized in connection with the sale of our rare pediatric disease priority review voucher to AbbVie Inc., which closed in January 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities revenues, and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by external service providers, which include the conduct of clinical research and contract formulation and manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these external service providers.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined based on actual costs, or estimated net realizable value, on a first-in, first-out basis. Inventories consist of raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods.
Prior to regulatory approval of our product candidates, expenses incurred to manufacture drug products are recorded as research and development expense. We begin capitalizing these expenses as inventory upon regulatory approval. We periodically assess the recoverability of our inventory and reduce the carrying value of the inventory when items are determined to be obsolete, defective or in excess of forecasted sales requirements. Inventory write-downs for excess, defective and obsolete inventory are recorded as a cost of sales. There have been no write-downs of inventories for the periods presented.
Product revenue, net
We recognize product revenue when the customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon delivery to the customer as the delivery of the product is our only performance obligation.
Product revenue is recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration resulting from rebates, prompt payment discounts, co-payment assistance, and returns. Amounts related to such items are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available. The amount of variable consideration may be constrained and is included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Product revenue is recorded after considering the impact of the following variable consideration amounts along with the constraint at the time of revenue recognition:
Rebates: Our products are subject to government mandated rebates for Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Benefit Program, and other government health care programs in the United
States. Rebate amounts are based upon contractual agreements or legal requirements with public sector benefit providers. We use the expected-value method for estimating these rebates based on statutory discount rates and expected utilization. The expected utilization of rebates is estimated based on expected coverage of identified patients. Estimates for these rebates are adjusted quarterly to reflect the most recent information. We record an accrued liability for unpaid rebates related to products for which control has been transferred to the customer.
Prompt payment discounts: We provide a discount to our customer if they pay for purchases within 30 days. We expect that our customer will earn prompt payment discounts and we use the most likely amount method for estimating such discounts. As a result, when revenues are recognized, we deduct the full amount of the prompt payment discounts from total product revenues and record these discounts as a reduction of accounts receivable.
Co-payment assistance: We provide co-payment assistance to patients who have commercial insurance and meet certain eligibility requirements. We use the expected-value method for estimating co-payment assistance based on estimates of program redemption using data provided by third-party administrators. Estimates for the co-payment assistance are adjusted quarterly to reflect actual experience. We record an accrued liability for unredeemed co-payment assistance related to products for which control has been transferred to the customer.
Product returns: We offer limited product return rights and generally allow for the return of product that is damaged or defective, or within a few months prior to and up to a few months after the product expiration date. We consider several factors in the estimation of potential product returns, including expiration dates of the product shipped, the limited product return rights, third-party data in monitoring channel inventory levels, shelf life of the product, and other relevant factors.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock options and restricted stock units based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the grant date. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. We record forfeitures when they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model includes the following assumptions:
Expected Term. Our expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term).
Expected Volatility. Since we have only been publicly traded for a short period and do not have adequate trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. Beginning in the third quarter of 2019, as we had been publicly traded for four and a half years, we began to layer in our historical volatility in the calculation of expected volatility.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Expected Dividend. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We use the contractual term to determine the non-employee awards’ fair value at the grant date. The contractual term of options granted under the Plan is 10 years. Our Board of Directors determined the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant and the resulting stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the awards.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
*Percentage not meaningful or not material.
Product revenue, net
Product revenue, net consists of sales of Zokinvy, which was approved by the FDA in November 2020 and launched commercially in January 2021.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, is related to certain costs associated with Zokinvy that were incurred after FDA approval. Prior to receiving FDA approval in November 2020, we recorded all Zokinvy manufacturing costs incurred as research and development expense. We sold inventory previously expensed to research and development over the current year, and we expect our costs of product sales of Zokinvy to increase as a percentage of net product revenue in future periods as we produce and sell inventory that reflects the full cost of manufacturing the product. There were no cost of sales prior to 2021.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $22.8 million to $64.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $41.6 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $20.9 million increase in contract manufacturing and clinical expenditures due to an increase in clinical program activities, a $2.4 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount, and a $2.2 million increase in professional services, including supporting investigator sponsored studies, offset by less regulatory related consulting spend associated with Progeria. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $2.8 million related to milestone payments, which occurred in 2020 related to the BMS License Agreement with no similar expense recorded in 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $3.3 million to $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $20.6 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $2.1 million increase in professional services, including consulting, advisory and accounting services due to support the growth of the Company and a $1.8 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $0.5 million in sales and marketing related expenses, which were incurred in 2020 to support the U.S. launch of Zokinvy.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $0.5 million to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $0.7 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates on money market funds and available-for-sale securities.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net increased by $46.5 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to net proceeds received from the sale of our rare pediatric disease priority review voucher to AbbVie Inc., which closed in January 2021.
Provision for income taxes
Provision for income taxes increased by $64,000 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the tax expense related to state taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $88.8 million of cash, cash equivalents and short-term debt securities, comprised of $22.2 million of cash and cash equivalents and $66.6 million of short-term debt securities available-for-sale, and an accumulated deficit of $340.4 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had $17.3 million of long-term debt securities available-for-sale. The total cash, cash equivalents, short-term debt securities, and long-term debt securities was $106.1 million.
On December 18, 2020, we filed a new shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-251497) with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which permits the offering, issuance and sale by us up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $200.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants. Up to a maximum of $50.0 million of the maximum aggregate offering price of $200.0 million may be issued and sold pursuant to an ATM financing facility (the ATM Facility) under a sales agreement with Jefferies. In December 2021, we completed ATM offerings for a total of 565,938 shares of our common stock under the ATM Facility. The offerings were made under Eiger’s effective shelf registration statement and resulted in net proceeds to the Company of $3.0 million, after deducting commissions.
We believe that the currently available resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least the next 12 months following the issuance date of these consolidated financial statements. However, if our anticipated operating results are not achieved in future periods, we believe that planned expenditures may need to be reduced or we would be required to raise funding in order to fund our operations. Additionally, our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, including research and development expenditures and selling, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Future Funding Requirements
Prior to 2021, we had not generated any product revenue. We launched our first commercial product, Zokinvy, in January 2021. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our other product candidates.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, funding the development of our product candidates, sales and marketing costs for commercialization of Zokinvy and our other product candidates, compensation and related expenses, hiring additional staff, including clinical, scientific, operational, financial, and management personnel, and costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates.
We plan to continue to fund losses from operations and capital funding needs through future equity and/or debt financings, as well as potential additional collaborations or strategic partnerships with other companies. As a result of economic conditions, general global economic uncertainty, political change and other factors, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we do not know whether additional capital will be available when needed, or that, if available, we will be able to obtain additional capital on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital due to the volatile global financial markets, general economic uncertainty or other factors, we may need to curtail planned development or commercialization activities. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt could result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. We can provide no assurance that financing will be available in the amounts we need or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding we may be forced to delay, make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Leases
In October 2017, we entered into a non-cancelable operating facility lease agreement commencing on March 1, 2018 and expiring in February 2023. We also have additional operating leases that are included in our lease accounting but are not considered significant for disclosure. Refer to Note 13 of our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Asset and License Agreements
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under asset purchase and license agreements, including royalties and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones.
Product Development Agreements
On August 11, 2018, we entered into a Product Development Agreement and a First Project Agreement (the Product Agreements), pursuant to which we will receive development program support services for the HDV program. The services are to be provided from July 1, 2018 through the new drug application (NDA) filing. The Product Agreements can be terminated by either party due to material breach or by us without cause with 90 days prior written notice. Refer to Note 5 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details and description of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Oxford Finance Term Loan
On December 30, 2016, we entered into an aggregate $25.0 million loan with Oxford Finance LLC (the Oxford Loan). On March 5, 2019, we entered into the third amendment to the Oxford Loan (the Amended Oxford Loan) to refinance the Oxford Loan. The Amended Oxford Loan increased the aggregate amount available to be borrowed to
$35.0 million and extended the maturity date to March 1, 2024. On March 5, 2019, prior to entering into the Amended Oxford Loan, the outstanding balance of the Oxford Loan was $23.3 million. At the time of entering into the Amended Oxford Loan, we borrowed an additional $6.7 million in principal under the Amended Oxford Loan, which increased the total amount borrowed to $30.0 million (Amended Tranche A). On February 23, 2021, we entered into the fifth amendment to the Oxford Loan. The amendment extended the interest only period by 17 months until September 1, 2022, followed by 19 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. On October 6, 2021, we entered into the sixth amendment to the Oxford Loan. As a result, the Amended Oxford Loan will bear interest at the LIBOR replacement rate which is the sum of the alternate benchmark rate and the LIBOR replacement spread. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all loan terms. Refer to Note 8 of our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details related to the terms of this loan agreement.
Manufacturing Service Agreement
In 2020, we entered into a Master Manufacturing Services Agreement (MMSA) and Product Agreement with Patheon, Inc. (Patheon) for the manufacturing of lonafarnib capsules and packaging of bottles for commercial sale. Under the terms of the agreements, we are required to provide Patheon with annual volume forecasts of capsules and Patheon will manufacture 80 percent of actual manufacturing volume. If we order more than 20 percent of manufacturing volume from other manufacturers, we are required to pay 70 percent of purchase price to Patheon for the shortfall. The initial terms of the MMSA and Product Agreement end on December 31, 2025 with automatic renewal for successive two-year terms, unless earlier terminated pursuant to the terms of each agreement, or upon either party’s notice of termination to the other.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under the rules of the SEC and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $71.3 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $33.9 million, a $46.5 million gain from the sale of a priority review voucher and $0.3 million income related to an asset purchase agreement which were partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $7.9 million, amortization of debt securities premiums and discounts of $1.0 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.8 million, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets of $0.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.3 million, and common stock issued under Product Development Agreement of $0.2 million. Additionally, cash used in operating activities reflected changes in net operating assets of 1.3 million due to an increase of $2.4 million in inventory, an increase of $2.6 million in accounts receivable, an increase of $0.6 million in other assets, an increase of $0.7 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and a decrease of $0.5 million in operating lease liabilities, partially offset by an overall increase of $5.5 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities primarily due to the timing of payments.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $63.2 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $65.1 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $6.0 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.8 million, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets of $0.5 million and common stock issued under Product Development Agreement of $0.2 million. Additionally, cash used in operating activities
reflected changes in net operating assets of $5.9 million due to an increase of $3.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to the timing of payments, an increase of $1.4 million in other assets primarily related to long term deposits with clinical research organizations, a decrease of $0.4 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments and a decrease of $0.5 million in operating lease liabilities
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $61.5 million, primarily consisting of $99.6 million of proceeds from maturities of debt securities, $46.5 million of net proceeds received from the sale of our priority review voucher, which were partially offset by $84.6 million of purchases of debt securities.
Cash used in investing activities was $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $128.3 million of purchases of debt securities, partially offset by $83.8 million of proceeds from maturities of debt securities.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.2 million, which primarily consisted of $3.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the ATM Facility and $0.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon stock option exercises and ESPP purchase, partially offset by $0.3 million payments of common stock offering costs and $0.2 million in debt issuance costs.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $97.5 million and primarily consisted of $96.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under ATM facilities and $0.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon stock option exercises and ESPP purchase.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements adopted and not yet adopted for the year ended December 31, 2021.