Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See also "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
On March 24, 2020, we effected a one-for-fifteen reverse stock split, or the Reverse Stock Split, reducing the number of our common shares outstanding on that date from 87.4 million shares to approximately 5.8 million shares. Additionally, the exercise price and number of all outstanding options and warrants, and the number of shares reserved for future issuance pursuant to our equity compensation plan were all adjusted proportionately. All such amounts and per share amounts presented herein have been adjusted retroactively to reflect these changes. The number of the Company’s authorized shares were not proportionately reduced in the Reverse Stock Split and remain at 141,428,571 shares.
Overview
The following discussion highlights the results of our operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described, and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of our financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis is based on our audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Business
We design, develop, and market exoskeleton products that augment human strength, endurance and mobility. Our exoskeleton technology serves multiple markets and can be utilized both by able-bodied persons and persons with physical disabilities. We have sold or leased devices that (i) enable individuals with neurological conditions affecting gait, including ABI and SCI, to rehabilitate, and in some cases, to walk again, (ii) assist individuals with a broad range of upper extremity impairments, and (iii) allow industrial workers to perform difficult repetitive work for extended periods.
We believe that the commercial opportunity for exoskeleton technology adoption is accelerating as a result of recent advancements in material technologies, electronic and electrical engineering, control technologies, and sensor and software development. Taken individually, many of these advancements have become ubiquitous in peoples’ everyday lives. We believe that we have learned how to integrate these existing technologies and wrap the result around a human being efficiently, elegantly and safely, supported by an industry leading intellectual property portfolio. We further believe that we can do so across a broad spectrum of applications, from persons with lower limb paralysis to able-bodied users.
EksoHealth
EksoHealth is our business unit focused on developing and marketing exoskeletons for medical applications.
Our leading product in EksoHealth, the EksoNR, is a robotic exoskeleton used to provide physical therapy for patients with lower extremity impairment. EksoNR, which in 2019 superseded our EksoGT product in this segment, includes unique features designed specifically to assist physical therapists and other clinicians to teach patients to walk again after suffering a neurological impairment. Typical conditions that can be treated with the assistance of EksoNR include ABIs, such as stroke and traumatic brain injuries, as well as SCIs and others. The benefits of using EksoNR for rehabilitation can include earlier mobilization of patients, longer and more intense rehab sessions, and better quality of sessions compared to alternative therapies. The product is most typically used in a clinical setting, with the most common among those being inpatient rehab facilities and stroke centers.
EksoUE is a wearable upper body exoskeleton that is also used as a tool during rehabilitation. EksoUE is designed to assist patients with a broad range of upper extremity impairments and aims to provide them with a wider active range of motion and increased endurance for rehabilitation sessions of higher intensity.
EksoWorks
EksoWorks is our business unit focused on developing, marketing, and selling exoskeletons and other assistive tools for industrial applications. The target users for these devices are generally able-bodied, and as such the goal of these products is to reduce fatigue for workers. The benefits of fatigue reduction can include reduced rates of injuries, higher productivity, higher worker morale, and lower turnover. Currently, we primarily sell these products directly to companies that deploy them for use in their operations.
Within EksoWorks we have two main categories of products. Our wearable exoskeleton products include EksoVest and the new EVO, both of which support the weight of a worker’s arms and tools, reducing the fatigue associated with working at or above shoulder height for extended periods. These products are currently targeted at end markets in aerospace, automotive, manufacturing, and specific construction trades.
EksoZeroG is a tool holder that can mount on an aerial lift platform or scaffolding. This effectively reduces the weight of heavy tools as felt by the operator. EksoZeroG has been sold primarily through rental companies into the construction market.
Operational Highlights
•In 2021, we booked a total of 80 EksoNR units.
•We recorded annual gross margins of approximately 60% in 2021, compared to 57% in 2020.
2021 Financing Activities
•In February 2021, we sold 3,902,440 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $10.25 per share and received net proceeds of $36.5 million from the underwritten public offering. Pursuant to the underwriting agreement, we issued warrants to purchase up to 273,170 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $12.81 to the underwriters.
•In June 2021, our Forgiveness Application of the PPP loan was approved in full and we recorded a gain of the forgiveness of the loan and accrued interest of $1.1 million.
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $1.4 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and $0.8 million from sales of common stock under our "at the market offering" program.
Economic and Industry Trends
Our revenue is highly dependent on market demand for our exoskeleton products. This market demand is influenced by many factors including the level of awareness of robotic exoskeleton rehabilitation among the rehabilitation clinics with significant stroke, ABI, and SCI populations, the imperatives among construction and manufacturing companies to drive adoption of improved safety and health practices, as well as conditions relating to overall economic growth and general business activity. Difficult and challenging economic conditions, including growing supply chain issues amidst an increasingly inflationary environment, could lead to increased price-based competition. In particular, the effects of such increasing price-based competition may have an especially significant impact on certain products that we offer, including the EksoNR, which have a lengthy sale and purchase order cycle because they are major capital expenditure items and generally require the approval of senior management at purchasing institutions. Furthermore, our business includes operations in the Americas, EMEA and APAC, so we are affected by demand for our products in those regions, as well as the strengthening or weakening of local currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar.
The COVID-19 pandemic and related public health measures have also materially affected how we and our customers are operating our businesses, and have materially affected our operating results, as demand for our exoskeleton products decreased as many inpatient rehabilitation facilities temporarily shifted priorities and delayed capital expenditures. While the duration and extent to which this will impact our future results remain uncertain, we have seen certain recovery in the demand for our exoskeleton products following the gradual reopening and recovery of the broader global economy, and we believe the clinical need for our products has not diminished, as evidenced by clinical data showing the increased prevalence of strokes during the pandemic. With continued high levels of new daily cases of COVID-19 in the United States, combined with concerns about the emergence of new, more infectious variants of the coronavirus, we continue to engage with our current and prospective customers through video conferencing, virtual training events and online education demos to offer our support and showcase the value of our Ekso devices. Further, now that our clinical team is fully vaccinated and are active onsite at U.S. rehab centers, we expect to see an uptick in live in-person interactions going forward. Although market uncertainties related to the pandemic
make it difficult for us to project the full impact on our business and customers, we believe that we are well-positioned to serve our customers when business conditions begin to normalize.
Throughout the pandemic, our top priority has been to protect the health and safety of our employees and our consumers. We have an optional work from home policy for many of our employees. Vaccinated employees are permitted to work in the office and we have allowed essential business travel to resume. We have also enhanced the use of personal protective equipment in our facilities.
Management continues to actively monitor the global situation and its effects on our financial position and operations.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known. Besides the estimates identified below that are considered critical, we make many other accounting estimates in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. All estimates, whether or not deemed critical, affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as disclosures of contingent liabilities. These estimates and judgments are also based on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known, even for estimates and judgments that are not deemed critical.
Refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for critical accounting policies, estimates and judgements.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue increased $2.4 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020. This increase was comprised of a $1.7 million increase in EksoHealth revenue and a $0.7 million increase in EksoWorks primarily due to an increase in the volume of device sales driven by business conditions normalizing from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $1.7 million, or 33%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily attributable to an increased volume of device sales and a reduction in EksoWorks cost of sales.
Gross margin was approximately 60% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gross margin of 57% for the same period in 2020. Gross margins increased primarily due to improved EksoWorks margins driven by lower production costs of the EVO vest compared to the previous generation vest and the reduction of collaborative arrangements in overall revenue composition.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $0.4 million, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily due to a decrease in employee headcount as a result of a reduction in force in May of 2020.
Research and development expenses increased $0.3 million, or 11%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily due to increased employee discretionary compensation costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $2.8 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily due to an increase in business development costs and increased employee compensation from higher headcount.
Goodwill impairment charge of $0.2 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, reducing the goodwill balance to zero. No goodwill impairment charge was recorded in 2021.
Restructuring expense of $0.2 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, and related to the completion of a restructuring plan in May of 2020. The restructuring expense consisted of employee severance payments. There was no comparable amount in 2021.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest expense decreased 19% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily due to lower effective interest rates and outstanding principal balances on our term loans.
Gain on revaluation of warrant liabilities of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was associated with the revaluation of warrants issued in 2019, 2020 and 2021. Loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities of $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was related to warrants issued in 2015, 2019 and 2020. Gains and losses on revaluation of warrants are primarily driven by changes in our stock price.
Gain on forgiveness of note payable of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was recorded as a result of the PPP loan forgiveness approval we received from our lender and the SBA in June 2021. There was no comparable amount for the same period of 2020.
Warrant issuance expense of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was recorded in connection with our private placement offerings of warrants to purchase common stock concurrently with a registered direct offering of our common stock in June 2020. We incurred $1.1 million in direct financing costs, which were allocated on a relative fair value basis between the common stock and warrant issuances, of which $0.3 million was allocated to warrants and expensed immediately. There was no comparable amount in 2021.
Other expense, net was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to other income, net of $1.0 million for the same period of 2020, due to unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency revaluations of our inter-company monetary assets and liabilities.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts toward the development of exoskeletons for the medical and industrial markets, toward the commercialization of medical exoskeletons to rehabilitation centers and toward raising capital. We have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of equity securities for cash consideration and through bank debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $40.9 million, compared to working capital of $13.4 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily due to higher cash balance from equity financings, warrants exercises, and the reduction of notes payable, current as a result of retiring our WAB Term Loan. Our cash as of December 31, 2021 consisted of bank deposits with third party financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021, of our $40.4 million of cash, $40.2 million was held domestically while $0.2 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $208.9 million and cash on hand of $40.4 million. Largely as a result of significant research and development activities related to our advanced technology and commercialization of such technology into our medical device business, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. We have incurred net losses of $9.8 million and $15.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $11.2 million of cash in our operations.
As described in Note 9 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Notes Payable, net, borrowings under our secured term loan agreement with Pacific Western Bank have a requirement of minimum cash on hand equivalent to the current outstanding principal balance. As of December 31, 2021, $2.0 million of cash must remain as restricted. After
considering cash restrictions, effective unrestricted cash as of December 31, 2021 is estimated to be $38.4 million. With this unrestricted cash balance, we believe that we currently have sufficient cash to fund our operations beyond the look-forward period of one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
Cash
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of cash for the periods stated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operations increased $2.4 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, primarily due to increased employee compensation related to higher headcount, increased inventory purchases, and higher business development costs.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $38.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was from the sale of common stock and warrants for net proceeds of $36.5 million in connection with the equity financing, net proceeds of $0.8 million from our “at the market offering” program, and proceeds of $1.4 million from the exercise of warrants.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was from the sale of our common stock for net proceeds of $7.1 million in connection with the equity financing in June 2020, proceeds of $1.1 million from our PPP loan, and proceeds of $3.3 million from the exercise of June 2020 Warrants and May 2019 Warrants, partially offset by aggregate principal payments of $1.3 million against our term loan and the $1.5 million payoff of our loan with Western Alliance Bank.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations, including interest payments, as of December 31, 2021 and the effect those obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
Refer to Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual obligations and commitments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Recent Accounting Pronouncements for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.