Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of the Company. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created thereby. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this report. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under the Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors section and elsewhere in this report, as well as, in other reports and documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission from time to time. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Legacy Operations and Acquisition of Anelixis Therapeutics, Inc.
On September 14, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of Anelixis Therapeutics, Inc. (“Anelixis”), a privately held clinical stage biotechnology company developing a next generation anti-CD40L antibody as a potential treatment for organ and cellular transplantation, autoimmune diseases, and ALS. Concurrent with the Company’s acquisition of Anelixis on September 14, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the Company issued and sold approximately 199,112 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock (the “PIPE Shares”) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $99.1 million (the “Financing”). The Financing was exempt from registration pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and/or Regulation D promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving a public offering. The proceeds from the private placement will be used to fund the Company’s operations, including up to four clinical trials of our lead asset, tegoprubart. At the closing of the Financing, the Company entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the Investors. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, on December 22, 2020, the Company registered the resale by certain selling stockholders of 12,065,875 shares of common stock, which may be issued upon conversion of the PIPE Shares under its effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-251305).
Prior to our acquisition of Anelixis, we had been focused on developing novel products for patients with disorders of the ear, nose, and throat (“ENT”). In June 2020, we announced that our lead program did not achieve statistical significance for the primary efficacy endpoints in the treatment of acute otitis media. As a result of this failure to achieve the primary study endpoint and expected need to reformulate the investigational drug, we suspended the clinical development of our legacy ENT assets while we assessed alternate development strategies, including the out-licensing or sale of these assets. Following the June 2020 announcement, we significantly curtailed development expenses as we sought to identify strategic alternatives that would maximize stockholder value. As a result of these activities, we acquired Anelixis and raised additional capital in September 2020, as described above.
Subsequent to our acquisition of Anelixis, we undertook a strategic review of the legacy ENT assets. We concluded this review and determined that the best path forward was to terminate license agreements associated with these ENT assets and return the rights to the original license holders, which we did in July 2021. There was no financial impact to returning these assets.
Other Developments
September 2020 Stock Purchase Agreement
On September 14, 2020, Eledon entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “Investors”). Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Eledon agreed to sell an aggregate of approximately 199,112 shares of Series X1 non-voting Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series X1 Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $99.1 million (collectively, the “Financing”). Eledon had commitments for an additional $9.0 million in equity financing that was contingent upon the satisfaction of certain incremental closing conditions, including stockholder approval of the issuance of the Company’s common stock upon the conversion of the Company’s X1 Preferred Stock and the effective registration of its common stock. Subject to stockholder approval, each share of Series X1 Preferred Stock was convertible into 55.5556 shares of Common Stock, as described below.
The preferences, rights and limitations applicable to the Series X1 Preferred Stock are set forth in the Certificate of Designation, as filed with the SEC. The Financing was exempt from registration pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and/or Regulation D promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving a public offering. The Investors have acquired the securities for investment only and not with a view to or for sale in connection with any distribution thereof, and appropriate legends have been affixed to the securities issued in this transaction.
On December 18, 2020, the Company held a special meeting of stockholders (the “Special Meeting”). At the Special Meeting, the Company’s stockholders approved the issuance of the Company’s common stock, upon conversion of the Company’s Series X1 Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, issued in September 2020.
On December 23, 2020, the Company sold 1,004,111 shares of its common stock for gross proceeds of $9.0 million that was contingent upon the satisfaction of certain incremental closing conditions, as described above.
2020 Common Stock Exchange Agreements
On February 13, 2020, the Company entered into an exchange agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) with Biotechnology Value Fund, L.P., Biotechnology Value Fund II, L.P. and Biotechnology Value Trading Fund OS, L.P. (the “Exchanging Stockholders”), pursuant to which the Exchanging Stockholders exchanged (the “February Exchange”) 210,888 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, for 3,796 shares of newly designated Series X non-voting Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series X Preferred Stock”). The Company agreed to reimburse the Exchanging Stockholders for their expenses in connection with the Exchange up to a total of $25,000, which was recorded as operating expense in the Company’s condensed consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
On February 13, 2020, in connection with the February Exchange, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation setting forth the preferences, rights and limitations of the Series X Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware. Each share of Series X Preferred Stock will be convertible into 55.5556 shares of common stock at the option of the holder at any time; subject to certain limitations, including, that the holder will be prohibited from converting Series X Preferred Stock into common stock if, as a result of such conversion, the holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own a number of shares of common stock above a conversion blocker, which is initially set at 9.99% of the total common stock then issued and outstanding immediately following the conversion of such shares of Series X Preferred Stock. In the event of the Company’s liquidation, dissolution or winding up, holders of Series X Preferred Stock will participate pari passu with any distribution of proceeds to holders of common stock. Holders of Series X Preferred Stock are entitled to receive dividends on shares of Series X Preferred Stock equal (on an as-if-converted-to-common stock basis) to and in the same form as dividends actually paid on the common stock or other junior securities of the Company. Shares of Series X Preferred Stock will generally have no voting rights, except as required by law and except that the consent of a majority of the holders of the outstanding Series X Preferred Stock will be required to amend the terms of the Series X Preferred Stock.
On June 1, 2020 and June 10, 2020, the Exchanging Stockholders converted a total of 3,285 shares of Series X Preferred Stock into 182,500 shares of common stock.
2020 Warrant Exercise Transactions
On January 10, 2020 and January 15, 2020, the Company entered into warrant exercise agreements (the “Exercise Agreements”) with the holders (the “Holders”) of its Series A Warrants and Series B Warrants (collectively, the “Warrants”), pursuant to which the Holders agreed to exercise in cash their Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 383,235 shares of the Company’s common stock at a reduced exercise price of $12.87 per share, plus an additional $2.25 per share for the issuance of the private placement warrants for gross proceeds (before placement agent fees and expenses) to the Company of approximately $5.8 million (the “Exercise Transaction”).
Under the Exercise Agreements, the Company also agreed to issue to the Holders new warrants to purchase up to 383,235 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $12.96 per share, with an exercise period of five and a half years (the “Private Placement Warrants”). The Private Placement Warrants transaction subsequently closed and the Private Placement Warrants were issued on January 14, 2020 with respect to the Warrants exercised on January 10, 2020 and on or about January 17, 2020, with respect to the Warrants exercised on January 15, 2020. In addition, the Company agreed to issue to the placement agent warrants to purchase up to 19,162 shares of common stock, representing 5.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock issued in the Exercise Transaction. The placement agent warrants have substantially the same terms as the Private Placement Warrants issued to the Holders, except that the placement agent warrants have an exercise price equal to $18.90. A warrant inducement expense of $4.8 million was incurred which was
determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and was calculated as the difference between the fair value of the Warrants prior to, and immediately after, the reduction in the exercise price on the date of repricing in addition to the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants issued.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Holders exercised approximately 64,171 Private Placement Warrants in a cashless exchange for 28,553 shares of the Company’s common stock. Additionally, approximately 9,985 private placement warrants were exercised for 9,985 shares of the Company’s common stock for gross proceeds of $188,773.
December 2020 Exchange Agreements
On December 31, 2020, the Company entered into an exchange agreement (the “Series X Exchange Agreement”) with Biotechnology Value Fund, L.P., Biotechnology Value Fund II, L.P., Biotechnology Value Trading Fund OS, L.P. , MSI BVF SPV, L.L.C. (the “BVF Exchanging Stockholders”) and Cormorant Global Healthcare Master Fund, LP (together with the BVF Exchanging Stockholders, the “Exchanging Stockholders”), pursuant to which the Exchanging Stockholders exchanged (the “Series X Exchange”) 344,666 shares of the Company’s common stock, for 6,203.98 shares of Series X Preferred Stock.
In addition, on December 31, 2020, the Company entered into an exchange agreement (the “Warrant Exchange Agreement,” and together with the Series X Exchange Agreement, the “Exchange Agreements”) with the BVF Exchanging Stockholders, pursuant to which the BVF Exchanging Stockholders exchanged (the “Warrant Exchange,” and together with the Series X Exchange, “the Exchanges”) 509,117 shares of the Common Stock for one or more pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 509,117 shares of the Common Stock at a nominal exercise price (the “Warrants”).
The Company recorded the shares of Series X Preferred Stock and Warrants issuable as preferred stock and warrant subscriptions at December 31, 2020, since the physical settlement of the Exchanges was made on January 5, 2021, whereby the transfer agent recorded the exchange of common stock for the issuance of preferred stock and warrants.
September 2021 Exchange Agreements
On September 21, 2021, the Company issued warrants exercisable for 298,692 shares of common stock in exchange for warrants exercisable for 5,376.456 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock previously issued as part of the Anelixis merger. These Series X1 Preferred Stock warrants were replaced by the Company for the outstanding warrants issued by Anelixis that were not settled upon completion of the merger.
Common Stock Warrants
As of December 31, 2021, 1,145,631 warrants were exercisable into common stock (after rounding for fractional shares and subject to beneficial ownership conversion blockers). The shares of common stock underlying the registered direct and private placement warrants are registered for offer and sale under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), pursuant to the Company’s effective registration statements on Forms S-1.
Series X1 Preferred Stock Warrants
As of December 31, 2021, 50,207.419 warrants were exercisable into Series X1 Preferred Stock which are convertible into 2,789,301 shares of common stock (after rounding for fractional shares and subject to beneficial ownership conversion blockers).
2021 Equity Distribution Agreement
On March 31, 2021, the Company filed a prospectus and prospectus supplement (the “2021 Prospectus”) under which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, pursuant to an equity distribution agreement with Jeffries LLC, up to
$75.0 million in shares of its common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, no shares were sold under the 2021 Prospectus.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting global disruptions have adversely affected our business and operations, including, but not limited to, the operations of third parties upon whom we rely. The effects of executive and similar government orders, including shelter-in-place orders and work-from-home policies may negatively impact our productivity and disrupt our business. Although the impacts of COVID-19 have not been material to-date, we have experienced delays in certain clinical studies and resulting delays in data collection and have also experienced inefficiencies in planning and executing trials due to our limited ability to conduct meetings with key third parties. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we quickly implemented safety and health standards and protocols for our employees. We have been responsive to local guidelines in respect of the COVID-19 pandemic, which included shutting our offices for part of 2021 and having our employees work from home, re-opening in deliberate fashion following local guidelines, and installing COVID-19 plans and policies to be followed at our offices (including mask protocols, and limitations on attendance in common spaces).
The further spread of COVID-19 and its effects, including actions to limit the spread of the illness, could impact our ability to carry out our business and may materially adversely impact global economic conditions. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business will depend on future developments, including the duration and severity of the outbreak (including the severity and transmission rates of new variants of the virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants), the timing, distribution, rate of public acceptance and efficacy of vaccines and other treatments, the effect of governmental regulations imposed in response to the pandemic and the magnitude and duration of global supply chain constraints, all of which are highly uncertain and ever-changing. The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting global disruptions have caused significant volatility in financial and credit markets. We have utilized a range of financing methods to fund our operations in the past; however, current conditions in the financial and credit markets may limit the availability of funding or increase the cost of funding. Any of the foregoing factors, or other effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, could materially affect our business, possibly to a significant degree. The severity and duration of any such impacts cannot be predicted.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Business Combinations
Accounting for acquisitions requires extensive use of estimates and judgment to measure the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) and liabilities assumed. Additionally, the Company must determine whether an acquired entity is considered a business or a set of net assets because the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired can only be recognized as goodwill in a business combination. The Company accounted for the acquisition of Anelixis as a business combination under the acquisition method of accounting. Consideration paid to acquire Anelixis was measured at fair value and included the exchange of Anelixis’ common stock. The allocation of the purchase price resulted in recognition of intangible assets related to goodwill and IPR&D. Acquired IPR&D is recognized at fair value and initially characterized as an indefinite-lived intangible asset, irrespective of whether the acquired IPR&D has an alternative future use. The operating activity for Anelixis, the acquiree for accounting purposes, was immediately integrated with Eledon post-acquisition, therefore it is not practical to segregate results of operations related specifically to Anelixis since the date of acquisition.
During the measurement period, which extends no later than one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record certain adjustments to the carrying value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. After the measurement period, all adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as operating expenses or income.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the difference between the consideration transferred and the fair value of the net assets acquired under the acquisition method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment as of December 31 of each year or earlier if indicators of impairment exist that would, more likely than not, reduce the fair value from its carrying amount. No impairment was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company performs its goodwill impairment analysis at the reporting unit level, which aligns with the Company’s reporting structure and availability of discrete financial information. The Company performs its annual impairment analysis by either comparing the reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying amount or doing a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit’s fair value from the last quantitative assessment to determine if there is potential impairment. The Company may do a qualitative assessment when the results of the previous quantitative test indicated the reporting unit’s estimated fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying value of its net assets and it does not believe there have been significant changes in the reporting unit’s operations that would significantly decrease its estimated fair value or significantly increase its net assets. If a quantitative assessment is performed the evaluation includes management estimates of cash flow projections based on internal future projections and/or use of a market approach by looking at market values of comparable companies. Key assumptions for these projections include revenue growth, future gross and operating margin growth, and its weighted cost of capital and terminal growth rates. The revenue and margin growth are based on increased sales of new products as the Company maintains investments in research and development. Additional assumed value creators may include increased efficiencies from capital spending. The resulting cash flows are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital. Operating mechanisms and requirements to ensure that growth and efficiency assumptions will ultimately be realized are also considered in the evaluation, including timing and probability of regulatory approvals for Company products to be commercialized. The Company’s market capitalization is also considered as a part of its analysis.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include personnel and facility-related expenses, outside contracted services including clinical trial costs, manufacturing and process development costs, research costs and other consulting services and non-cash stock-based compensation. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Amounts due under contracts with third parties may be either fixed fee or fee for service, and may include upfront payments, monthly payments and payments upon the completion of milestones or receipt of deliverables. Non-refundable advance payments under agreements are capitalized and expensed as the related goods are delivered or services are performed.
The Company’s contracts with third parties to perform various clinical trial activities in the on-going development of potential products. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows to its vendors. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the achievement of certain events, successful enrollment of patients, and completion of portions of the clinical trial or similar conditions. The Company’s accrual for clinical trials is based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with clinical trial centers and clinical research organizations. These contracts may be terminated by the Company upon written notice and the Company is generally only liable for actual effort expended by the organizations to the date of termination, although in certain instances the Company may be further responsible for termination fees and penalties. The Company estimates its research and development expenses and the related accrual as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to the Company at that time. There have been no material adjustments to the Company’s prior period accrued estimates for clinical trial activities through December 31, 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
For stock options granted to employees and directors, the Company recognizes compensation expense for all stock-based awards based on the grant-date estimated fair value. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, using assumptions which are subjective and require significant judgment and estimation by management. The risk-free rate assumption was based on observed yields from governmental zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected volatility assumption was based on historical volatilities of a group of comparable industry companies whose share prices are publicly available. The peer group was developed based on companies in the pharmaceutical industry. The expected term of stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to be outstanding. Because the Company does not have historical exercise behavior, the Company determined the expected life assumption using the simplified method for stock options granted to employees, which is an average of the options ordinary vesting period and the contractual term. For stock options granted to the Board, the Company determined the expected life assumption using the simplified method as the starting point with an average period of twelve (12) months added to take into account for the extended range of time of 12 to 18 months vested stock options granted to Board members
may be exercised upon termination. The expected dividend assumption was based on the Company’s history and expectation of dividend payouts. The Company has not paid and does not expect to pay dividends at any time in the foreseeable future. The Company recognizes forfeitures on an actual basis and as such did not estimate forfeitures to calculate stock-based compensation.
Restricted Stock Units (“RSU”) and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (“PRSU”) are measured and recognized based on the quoted market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock options granted to nonemployees is recognized based on the estimated fair value of the stock options on their grant date, determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The awards generally vest over the period the Company expects to receive services from the nonemployees. Similar to stock options granted to employees, the fair value of stock options granted nonemployees, determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, involves assumptions that are subjective and require significant judgment and estimation by management. The risk-free rate assumption was based on observed yields from governmental zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected volatility assumption was based on historical volatilities of a group of comparable industry companies whose share prices are publicly available. The peer group was developed based on companies in the pharmaceutical industry. The expected term of stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to be outstanding. Because the Company does not have historical exercise behavior on stock options granted to nonemployees, the Company determined the contractual term is the appropriate period for expected life on stock options granted to nonemployees. The expected dividend assumption was based on the Company’s history and expectation of dividend payouts. The Company has not paid and does not expect to pay dividends at any time in the foreseeable future. The Company recognizes forfeitures on an actual basis and as such did not estimate forfeitures to calculate stock-based compensation.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides comparative results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in external costs related to the production of clinical trial materials and clinical development costs, primarily with external CRO’s of $7.0 million and $4.4 million, respectively, as we advance our tegoprubart program, an increase in professional and consulting fees of $2.2 million, as well as increases in personnel costs of $2.1 million, and stock-based compensation costs of $1.9 million, associated with the hiring of staff to build out our clinical and development capabilities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation costs and personnel costs of $2.8 million and $1.5 million, respectively, associated with increased headcount, an increase in professional and consulting fees of $1.4 million, and $0.3 million in higher general operating expenses. This was partially offset by a decrease in merger related costs of $2.9 million that were incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the Anelixis acquisition. No merger related expenses were recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Restructuring Expense
On June 11, 2020, following the prior announcement of topline results of the Phase 2a Clinical Trial of OP0201 in acute otitis media, the Board approved a reduction in force. Following the acquisition of Anelixis, the severance terms of certain terminated employees were modified. Additionally, on September 3, 2020, the Board accepted the resignation of Gregory Flesher as the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board. Mr. Flesher’s resignation was effective as of the close of business on September 4, 2020. The resignation of Mr. Flesher was not the result of any dispute or disagreement with the Company on any matter relating to the Company’s operations, policies or practices. Furthermore, following the acquisition of Anelixis, the severance terms of certain terminated employees were modified. The Company incurred charges totaling $2.3 million for the estimated cash payments related to employee separation costs, including severance and post-employment health benefits.
Other Income, Net
The decrease in other income, net, was primarily due to a decrease in interest income, partially offset by an increase in losses related to currency revaluation, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Warrant Inducement Expense
The Company recognized warrant inducement expense of $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the Warrant Exercise Transaction in addition to the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants issued. No warrant inducement expenses were recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021. (See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this filing).
Income Tax Benefit
The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to the current year change in deferred tax liability for the acquired IPR&D related to the Anelixis acquisition in 2020. The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $404,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the current year change in deferred tax liability for the acquired IPR&D related to the Anelixis acquisition.
Pro Forma Financial Information for Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table provides pro forma combined financial information presented to illustrate the estimated effects of the Anelixis acquisition based on the historical financial statements and accounting records of the Company and Anelixis after giving effect to the acquisition. This pro forma information is not necessarily indicative either of the combined results of operations that actually would have been realized by us had the Anelixis acquisition been consummated at the beginning of the period for which the pro forma information is presented, or of future results. Additionally, the pro forma combined financial information does not reflect any merger-related expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
To date, our operations have been financed primarily by net proceeds from the sale of preferred and common stock and warrants and the issuance of convertible promissory notes. In September 2020, we completed a $99.1 million Financing and in December 2020, we sold 1,004,111 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $9.0 million as part of the 2020 Purchase Agreement. On March 31, 2021, we filed the 2021 Prospectus under which we may offer and sell, from time to time, pursuant to an equity distribution agreement with Jeffries LLC, up to $75.0 million in shares of its common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, no shares were sold under the 2021 Prospectus.
We do not have any approved products for commercial sale and have never generated revenue from product sales and have incurred significant net losses since our inception and expect to continue to incur net operating losses for the foreseeable future. We do not expect to receive any revenue from any product candidates that we develop unless and until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize our product candidates or enter into collaborative arrangements with third parties. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $84.8 million, consisting of readily available cash and cash equivalents in bank accounts. While we believe our cash and cash equivalents are not subject to excessive risk, we maintain significant amounts of cash and cash equivalents at one or more financial institutions that are in excess of federally insured limits.
Material Cash Requirements
We believe our cash balance at December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could utilize our available resources sooner than we currently expect. Further our operating plan may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs for clinical studies sooner than planned or to fund additional clinical studies.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist of clinical research and development expenses, manufacturing expenses, legal and compliance expenses, compensation and related expenses, and general overhead costs. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay or prepay these expenses. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we expand our clinical program with
tegoprubart, continue the research and development of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
We will continue to require additional financing in order to advance our drug product through clinical development, to manufacture, obtain regulatory approval for and to commercialize our product candidates, to develop, acquire or in-license other potential product candidates, and to fund operations for the foreseeable future. Therefore, we will seek to raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. The ability to raise substantial additional capital will depend on many factors, including:
•
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of our ongoing and future clinical trials of tegoprubart, including as such activities may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the number and scope of indications we decide to pursue for tegoprubart development;
•
the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of any BLA, we may submit for tegoprubart;
•
the costs and timing of manufacturing for tegoprubart, if approved;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectualproperty-related claims;
•
our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of tegoprubart;
•
the costs associated with being a public company;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and
•
the cost associated with commercializing tegoprubart, if approved for commercial sale.
Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms on a timely basis, or at all. Any such failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies, and may cause us to delay the scope of or suspend one or more of our clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts, out-license intellectual property rights to our product candidates or sell unsecured assets, or a combination of the above. Any of these actions could materially harm our business. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, would result in fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. If we raise funds through collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. Please see the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements and the challenges we may face in raising capital.
We lease our office facilities in Irvine, California and Burlington, Massachusetts under non-cancelable operating leases that expire in December 2022 and November 2024, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to make total lease payments of $0.8 million through November 2024.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third-party contract organizations for preclinical and clinical studies, manufacture and supply of our preclinical and clinical materials and providing other services and products for operating purposes. Contracts for preclinical and clinicals studies and other services generally provide for termination following a certain period after notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. We do not have any long-term manufacturing and supply agreements with our third-party contract manufacturers but enter into specific contracts on an as needed basis for individual batch production runs.
See Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Recent Developments” for a discussion of additional sources of liquidity, including the Exercise Transaction and the Financing.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of our net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our net loss of $34.5 million, net deferred income taxes of $2.4 million, and a net decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million. partially offset by non-cash items consisting primarily of amortization of $0.2 million, and stock-based compensation totaling $7.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of our net loss of $22.8 million, net deferred income taxes of $0.4 million, partially offset by non-cash items consisting primarily of depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million, warrant inducement expense of $4.8 million, and stock-based compensation totaling $3.2 million. Additionally, cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected a net decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million, due to a decrease in operating lease liability.
There was no cash provided by or used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of cash and cash equivalents received from the acquisition of Anelixis.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was comprised of $0.5 million of offering costs accrued as of December 31, 2020 in connection with the sale of shares of common stock and paid during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was comprised of $95.2 million in net proceeds from the 2020 Purchase Agreement for the sale of 199,112 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock, $5.4 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants by stockholders to purchase approximately 0.4 million shares of common stock, and $9.0 million in net proceeds for the sale of approximately 1.0 million shares of common stock, offset by $25,000 of cash paid in connection with the cancellation of common stock related to the Company’s reverse stock-split.