Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a precision oncology company focused on the development of targeted therapeutics for the treatment of cancer in genomically defined patient populations. Our vision is to elevate precision medicine to the forefront of every cancer treatment journey, as we believe that each patient living with cancer deserves the opportunity to benefit from a genomically-driven treatment decision. We utilize our deep expertise in developing drugs for rare, genomically defined patient populations and strategic collaborations with our diagnostic collaborators to work towards a future where each tumor’s unique genomic test result can be matched with a purpose-built precision medicine.
We are focused on identifying oncogenic drivers that are known to be predominantly mutually exclusive with other driver alterations, and pursuing innovations and efficiencies in the conduct of clinical trials that we believe may enable development of targeted therapeutics against those oncogenic drivers.
Our lead program is focused on NRG1 fusions, which are rare genomic alterations that have recently been identified as oncogenic driver alterations and that we believe have the potential to be therapeutically actionable through targeted HER3 inhibition. We have designed and initiated our potentially registration-enabling Phase 2 CRESTONE trial to investigate the safety and efficacy of seribantumab, an anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody, in advanced solid tumors harboring an NRG1 fusion. We are conducting this trial in a tumor-agnostic fashion, such that any patient with a solid tumor that harbors an NRG1 fusion, regardless of the tissue of origin, may be eligible. We believe that the design and conduct of the CRESTONE trial has the possibility to produce results that may provide support for us to seek accelerated approval of seribantumab for patients with advanced solid tumors harboring an NRG1 fusion, subject to discussions with the FDA. Any accelerated marketing approval is subject to continued discussions with the FDA, and agreement on post-approval confirmatory trials to confirm an anticipated clinical benefit. If the CRESTONE trial meets its primary endpoint, and subject to continued discussions with the FDA, we anticipate submitting a BLA under an accelerated approval pathway for the treatment of patients with solid tumors harboring an NRG1 fusion. Even if the CRESTONE trial meets its primary endpoint, there can be no assurance that the FDA or other regulators will find such data sufficient to support a BLA submission or that additional trials will not be required. Further updates on the CRESTONE trial may be provided following additional information including, but not limited to, interactions with the FDA or other regulators, with whom we plan to discuss the interim clinical data and any resulting development pathways and opportunities. We expect to complete enrollment of the first 20 patients in Cohort 1 of the CRESTONE study in mid-2022, and to present initial clinical data from approximately 10 patients from Cohort 1 of the CRESTONE study treated with seribantumab at 3 grams weekly at a major medical meeting in mid-2022.
We were incorporated in April 2019. We have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our lead product candidate, initiating the CRESTONE clinical trial, building our intellectual property portfolio, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have financed our operations through private placements of convertible preferred stock and our IPO. On June 29, 2021, we closed our IPO and issued 6,250,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 per share, for net proceeds of $91.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other expenses of $8.9 million. In connection with the IPO, all shares of Series A and Series B convertible preferred stock outstanding automatically converted into 15,736,053 shares of common stock. On July 19, 2021, in connection with our IPO, the underwriters exercised the right to purchase 403,407 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 for net proceeds of $6.0 million. Prior to our IPO, we had received net proceeds of approximately $97.2 million from sales of our convertible preferred stock.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses on an aggregate basis. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $32.0 million and $17.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $55.2 million. These losses have resulted primarily from costs incurred in connection with research and development activities, acquisition, patent investment, and general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress, timing and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current or any future product candidates;
● disruptions or delays in enrollment of our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the extent to which we develop, in-license or acquire other pipeline product candidates or technologies;
● the number and development requirements of other future product candidates that we may pursue, and other indications for our current product candidates that we may pursue;
● the costs, timing and outcome of obtaining regulatory approvals of our current or future product candidates and any companion diagnostics we may pursue;
● the scope and costs of making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our current or future product candidates;
● the costs involved in growing our organization to the size needed to allow for the research, development and potential commercialization of our current or future product candidates;
● the costs associated with commercializing any approved product candidates, including establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
● the costs associated with completing any post-marketing studies or trials required by the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, or other regulatory authorities;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of seribantumab, if approved, or any other future product candidates that receive marketing approval;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims that we may become subject to, including any litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
● the costs associated with potential product liability claims, including the costs associated with obtaining insurance against such claims and with defending against such claims; and
● to the extent we pursue strategic collaborations, including collaborations to commercialize seribantumab or to develop any future product candidates, our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all, as well as the timing and amount of any milestone or royalty payments we are required to make or are eligible to receive under such collaborations, if any.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for seribantumab or our other future product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal
commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Further, upon the closing of this offering, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on favorable terms, or at all. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans. If we are unable to raise capital or debt when needed or on favorable terms, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs, our commercialization plans or other operations.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $146.3 million. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Impact of COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as contributing to significant volatility and negative pressure on the U.S. economy and in financial markets. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will continue to depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, new variants, the vaccination and booster rate, impact on our clinical studies, employee or industry events, and effect on our suppliers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
While we are currently continuing the clinical trials we have underway, COVID-19 precautions may directly or indirectly impact the timeline for some of our clinical trials. To date, we have been able to continue to enroll our patients in our Phase 2 CRESTONE clinical trial and currently do not anticipate any interruptions of clinical enrollment. However, we are continuing to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our current and future business and operations, including our expenses and clinical trials, as well as on our industry and the healthcare system.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including expenses, clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
Components of our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Our operating expenses since our inception have consisted solely of research and development costs and general and administrative costs. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development activities;
● external research and development expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of seribantumab, including expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, and consultants;
● costs incurred with contract manufacturing organizations that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials of seribantumab;
● fees paid to consultants for services directly related to our product development and regulatory efforts; and
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements related to conducting our clinical activity.
Research and development costs consist of salaries and benefits, including associated stock-based compensation, and fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We estimate preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions and contract research organizations, and clinical manufacturing organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf based on actual time and expenses incurred by them. Further, we accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and adjust estimates accordingly.
To date, all of our research and development expenses have been incurred to advance our lead product candidate, seribantumab. We expect that significant additional spending will be required to progress seribantumab through the remainder of its clinical development, as well as advance any future product candidate through clinical development. These expenses will primarily consist of expenses for the administration of clinical studies as well as manufacturing costs for clinical material supply. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates.
The successful development and commercialization of seribantumab or our other future product candidates is highly uncertain. The success of seribantumab, or any other future product candidate will depend on several factors, including the following:
● successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials, including our CRESTONE trial;
● acceptance of a BLA by the FDA, or other similar clinical trial applications from foreign regulatory authorities for seribantumab and our future clinical trials for our future product candidates;
● timely and successful enrollment of patients in, and completion of, clinical trials with favorable results;
● demonstration of safety, efficacy and acceptable risk-benefit profiles of our product candidates, including our lead product candidate, seribantumab, to the satisfaction of the FDA and foreign regulatory agencies;
● our ability, or that of our collaborators, to develop and obtain clearance or approval of companion diagnostics, on a timely basis, or at all;
● receipt and related terms of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities, including the completion of any required post-marketing studies or trials;
● raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of and commercialize our lead product candidate;
● successfully identifying future acquisition, collaboration or in-license candidates to expand our product candidate pipeline;
● obtaining and maintaining patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates, including our lead product candidate, seribantumab;
● making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our product candidates;
● developing and implementing marketing and reimbursement strategies;
● establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities and launching commercial sales of our products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● acceptance of our products, if and when approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
● effectively competing with other therapies;
● obtaining and maintaining third-party payor coverage and adequate reimbursement;
● protecting and enforcing our rights in our intellectual property portfolio; and
● maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
Many of these factors are beyond our control, and it is possible that none of our product candidates, including our lead product candidate, seribantumab, will ever obtain regulatory approval even if we expend substantial time and resources seeking such approval. If we do not achieve one or more of these factors in a timely manner or at all, we could experience significant delays or an inability to successfully commercialize our product candidates, which would materially harm our business. For example, our business could be substantially harmed if results of our ongoing CRESTONE clinical trial of seribantumab vary adversely from our expectations.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of increased payroll, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting, legal and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with stock exchange listing and SEC requirements, accounting and investor relations costs, and director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for seribantumab, or any of our future product candidates, we expect to incur
significant expenses related to building a sales and marketing team to support product sales, and marketing and distribution activities, to the extent that such activities are not supported by one or more third-party collaborators.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $8.1 million was primarily due to a $3.5 million increase in clinical trial expenses associated with the CRESTONE clinical trial, a $2.0 million increase in costs related to manufacturing clinical supply of seribantumab for use in the CRESTONE clinical trial, a $2.1 million increase in employee related costs, including stock-based compensation, and $0.5 million increase in other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $6.7 million was primarily due to an increase of $3.0 million personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, $1.5 million in director and officer and other insurance, $1.3 million of professional fees, and $0.9 million of other expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales or any other sources and have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever.
On June 29, 2021, we closed our IPO and issued 6,250,000 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $91.1 million. On July 19, 2021, in conjunction with our IPO, the underwriters exercised the right to purchase 403,407 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 per share for net proceeds of $6.0 million. Prior to our IPO, we had received net proceeds of approximately $97.2 million from the sale of our convertible preferred stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $146.3 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $30.2 million, which consisted primarily of our net loss of $32.0 million, partially offset by $1.6 million of stock-based compensation expense and $0.2 million of cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a decrease of $2.0 million in accrued expenses, due to the timing of payments related to research and development costs, partially offset by an increase of $1.7 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, due to increased insurance due to operating as of public company.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $12.3 million, which consisted primarily of our net loss of $17.3 million, partially offset by $4.9 million of cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of an increase of $6.2 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses, partially offset by an increase of $1.3 million of prepaid expenses and other assets. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was largely due to the timing of payments related to research and development costs.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, there was no cash used in or provided by investing activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 cash used in investing activities was $0.1 million, and consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $97.1 million, which consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the completion of our IPO.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 cash provided by financing activities was $90.0 million, which consisted primarily of net proceeds of $90.0 million from the sale and issuance of our Series A and Series B convertible preferred stock.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials for seribantumab, and seek to develop, in-license or acquire additional product candidates. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
● the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials, including CRESTONE;
● the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the cost to develop companion diagnostics as needed for each of our product candidates;
● our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and, if any of our product candidates are approved, commercial manufacturing;
● addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
● our efforts to enhance operational, financial and information management systems, and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
● the legal patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims; and
● the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone payments thereunder.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents of $146.3 million as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress, timing and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current or any future product candidates;
● disruptions or delays in enrollment of our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the extent to which we develop, in-license or acquire other pipeline product candidates or technologies;
● the number and development requirements of other future product candidates that we may pursue, and other indications for our current product candidates that we may pursue;
● the costs, timing and outcome of obtaining regulatory approvals of our current or future product candidates and any companion diagnostics we may pursue;
● the scope and costs of making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our current or future product candidates;
● the costs involved in growing our organization to the size needed to allow for the research, development and potential commercialization of our current or future product candidates;
● the costs associated with commercializing any approved product candidates, including establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
● the costs associated with completing any post-marketing studies or trials required by the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, or other regulatory authorities;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of seribantumab, if approved, or any other future product candidates that receive marketing approval;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims that we may become subject to, including any litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
● the costs associated with potential product liability claims, including the costs associated with obtaining insurance against such claims and with defending against such claims; and
● to the extent we pursue strategic collaborations, including collaborations to commercialize seribantumab or to develop any future product candidates, our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all, as well as the timing and amount of any milestone or royalty payments we are required to make or are eligible to receive under such collaborations, if any.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for seribantumab or our other future product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on favorable terms, or at all. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans. If we are unable to raise capital or debt when needed or on favorable terms, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs, our commercialization plans or other operations.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided and expenses incurred up to the date of cancellation.
In May 2019, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with the previous sponsor, pursuant to which we acquired all rights and interest to patents, know-how, and inventory for assets related to seribantumab. If we are successful in developing and commercializing seribantumab, we may be obligated to pay the previous sponsor up to $54.5 million in development, regulatory and sales milestone payments pursuant to the terms of the asset purchase agreement. Additionally, in conjunction with the asset purchase agreement with the previous sponsor, we assumed the rights and obligations under certain collaboration and license agreements which may require the payment of milestones and/or royalties on future sales of seribantumab. We are currently unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales. See “Business - Asset purchase, licensing and collaboration agreements” for additional information about these license agreements, including with respect to potential payments thereunder.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Costs and Accruals
Research and development costs consist of salaries and benefits, including associated stock-based compensation, and fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We estimate preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions and contract research organizations, and clinical manufacturing organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf based on actual time and expenses incurred by them. Further, we accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and adjusts estimates accordingly.
We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the services have been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We measure stock-based compensation expense at the accounting measurement date based on the fair value of the award and recognize the expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is typically the vesting period. Compensation expense is measured using the fair value of the award at the grant date and is adjusted to reflect actual forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model that takes into account the fair value of our common stock, the exercise price, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of our common stock, expected dividends on our common stock, and the risk-free interest rate over the expected life of the option.
Expected term - We use the simplified method described in the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 14.D.2 to calculate the expected term as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term for options granted to employees.
Expected volatility - We estimate expected volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our traded stock price.
Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curves whose terms are consistent with the expected term of the stock options.
Expected dividend - We have not issued any dividends and do not expect to issue dividends over the life of the options. As a result, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
We classify stock-based compensation expense in our statement of operations in the same manner in which the award recipient’s payroll costs or service payments are classified.
Determination of the Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to the Company’s IPO in June 2021, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock, our board of directors considered, among other things, the prices at which we sold convertible preferred stock and valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm, with input from management, in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock at the time, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including (1) our stage of development and our business strategy; (2) the progress of our research and development programs; (3) the illiquid nature of our common stock; (4) the prices at which we sold convertible preferred stock and the superior rights and preferences of the convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant; (5) external market conditions affecting the biotechnology industry, and trends within the biotechnology industry; (6) our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results; (7) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, or IPO, or a sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions; and (8) the analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in the biopharmaceutical industry.
As a public trading market for our common stock has been established, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. We classify stock-based compensation expense in our statement of operations in the same manner in which the award recipient’s payroll costs or service payments are classified.