ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S Discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Please see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, projected or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for 2021 as compared to 2020 are discussed below. For a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for 2020 as compared to 2019, please refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, except as set forth below.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company engaged in the science of ribosome modulation, leveraging both our innovative TURBO-ZM™ chemistry technology platform and our library of novel aminoglycosides in an effort to develop novel oral small molecule Ribosome Modulating Agents (“RMAs”) and Eukaryotic Ribosome Selective Glycosides (“ERSGs”), for the treatment of rare and ultra-rare premature stop codon diseases and ribosomal mutations. Premature stop codons are point mutations that disrupt the stability of the impacted messenger RNA (“mRNA”) and the protein synthesis from that mRNA. Additionally, certain mutations of the ribosome disrupt normal protein translation and are drivers of a subset of cancers.
We have multiple programs in our pipeline including a clinical program for the treatment of cystic fibrosis (“CF”) patients with nonsense (“Class 1 CF”) mutations, preclinical programs in Recessive Dystrophic (“RDEB”) and Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa (“JEB”) and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (“FAP”) and various earlier discovery stage programs in oncology. We are also actively looking to expand our programs by seeking new indications in other rare diseases for our lead compounds. In November 2021, we announced positive topline results from the monotherapy arms of a Phase 2 study evaluating the safety and activity of one of our ERSGs, ELX-02, in Class 1 CF patients with at least one G542X nonsense allele mutation. We have expanded this Phase 2 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy in Class 1 CF patients of a combination of ELX-02 and ivacaftor, an approved drug currently marketed for the treatment of certain CF patients under the trade name “Kalydeco.” The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) has granted Fast Track designation for ELX-02 for the treatment of CF patients with nonsense mutations. In addition, the FDA granted ELX-02 Orphan Drug Designation for the treatment of CF in July 2020 and the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) granted ELX-02 orphan medicinal product designation in September 2018.
In March 2022, we entered into an agreement with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (“CFF”) for an award of up to $15.9 million to fund the ongoing global Phase 2 clinical development of ELX-02 in CF. We received an upfront payment of $7.0 million in March 2022. The remaining $8.9 million of the award will be payable upon the achievement of certain clinical development milestones. Upon the successful commercialization of ELX-02, we will pay the CFF royalties based on future sales tiered on the actual level of funding from the CFF.
Acquisition of Zikani Therapeutics, Inc.
On April 1, 2021, the Company acquired Zikani Therapeutics, Inc. (“Zikani” and such acquisition, the “Zikani Merger”)), a company in preclinical development and engaged in the science of ribosome modulation, leveraging its innovative TURBO-ZMTM chemistry technology platform to develop novel RMAs as potential therapeutics for diseases with limited treatment options. The TURBO-ZMTM platform is designed to enable rapid synthesis of novel compounds that can be optimized to modulate the ribosome in a disease specific manner. The TURRBO-ZMTM synthetic chemistry platform can design oral novel macrolide-based small molecules that are potent oral modulators with favorable therapeutic indices. Macrolides are antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria.
As a result of the Zikani Merger, we expect the Company to emerge as a leader in the science of ribosome modulation through our complementary platforms and continued development of our library of RMAs and ERSGs. ELX-02, is a small molecule drug candidate designed to restore production of full-length functional proteins. The investigational therapy has shown strong activity across a full range of mutations in CF preclinical models. In Phase 1 testing, ELX-02 was generally well tolerated and demonstrated high bioavailability with consistent pharmacokinetics across both single and multiple-dose studies. The Phase 2 trials are designed to validate the safety of ELX-02 and assess its biological activity.
With the strength of our ELX-02 program for CF, the acquisition of Zikani provides us with the opportunity to amplify the potential of our innovative science by developing a new class of therapies to treat diseases with limited to no treatment options. The CFF has agreed to provide funding for a portion of this research. Our preclinical programs are focused on select rare diseases including inherited diseases, cancer caused by nonsense mutations, kidney diseases, including autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, as well as rare ocular genetic disorders. In addition, we plan to file an Investigational New Drug (“IND”) in 2022 for patients with nonsense mutations in Recessive Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (“RDEB”) and Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa (“JEB”). RDEB is an incurable, extremely painful and often fatal skin blistering condition caused by a lack of collagen type VII that is estimated to affect more than 3,000 people worldwide. JEB is the most severe form of Epidermolysis Bullosa, with most patients dying in infancy. By extending the application of ribosomal RNA modulation to the readthrough of nonsense mutations in tumor suppressor genes, we are also rapidly advancing preclinical research for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an inherited pre-cancerous colorectal disease frequently caused by nonsense mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. We plan to target rare diseases including genetic diseases and cancers caused by nonsense mutations.
Nonsense mutations cause approximately 10-12% of rare inherited diseases. ELX-02 along with the TURBO-ZMTM library of compounds are anticipated to significantly expand to include the treatment of many other rare diseases and certain cancers.
Under the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), the Company issued 7,596,810 shares of common stock in exchange for all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Zikani (the “Merger Consideration”). The Zikani Merger was accounted for as an asset acquisition with acquired in-process research and development which was immediately expensed.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Dollar amounts in the following table are in thousands:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $8.3 million. The increase was primarily related to an increase in salaries and other personnel related costs of $0.8 million, a $0.4 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, and a $5.9 million increase in expenses related to subcontractors, consultants and advisors in connection with continued development of ELX-02 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the prior year period expense, and an increase in $1.1 million related to operational facilities acquired with Zikani.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.6 million. The increase was primarily related to a $2.3 million increase in expenses attributable principally to infrastructure related costs including legal, accounting and other professional fees, $1.0 million related to severance charges, and $2.3 million related to stock-based compensation charges.
Acquired in-process research and development
Acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) expense of $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists of the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and consideration given in connection with the acquisition of the Zikani’s IPR&D. As the assets acquired were in the research and development phase and were determined to not have any alternative future use, such assets were expensed as acquired IPR&D. There was no such expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring charges
Restructuring charges of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the leadership and organizational realignment during the first quarter of 2020. The total included $1.9 million related to contract termination and employee separation costs (primarily severance and benefits) and $2.1 million of non-cash stock compensation, relating to accelerated vesting of executive stock awards. There were no similar charges during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other expense (income), net
We recorded $0.7 million in other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.4 million. The decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to the Company recognizing a $0.8 million gain on extinguishment of debt related to the forgiveness of the PPP Loan (defined below), offset by a $0.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt related to the repayment of the amounts outstanding under our existing term loan from SVB in September 2021.
Provision for income taxes and net operating loss carryforwards
There were no provisions for or benefits from income taxes recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of $158.8 million and $24.2 million, respectively, and federal research tax credit carryforwards of $5.9 million. Certain U.S. net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire, if not utilized, beginning in 2021 through 2037, and the research tax credits will expire beginning in 2022 through 2037. These NOL carryforwards could expire unused and be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities. Included in these U.S. federal NOL carryforwards are $82.5 million of NOLs generated after the effective date of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”), which are not subject to expiration, but may not be carried back and are only eligible to offset up to a maximum of 80% of taxable income generated in a given year. Under the Tax Act, federal net operating losses incurred beginning in 2018 and in future years may be carried forward indefinitely, but the deductibility of such federal net operating losses is limited. It is uncertain if and to what extent various U.S. states will conform to the newly enacted federal tax law. Also, as of December 31, 2021, we had Israeli NOL carryforwards of $99.3 million, which carry forward indefinitely.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $(66.7) million and $(34.6) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $(238.3) million. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through equity capital investments, and to a lesser extent, from loans and grants. We have devoted substantially all of our financial resources and efforts to research and development. We expect that it may be several years, if ever, before we receive regulatory approval and have a product candidate ready for commercialization. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. A successful transition to profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of revenue adequate to support our cost structure. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We anticipate that our expenses may increase if, and as, we:
•
advance ELX-02 and/or other product candidates further into clinical development;
•
experience additional delays in enrollment and completion of our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
continue the preclinical development of our research programs and advance candidates into clinical trials;
•
pursue regulatory authorization to conduct clinical trials of additional product candidates;
•
seek marketing approvals for our product candidates;
•
establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
hire additional clinical, regulatory, management and scientific personnel;
•
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel;
•
acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and
•
operate as a public company.
We may never achieve profitability, and unless and until we do, we will continue to need to raise additional cash to fund our operations. Although the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on clinical operations and trial enrollment cannot fully be determined, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $42.3 million at December 31, 2021, combined with the $7.0 million received from the CFF subsequent to the 2021 fiscal year end is not sufficient to maintain our current and planned operations for at least the next twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report. We will need to raise additional capital to finance our operations, which cannot be assured. We have concluded that these conditions, in aggregate, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern without additional funding through one year after the date these consolidated financial statements are issued.
In addition, as previously noted, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules for an aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million of which $12.5 million had been funded as of December 31, 2021. The term loan contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, which among others requires us to maintain at all times a minimum qualified cash balance equaling amounts ranging from $6.3 million to $10.0 million plus qualified accounts payable.
As of December 31, 2021 we were in compliance with all debt covenants. However, the inherent uncertainties described above may impact our ability to remain in compliance with these covenants over the next twelve months. If we breach our financial covenants and fail to secure a waiver or forbearance from the third-party lender, such breach or failure could accelerate the repayment of the outstanding borrowings under the Hercules agreement or the exercise of other rights or remedies the third-party lender may have under applicable law. No assurance can be provided that a waiver or forbearance will be granted or that the outstanding borrowings under the Hercules agreement, will be successfully refinanced on terms that are acceptable to the Company.
As previously noted, in March 2022, we entered into an agreement with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (“CFF”) for an award of up to $15.9 million to fund the ongoing global Phase 2 clinical development of ELX-02 in CF. We received an upfront payment of $7.0 million in March 2022. The remaining $8.9 million of the award will be payable upon the achievement of certain clinical development milestones. Upon the successful commercialization of ELX-02, we will pay the CFF royalties based on future sales tiered on the actual level of funding from the CFF.
Management intends to fund future operations through private or public debt or equity financing transactions and may seek additional capital through arrangements with strategic partners or from other sources. The availability of sufficient funding to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt are not within management’s control and cannot be assessed as being probable of occurring. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing, we will evaluate alternatives which may include reducing or deferring operating expenses, which may have a material adverse effect on our operations and future prospects.
Principal Financing Activities
Borrowing Activities
On September 30, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc., (“Hercules” or the “Lender”) Hercules agreed to extend term loans (the “Hercules Term Loan”) to the Company in an aggregate principal amount of up to $30.0 million, comprised of three tranches. The Company drew on the first tranche of $12.5 million on September 30, 2021 and used $7.7 million of the proceeds to repay the SVB loan principal, final payment, and early termination fees, resulting in net proceeds to us of $4.2 million, net of issuance related costs of $0.6 million. The remaining tranches totaling $17.5 million will be available to the Company based on achieving certain clinical and equity milestones during defined time periods. We will pay interest only on the outstanding principal on a monthly basis for the first 18 months of the agreement, which may be extended for an additional 12 months upon the achievement of certain milestones. Any amounts outstanding under the term loan advances, if not repaid sooner, are due and payable on April 1, 2025. On any date that we partially repay the outstanding obligations, the Company shall pay the Lenders a charge equal to 6.55% of the original principal amount.
On January 30, 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”), and WestRiver Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P. (together with SVB, the “Lenders”). Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Loan Agreement, the Lenders extended a term loan to us of $15.0 million. We commenced making payments on the outstanding principal balance of the loan on February 1, 2020, which was payable in 36 equal monthly installments. Amounts outstanding under the loan are due and payable on January 1, 2023. On September 30, 2021, in connection with the funding of the Hercules Term Loan Tranche 1 Advance, the Company voluntarily repaid in full the carrying value of the outstanding loan consisting of $6.7 million of principal, a final maturity payment of $0.9 million, and early termination fees of $0.1 million from funds received under the Hercules Loan Agreement. The debt issuance costs, the valuation of the warrants, and the final maturity payment of $0.9 million, had been recorded as a debt discount which were being accreted to interest expense through the maturity date of the loan. The remaining unamortized debt discount of $0.2 million and early termination fees were accounted for as a loss on debt extinguishment and included in other income and expense in the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In April 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with SVB under the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act”) and received loan proceeds of $0.8 million (the “PPP Loan”). We used the loan proceeds for payroll and other covered costs in accordance with the relevant terms and conditions of the CARES Act. The PPP Loan has an interest rate of 1.0% per annum. Under the terms of the PPP, on September 3, 2021, the PPP Loan was forgiven in full and the Company recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Equity Financings
On September 30, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, LLC (“SVB Leerink”) pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell up to $50.0 million of shares of its common stock (the “ATM Shares”) from time to time, through an “at the market offering” program (the “ATM Program”), under which SVB Leerink will act as sales agent. Pursuant to the Sales Agreement, the Company will set the parameters for the sale of
ATM Shares, including the number of ATM Shares to be issued, the time period during which sales are requested to be made, limitations on the number of ATM Shares that may be sold in any one trading day and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. The Company is not obligated to make any sales of Shares under the ATM Program. The Company had not sold any shares under the ATM Program as of December 31, 2021.
On May 13, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 38,333,334 shares of common stock at a price of $1.35 per share and received gross proceeds of approximately $51.8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $3.1 million and offering expenses of $0.8 million.
On June 24, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,334 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share and received net proceeds of approximately $34.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.1 million and estimated offering expenses of $0.2 million.
In November 2018, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., pursuant to which we may sell and issue shares of our common stock up to an aggregate of $50 million through the Sales Agents. The shares were offered pursuant to the April 2018 Shelf. For the year ended December 31, 2018, under the Agreement, we sold 201,100 shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $2.2 million. In January 2019, we sold 35,362 shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $0.7 million.
Government Grants from the Israeli Innovation Authority (“IIA”)
To date, we have received research and development grants from the IIA totaling $2.6 million. We did not receive any grants for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Under the research and development agreements with the IIA and pursuant to applicable law, we are required to pay royalties at the rate of 3% on sales to end customers of product candidates developed with funds provided by the IIA, up to an amount equal to 100% of the IIA research and development grants received, plus interest based on the 12-month LIBOR rate. If we do not generate sales of product candidates developed with funds provided by the IIA, we are not obligated to pay royalties or repay the grants.
As of December 31, 2021, we have not commenced the payment obligation of the royalties and have a contingent obligation with respect to royalty-bearing participation received or accrued, amounting to $2.8 million, including accrued LIBOR interest.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands):
Our operating activities used cash of $35 million and $28.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in operations resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash items and changes in working capital. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $66.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges primarily related to $22.7 million of acquired in-process research and development from the Zikani Merger, $9.2 million related to stock-based compensation expense, $0.8 million of amortization of lease assets, and $0.4 million of debt discount amortization. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net loss was $34.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $8.7 million related to stock-based compensation expense and $0.1 million of depreciation expense.
Our investing activities provided cash of $2.1 million and $33.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily related to $2.1 million of cash acquired as part of the Zikani Merger. Cash provided by investing activities
during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to $33.8 million of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities.
Our financing activities provided cash of $50.8 million and used cash of $3.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted primarily of net proceeds of $47.7 million from our public offering of common stock in May 2021, $2.9 million in advances received from collaboration partners, $11.9 million of net cash received from the Hercules term loan, offset by $11.3 million in SVB term loan principal and repayments and final loan payment, and $0.3 million related to the settlement of taxes upon vesting of restricted stock units. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities consisted primarily of $4.6 million in term loan principal repayments, offset by $0.8 million received from the PPP Loan and $0.4 million in advances received from collaboration partners.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these annual consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies related to accrued expenses and accrued clinical trial costs and contract research liabilities are the most critical accounting policies for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Expenses and Accrued Clinical Trial Costs and Contract Research Liabilities
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves identifying services which have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for such service as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements. Given our current business, the primary area of uncertainty concerning accruals which could have a material effect on our operating results is with respect to service fees paid to contract manufacturers in conjunction with the production of clinical drug supplies, and to contract research organizations in connection with our pre-clinical research and clinical trials. In connection with all of the foregoing service fees, our estimates are most affected by our understanding of the status and timing of services provided. The majority of our service providers, including contract research organizations, invoice us in arrears for services performed. In the event that we do not identify some costs which have begun to be incurred, or we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services in a given period, our reported expenses for such period would be understated or overstated. We currently reflect the effects of any changes in estimates based on changes in facts and circumstances directly in our statement of operations in the period such change becomes known.
Our arrangements with contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials often provide for payment prior to commencing the project or based upon predetermined milestones throughout the period during which services are expected to be performed. We recognize expense relating to these arrangements based on the various services provided over the estimated time to completion. The date on which services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date, and the cost of such services are often determined based on subjective judgments. We make these judgments based upon the facts and circumstances known to us based on the terms of the contract and our ongoing monitoring of service performance. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had arrangements with multiple contract research organizations whereby these organizations commit to performing services for us over multiple reporting periods. We recognize the expenses associated with these arrangements based on our expectation of the timing of the performance of components under these arrangements by
these organizations. Generally, these components consist of the costs of setting up the trial, monitoring the trial, closing the trial and preparing the resulting data. Costs related to patient enrollment in clinical trials are accrued as patients are enrolled in the trial.
With respect to financial reporting periods presented in this Annual Report, the timing of our actual costs incurred have not differed materially from our estimated timing of such costs. In light of the foregoing, we do not believe our practices for estimating future expenses and making judgments concerning the accrual of expenses are reasonably likely to change in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined under Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.