Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated due to various factors discussed under “Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table contains selected financial information, for the periods indicated, from our statements of comprehensive income (loss) expressed as a percentage of net sales.
The following paragraphs discuss the Company’s performance for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Comparison of 2021 vs 2020 (dollars in thousands)
Net Sales
Net sales for 2021 were $8,607, an increase of $986, or 12.9%, from $7,621 in 2020. The increase in sales was driven primarily by increased domestic orders for agricultural and industrial automation applications. International sales during the year were flat as compared to the prior year, with increased sales to Canada primarily offset by decreased sales to China.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for 2021 increased $747, or 19.0%, to $4,677 from $3,930 in 2020. Gross margin in 2021 was 54.3% compared to 51.6% in 2020. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to improved factory and overhead utilization resulting from higher levels of manufacturing to support the increase in net sales.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses increased $102, or 2.5%, to $4,236 in 2021 from $4,134 in 2020, but decreased as a percentage of net sales to 49.3% from 54.3%. The increase in operating expense dollars was primarily due to increases in legal and other professional fees and contract engineering for product enhancements.
●
Selling and marketing expenses decreased $239, or 14.8%, to $1,373 in 2021 from $1,612 in 2020, and decreased as a percentage of net sales to 16.0% from 21.2%. The decrease was primarily from lower sales headcount, partially offset by an increase in tradeshow related expenses.
●
General and administrative expenses increased $301, or 17.9%, to $1,987 in 2021 from $1,686 in 2020, and increased slightly as a percentage of net sales to 23.1% from 22.1%. The higher expenses were primarily due to legal and other professional fees related to the Company's increased corporate and business development activities, partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense related to HazardPRO technology which was fully amortized in the third quarter of 2021.
●
Research and development expenses increased $40, or 4.8%, to $876 in 2021 compared to $836 in 2020, but decreased as a percentage of net sales to 10.2% from 11.0%. The increase was primarily due to higher contract engineering costs related to product enhancements.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income was $441 in 2021 compared to an operating loss of $204 in 2020, an increase of $645, or 316.2%. The increase to operating income was primarily related to the increase in net sales and gross margin.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income decreased $14 to $18 in 2021 from $32 in 2020, primarily as a result of less interest income earned as a result of lower interest rates on Treasury Bills, partially offset by an increase in the value of our investment in a non-publicly traded company.
Equity securities are stated at fair value, and unrealized holding gains and losses are reported in our statement of comprehensive income (loss) in the non-operating income (expense) section. All other available-for-sale securities are stated at fair value, and unrealized holding gains and losses, net of the related deferred tax effect, are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
Realized gains and losses, including losses from declines in value of specific securities determined by management to be other-than-temporary, are included in the statement of comprehensive income (loss). Realized gains and losses are determined on the basis of the specific securities sold.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $49 in 2021 compared to an income tax benefit of $48 in 2020. The increase in the tax expense was due primarily to net income before income taxes in 2021 compared to a net loss before income taxes in 2020. Detailed information on our income tax provision is provided in Note 11 to our financial statements.
Net Income (Loss)
We reported a net income of $410 in 2021 compared to net loss of $124 in 2020, an increase of $534, or 430.6%. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $0.12 and $-0.04 in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements or obligations that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material effect on our financial condition, changes in the financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash and cash equivalents were $6,713 and $1,090 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was due to the fact that at December 31, 2021 we held the majority of available funds in assets defined as cash and cash equivalents. At December 31, 2020, we held the majority of available funds in assets defined as investments. Working capital was $11,931 at December 31, 2021 compared to $11,323 at December 31, 2020.
Cash generated from operating activities increased $438 to $769 in 2021 from $331 in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net income, partially offset by net increases in trade receivables and inventories. The 2021 net income compared to the 2020 net loss was due to increased sales and gross margin. The increase in trade receivables was primarily due to increased net sales. The increase in inventories was due to the timing of inventory receipts. We are purchasing key components as they are available due to increased lead times and uncertainty of deliveries.
Cash generated from investing activities in 2021 was $4,860, compared to cash used in investing activities $8,020 in 2020. The increase in cash generated was due to a decrease in purchases of Treasury Bills classified as investments. In addition, we purchased $141 and $25 of property, equipment, and intangibles in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash used in financing activities during 2021 and 2020 was $6. The cash used was for principal payments on a financing lease on right-to-use assets.
Subject to the following section, entitled COVID-19 Pandemic Discussion, the Company believes its ongoing cash usage requirements will be primarily for capital expenditures, potential acquisitions, investments we believe present good opportunities for the Company and its shareholders, research and development, working capital, and growth initiatives. Management believes that cash on hand and any cash provided by operations will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements through at least the next 12 months.
COVID-19 Pandemic Discussion
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect our operations, including limiting our ability to travel and fully engage customers at their facilities. While many regions of the US have reduced the severe restrictions implemented during 2020, many customers continue to operate under modified restrictions based on the number of COVID-19 cases. The uncertainty surrounding the ongoing fluctuations in regional case counts creates uncertainty in our business and may negatively affect our 2022 financial results.
We typically have robust sources for production components and materials. However, we are increasingly experiencing significant disruptions in our supply chain, resulting in difficulty sourcing parts. Additionally, we are experiencing substantial price increases for many of the components used in our products. In certain situations, we are modifying product designs to accommodate new components that are more readily available. There is no guarantee that we will continue to be successful in updating these designs and sourcing alternative components, and we could experience significant delays or run out of certain components and materials. We are also seeing delays in shipping and transportation services, which may adversely affect our ability to make timely deliveries to our customers. Furthermore, the labor market for qualified employees able to fill our production positions is challenging and may result in delays in filling open positions. While we continue to closely manage each of these activities, our actions may not be successful and may result in a negative effect on our sales and profit margins.
As of the date of this filing, we expect our business may be negatively affected but cannot currently determine the significance and duration of the pandemic on our business.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make decisions based upon estimates, assumptions, and factors it considers relevant to the circumstances. Those decisions include the selection of applicable accounting principles and the use of judgment in their application, the results of which affect reported amounts and disclosures. Changes in economic conditions or other business circumstances may affect the outcomes of management’s estimates and assumptions.
Significant estimates, including the underlying assumptions, consist of the economic lives of long-lived assets, realizability of trade receivables, valuation of deferred tax assets/liabilities, inventory, investments, and stock compensation expense. It is at least reasonably possible that these estimates may change in the near term.
Economic lives of long-lived assets
We estimate the economic useful life of long-lived assets used in the business. Expected asset lives may be shortened or an impairment may be recorded based on a change in the expected use of the asset. If the expected life of an asset is shortened or an impairment recorded, it could result in an additional charge to depreciation expense.
Realizability of trade receivables
We estimate our allowance for doubtful accounts based on prior history and the aging of our trade receivables. We are unable to predict which, if any, of our customers will be unable to pay their open invoices at a future date. If an account becomes uncollectible and we are required to write off the balance, we would recognize the amount of the additional expense within general and administrative expenses.
Valuation of deferred tax assets/liabilities
We estimate our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on current tax laws and rates. The tax laws and rates could change in the future to either disallow the deductions or increase/decrease the tax rates. We recognize changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period in which the tax law changes become effective. Any change in our deferred tax assets or liabilities could have a material negative or positive effect on our income tax expense.
Valuation of inventory
We purchase inventory based on estimated demand of products. It is possible that the inventory we have purchased will not be used in the products that our customers need or will not meet future technological requirements. If we are unable to use the inventory in our products and it does not meet future technological requirements, we would be required to remove the items from inventory and expense the amount in cost of goods sold.
Valuation of investments
Our investments in available-for-sale securities are valued at market prices in an open market. The prices are subject to the normal fluctuations that could be either negative or positive. Even though these equity securities were only valued at $56 at December 31, 2021, changes in the value of these equity securities could affect our profitability as the value fluctuates. Any change in the value of these equity securities could have a material negative or positive effect on our profitability. Changes in the value of our Treasury Bills do not affect our profitability until the Treasury Bill is sold. At the time of sale, we recognize the interest earned on the Treasury Bill.
Valuation of stock-based compensation expense
We estimate the expected life and forfeiture rates of stock options granted when calculating the value of options using the Black-Scholes-Merton model. The actual life and forfeiture rate could differ from what we estimated. Changes in the life or forfeiture rate of stock options could have a negative or positive impact on our stock-based compensation.
Additional information regarding our significant accounting policies is provided below in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Financial Statements, Note 1, Nature of Business and Significant Accounting Policies.