Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand our business, our results of operations and our financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” and "Note About Forward-Looking Statements" sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. We generally refer to loans, customers and other information and data associated with each of our brands (Rise, Elastic and Today Card) as Elevate’s loans, customers, information and data, irrespective of whether Elevate directly originates the credit to the customer or whether such credit is originated by a third party.
OVERVIEW
We provide online credit solutions to consumers in the US who are not well-served by traditional bank products and who are looking for better options than payday loans, title loans, pawn and storefront installment loans. Non-prime consumers now represent a larger market than prime consumers but are risky to underwrite and serve with traditional approaches. We’re succeeding at it - and doing it responsibly - with best-in-class advanced technology and proprietary risk analytics honed by serving more than 2.7 million customers with $9.8 billion in credit. Our current online credit products, Rise, Elastic and Today Card, reflect our mission to provide customers with access to competitively priced credit and services while helping them build a brighter financial future with credit building and financial wellness features. We call this mission "Good Today, Better Tomorrow."
Prior to June 29, 2020, we provided services in the United Kingdom ("UK") through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Elevate Credit International Limited (“ECIL”) under the brand name ‘Sunny.’ During the year ended December 31, 2018, ECIL began to receive an increased number of customer complaints initiated by claims management companies ("CMCs") related to the affordability assessment of certain loans. The CMCs' campaign against the high cost lending industry increased significantly during the third and fourth quarters of 2018 and continued through 2019 and into the first half of 2020, resulting in a significant increase in affordability claims against all companies in the industry over this period. The Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"), a regulator in the UK financial services industry, began regulating the CMCs in April 2019 in order to ensure that the methods used by the CMCs are in the best interests of the consumer and the industry. Separately, the FCA asked all industry participants to review their lending practices to ensure that such companies are using an appropriate affordability and creditworthiness analysis. However, there continued to be a lack of clarity within the regulatory environment in the UK. This lack of clarity, coupled with the ongoing impact of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 ("COVID-19") on the UK market for Sunny, led the ECIL board of directors to place ECIL into administration under the UK Insolvency Act 1986 and appoint insolvency practitioners from KPMG LLP to take control and management of the UK business. As a result, we have deconsolidated ECIL and are presenting its results as discontinued operations.
We earn revenues on the Rise installment loans, on the Rise and Elastic lines of credit and on the Today Card credit card product. Our revenue primarily consists of finance charges and line of credit fees. Finance charges are driven by our average loan balances outstanding and by the average annual percentage rate (“APR”) associated with those outstanding loan balances. We calculate our average loan balances by taking a simple daily average of the ending loan balances outstanding for each period. Line of credit fees are recognized when they are assessed and recorded to revenue over the life of the loan. We present certain key metrics and other information on a “combined” basis to reflect information related to loans originated by us and by our bank partners that license our brands, Republic Bank, FinWise Bank and Capital Community Bank ("CCB"), as well as loans originated by third-party lenders pursuant to CSO programs, which loans originated through CSO programs are not recorded on our balance sheets in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Key Financial and Operating Metrics” and “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
We use our working capital and our credit facility with Victory Park Management, LLC ("VPC” and the "VPC Facility") to fund the loans we directly make to our Rise customers. The VPC Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $200 million at December 31, 2021. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities.”
We also license our Rise installment loan brand to two banks. FinWise Bank originates Rise installment loans in 17 states. This bank initially provides all of the funding, retains 4% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining 96% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to a third-party SPV, EF SPV, Ltd. ("EF SPV"). These loan participation purchases are funded through a separate financing facility (the "EF SPV Facility"), and through cash flows from operations generated by EF SPV. The EF SPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $250 million. We do not own EF SPV, but we have a credit default protection agreement with EF SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in EF SPV against Rise loan losses in return for a credit premium. Elevate is required to consolidate EF SPV as a variable interest entity ("VIE") under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 96% of the Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and sold to EF SPV.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we also license our Rise installment loan brand to an additional bank, CCB, which originates Rise installment loans in three different states than FinWise Bank. Similar to the relationship with FinWise Bank, CCB initially provides all of the funding, retains 5% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining 95% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to a third-party SPV, EC SPV, Ltd. ("EC SPV"). These loan participation purchases are funded through a separate financing facility (the "EC SPV Facility"), and through cash flows from operations generated by EC SPV. The EC SPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $100 million. We do not own EC SPV, but we have a credit default protection agreement with EC SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in EC SPV against Rise loan losses in return for a credit premium. Elevate is required to consolidate EC SPV as a VIE under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 95% of the Rise installment loans originated by CCB and sold to EC SPV.
The Elastic line of credit product is originated by a third-party lender, Republic Bank, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. Republic Bank retains 10% of the balances of all loans originated and sells a 90% loan participation in the Elastic lines of credit. An SPV structure was implemented such that the loan participations are sold by Republic Bank to Elastic SPV, Ltd. (“Elastic SPV”) and Elastic SPV receives its funding from VPC in a separate financing facility (the “ESPV Facility”), which was finalized on July 13, 2015. We do not own Elastic SPV but we have a credit default protection agreement with Elastic SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in Elastic SPV against Elastic loan losses in return for a credit premium. Per the terms of this agreement, under US GAAP, we are the primary beneficiary of Elastic SPV and are required to consolidate the financial results of Elastic SPV as a VIE in our consolidated financial results. The ESPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount of $350 million as of December 31, 2021.
Today Card is a credit card product designed to meet the spending needs of non-prime consumers by offering a prime customer experience. Today Card is originated by CCB under the licensed MasterCard brand, and a 95% participation interest in the credit card receivable is sold to us. These credit card receivable purchases are funded through a separate financing facility (the "TSPV Facility"), and through cash flows from operations generated by the Today Card portfolio. The TSPV Facility has a maximum commitment amount of $50 million, which may be increased up to $100 million. As the lowest APR product in our portfolio, Today Card allows us to serve a broader spectrum of non-prime Americans. The Today Card experienced significant growth in its portfolio size despite the pandemic due to the success of our direct mail campaigns, the primary marketing channel for acquiring new Today Card customers. We are following a specific growth plan to grow the product while monitoring customer responses and credit quality. Customer response to the Today Card is very strong, as we continue to see extremely high response rates, high customer engagement, and positive customer satisfaction scores.
Our management assesses our financial performance and future strategic goals through key metrics based primarily on the following three themes:
•Revenue growth. Key metrics related to revenue growth that we monitor by product include the ending and average combined loan balances outstanding, the effective APR of our product loan portfolios, the total dollar value of loans originated, the number of new customer loans made, the ending number of customer loans outstanding and the related customer acquisition costs (“CAC”) associated with each new customer loan made. We include CAC as a key metric when analyzing revenue growth (rather than as a key metric within margin expansion).
•Stable credit quality. Since the time they were managing our legacy US products, our management team has maintained stable credit quality across the loan portfolio they were managing. Additionally, in the periods covered in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we have maintained our strong credit quality. The credit quality metrics we monitor include net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues, the combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of outstanding combined loans, total provision for loan losses as a percentage of revenues and the percentage of past due combined loans receivable - principal.
•Margin expansion. We aim to manage our business to achieve a long-term operating margin of 20%. In periods of significant loan portfolio growth, our margins may become compressed due to the upfront costs associated with marketing and credit provisioning expense associated with this growth. As we continue to rebuild and scale our portfolio from the impacts of COVID-19, we anticipate that our direct marketing costs primarily associated with new customer acquisitions will be approximately 10% of revenues and our operating expenses will decline to 20% of revenues. While our operating margins may exceed 20% in certain years, such as in 2020 when we incurred lower levels of direct marketing expense and materially lower credit losses due to a lack of customer demand for loans resulting from the effects of COVID-19, we do not expect our operating margin to increase beyond that level over the long-term, as we intend to pass on any improvements over our targeted margins to our customers in the form of lower APRs. We believe this is a critical component of our responsible lending platform and over time will also help us continue to attract new customers and retain existing customers.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictive measures taken by governments, businesses and individuals caused unprecedented uncertainty, volatility and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial and consumer activity in the United States, including the markets that we serve. As the restrictive measures have been eased in certain geographic locations, the U.S. economy has begun to recover, and with the availability and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, we anticipate continued improvements in commercial and consumer activity and the U.S. economy. While positive signs exist, we recognize that certain of our customers are experiencing varying degrees of financial distress, which may continue, especially if new COVID-19 variant infections increase and new economic restrictions are mandated.
In 2020, we experienced a significant decline in the loan portfolio due to a lack of customer demand for loans resulting from the effects of COVID-19 and related government stimulus programs. These impacts resulted in a lower level of direct marketing expense and materially lower credit losses during 2020 and continuing into early 2021. Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we experienced a return of demand for the loan products that we, and the bank originators we support, offer, resulting in significant growth in the loan portfolio from that point. This significant loan portfolio growth is resulting in compressed margins in 2021 due to the upfront costs associated with marketing and credit provisioning expense related to growing and “rebuilding” the loan portfolio from the impacts of COVID-19. We continue to target loan portfolio originations within our target CACs of $250-$300 and credit quality metrics of 45-55% of revenue which, when combined with our expectation of continuing customer loan demand for our portfolio products, we believe will allow us to return to our historical performance levels prior to COVID-19 after initially resulting in earnings compression.
Both we and the bank originators are closely monitoring the key credit quality indicators such as payment defaults, continued payment deferrals, and line of credit utilization. While we initially anticipated that the COVID-19 pandemic would have a negative impact on our credit quality, instead the monetary stimulus programs provided by the US government to our customer base have generally allowed customers to continue making payments on their loans. At the beginning of the pandemic, we expected an increase in net charge-offs as compared to prior periods but experienced historically low net charge-offs as a percentage of revenue in the second half of 2020 and early 2021. With the increased volume of new customer loans expected to be originated as we grow our loan portfolio back to our pre-pandemic size and the ending of government assistance, we expect an initial increase in net charge-offs in excess of our targeted range with a return of net charge-offs to our targeted range of 45-55% of revenue as the portfolio becomes more seasoned with a balance of new and returning customers. Further, we believe that the allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb the losses inherent in the portfolio as of December 31, 2021.
We have implemented a hybrid remote environment where employees may choose to work primarily from the office or from home and gather collectively in the office on a limited basis. We have sought to ensure our employees feel secure in their jobs, have flexibility in their work location and have the resources they need to stay safe and healthy. As a 100% online lending solutions provider, our technology and underwriting platform has continued to serve our customers and the bank originators that we support without any material interruption in services.
COVID-19 has had a significant adverse impact on our business, and while uncertainty still exists, we believe we are well-positioned to operate effectively through the present economic environment and expect continued loan portfolio growth and strong credit quality into the next year. We will continue assessing our minimum cash and liquidity requirement, monitoring our debt covenant compliance and implementing measures to ensure that our cash and liquidity position is maintained through the current economic cycle.
KEY FINANCIAL AND OPERATING METRICS
As discussed above, we regularly monitor a number of metrics in order to measure our current performance and project our future performance. These metrics aid us in developing and refining our growth strategies and in making strategic decisions.
Certain of our metrics are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that such metrics are useful in period-to-period comparisons of our core business. However, non-GAAP financial measures are not an alternative to any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of our non-GAAP measures to US GAAP.
Revenues
_________
(1)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using an average of daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances.
(3)Average customer loan balance is an average of all three products and is calculated for each product by dividing the ending Combined loans receivable - principal by the number of loans outstanding at period end.
Revenues. Our revenues are composed of Rise finance charges, Rise CSO fees (which are fees we receive from customers who obtain a loan through the CSO program for the credit services, including the loan guaranty, we provide), revenues earned on the Elastic line of credit, and finance charges and fee revenues from the Today Card credit card product. See “-Components of our Results of Operations-Revenues.”
Ending and average combined loans receivable - principal. We calculate the average combined loans receivable - principal by taking a simple daily average of the ending combined loans receivable - principal for each period. Key metrics that drive the ending and average combined loans receivable - principal include the amount of loans originated in a period and the average customer loan balance. All loan balance metrics include only the 90% participation in the related Elastic line of credit advances (we exclude the 10% held by Republic Bank), the 96% participation in FinWise Bank originated Rise installment loans and the 95% participation in CCB originated Rise installment loans and the 95% participation in the CCB originated Today Card credit card receivables, but include the full loan balances on CSO loans, which are not presented on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Total combined loans originated - principal. The amount of loans originated in a period is driven primarily by loans to new customers as well as new loans to prior customers, including refinancing of existing loans to customers in good standing.
Average customer loan balance and effective APR of combined loan portfolio. The average loan amount and its related APR are based on the product and the underlying credit quality of the customer. Generally, better credit quality customers are offered higher loan amounts at lower APRs. Additionally, new customers have more potential risk of loss than prior or existing customers due to lack of payment history and the potential for fraud. As a result, newer customers typically will have lower loan amounts and higher APRs to compensate for that additional risk of loss. The effective APR is calculated based on the actual amount of finance charges generated from a customer loan divided by the average outstanding balance for the loan and can be lower than the stated APR on the loan due to waived finance charges and other reasons. For example, a Rise customer may receive a $2,000 installment loan with a term of 24 months and a stated rate of 130%. In this example, the customer’s monthly installment loan payment would be $236.72. As the customer can prepay the loan balance at any time with no additional fees or early payment penalty, the customer pays the loan in full in month eight. The customer’s loan earns interest of $1,657.39 over the eight-month period and has an average outstanding balance of $1,912.37. The effective APR for this loan is 130% over the eight-month period calculated as follows:
($1,657.39 interest earned / $1,912.37 average balance outstanding) x 12 months per year = 130%
8 months
In addition, as an example for Elastic, if a customer makes a $2,500 draw on the customer’s line of credit and this draw required bi-weekly minimum payments of 5% (equivalent to 20 bi-weekly payments), and if all minimum payments are made, the draw would earn finance charges of $1,125. The effective APR for the line of credit in this example is 107% over the payment period and is calculated as follows:
($1,125.00 fees earned / $1,369.05 average balance outstanding) x 26 bi-weekly periods per year = 107%
20 payments
The actual total revenue we realize on a loan portfolio is also impacted by the amount of prepayments and charged-off customer loans in the portfolio. For a single loan, on average, we typically expect to realize approximately 60% of the revenues that we would otherwise realize if the loan were to fully amortize at the stated APR. From the Rise example above, if we waived $350 of interest for this customer, the effective APR for this loan would decrease to 103%. From the Elastic example above, if we waived $125 of fees for this customer, the effective APR for this loan would decrease to 95%.
Number of new customer loans. We define a new customer loan as the first loan or advance made to a customer for each of our products (so a customer receiving a Rise installment loan and then at a later date taking their first cash advance on an Elastic line of credit would be counted twice). The number of new customer loans is subject to seasonal fluctuations. New customer acquisition is typically slowest during the first six months of each calendar year, primarily in the first quarter, compared to the latter half of the year, as our existing and prospective customers usually receive tax refunds during this period and, thus, have less of a need for loans from us. Further, many customers will use their tax refunds to prepay all or a portion of their loan balance during this period, so our overall loan portfolio typically decreases during the first quarter of the calendar year. Overall loan portfolio growth and the number of new customer loans tends to accelerate during the summer months (typically June and July), at the beginning of the school year (typically late August to early September) and during the winter holidays (typically late November to early December).
Customer acquisition costs. A key expense metric we monitor related to loan growth is our CAC. This metric is the amount of direct marketing costs incurred during a period divided by the number of new customer loans originated during that same period. New loans to former customers are not included in our calculation of CAC (except to the extent they receive a loan through a different product) as we believe we incur no material direct marketing costs to make additional loans to a prior customer through the same product.
The following tables summarize the changes in customer loans by product for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Recent trends. Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $416.6 million, a decrease of 10% versus the prior year period. Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $465.3 million, a decrease of 27% versus the prior year period. Both the Rise and Elastic products experienced a year-over-year decline in revenues of 12% and 11%, respectively, which were attributable to reductions in year-to-date average loan balances due to the economic crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in March 2020, which resulted in substantial government assistance to our potential customers that lowered demand for our products, and a lower Rise effective APR. This decline in revenue was partially offset by a year-over-year increase in revenues for the Today Card product, which more than tripled its average principal balance outstanding year-over year. We believe Today Card balances have increased despite the impact of COVID-19 due to the nature of the product (credit card versus installment loan or lines of credit), the lower APR of the product (effective APR of 31% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to Rise at 103% and Elastic at 94%) as customers receiving stimulus payments would be more apt to pay down more expensive forms of credit, and the added convenience of having a credit card for online purchases of day-to-day items such as groceries or clothing (whereas the primary usage of a Rise installment loan or Elastic line of credit is for emergency financial needs such as a medical deductible or automobile repair).
We are currently experiencing an increase in new and former customers as demand for the loan products provided by us and the bank originators began to return during the second quarter of 2021. This is in contrast to 2020 and early 2021 when the portfolio of loan products experienced significantly decreased loan demand for both new and former customers due to COVID-19, including the effects of monetary stimulus provided by the US government reducing demand for loan products. All three of our products experienced an increase in principal loan balances in 2021 compared to a year ago. Rise and Elastic principal balances at December 31, 2021 totaled $310.5 million and $199.7 million, respectively, up $82.2 million and $42.3 million, respectively, from a year ago. Today Card principal loan balances at December 31, 2021 totaled $48.6 million, up $34.5 million from a year ago.
Our CAC was lower in the year ended December 31, 2021 at $247 as compared to the prior year at $297, with the prior year not reflective of our historical CAC due to the significant reduction in new loan originations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our 2021 loan volume is being sourced from all our marketing channels including direct mail, strategic partners and digital. We’ve seen a marked improvement in loan volume from our strategic partners channel where we have improved our technology and risk capabilities to interface with the strategic partners via our application programming interface (APIs) that we developed within our new technology platform, Blueprint™. Blueprint™ will allow us to more efficiently acquire new customers within our targeted CAC range. We believe our CAC in future quarters will continue to remain within or below our target range of $250 to $300 as we continue to optimize the efficiency of our marketing channels and continue to grow the Today Card which successfully generated new customers at a sub-$100 CAC.
Credit quality
_________
(1)Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses are not financial measures prepared in accordance with US GAAP. Net charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due (Rise and Elastic) or 120 days past due (Today Card), or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud, offset by any recoveries. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation to Provision for loan losses, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(3)Combined loan loss reserve is defined as the loan loss reserve for loans originated and owned by us plus the loan loss reserve for loans owned by third-party lenders and guaranteed by us. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loan loss reserve to Allowance for loan losses, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(1)Net principal charge-offs is comprised of gross principal charge-offs less recoveries.
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using an average of daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances during each quarter.
(3)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
The above chart depicts the historically low charge-off metrics from the third quarter of 2020 through the third quarter of 2021, due to COVID-19 pandemic impacts such as a lack of new customer demand, our implementation of payment assistance tools, and government stimulus payments received by our customers. Net principal charge-offs as a percentage of average combined loans receivable-principal for the fourth quarter of 2021 has returned to the levels consistent with 2019 due to the volume of new customers being originated as we rebuild the portfolio from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and return to a more normalized credit profile.
In reviewing the credit quality of our loan portfolio, we break out our total provision for loan losses that is presented on our statements of operations under US GAAP into two separate items-net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses. Net charge-offs are indicative of the credit quality of our underlying portfolio, while additional provision for loan losses is subject to more fluctuation based on loan portfolio growth, recent credit quality trends and the effect of normal seasonality on our business. The additional provision for loan losses is the amount needed to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss reserve methodology.
Net charge-offs. Net charge-offs comprise gross charge-offs offset by recoveries on prior charge-offs. Gross charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due (Rise and Elastic) or 120 days (Today Card), or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud. Any payments received on loans that have been charged off are recorded as recoveries and reduce the total amount of gross charge-offs. Recoveries are typically less than 10% of the amount charged off, and thus, we do not view recoveries as a key credit quality metric.
Net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues can vary based on several factors, such as whether or not we experience significant growth or lower the APR of our products. Additionally, although a more seasoned portfolio will typically result in lower net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues, we do not intend to drive down this ratio significantly below our historical ratios and would instead seek to offer our existing products to a broader new customer base to drive additional revenues.
Net charge-offs as a percentage of average combined loans receivable-principal allow us to determine credit quality and evaluate loss experience trends across our loan portfolio.
Additional provision for loan losses. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology.
Additional provision for loan losses relates to an increase in inherent losses in the loan portfolio as determined by our loan loss reserve methodology. This increase could be due to a combination of factors such as an increase in the size of the loan portfolio or a worsening of credit quality or increase in past due loans. It is also possible for the additional provision for loan losses for a period to be a negative amount, which would reduce the amount of the combined loan loss reserve needed (due to a decrease in the loan portfolio or improvement in credit quality). The amount of additional provision for loan losses is seasonal in nature, mirroring the seasonality of our new customer acquisition and overall loan portfolio growth, as discussed above. The combined loan loss reserve typically decreases during the first quarter or first half of the calendar year due to a decrease in the loan portfolio from year end. Then, as the rate of growth for the loan portfolio starts to increase during the second half of the year, additional provision for loan losses is typically needed to increase the reserve for future losses associated with the loan growth. Because of this, our provision for loan losses can vary significantly throughout the year without a significant change in the credit quality of our portfolio.
The following provides an example of the application of our loan loss reserve methodology and the break-out of the provision for loan losses between the portion associated with replenishing the reserve due to net charge-offs and the amount related to the additional provision for loan losses. If the beginning combined loan loss reserve were $25 million, and we incurred $10 million of net charge-offs during the period and the ending combined loan loss reserve needed to be $30 million according to our loan loss reserve methodology, our total provision for loan losses would be $15 million, comprising $10 million in net charge-offs (provision needed to replenish the combined loan loss reserve) plus $5 million of additional provision related to an increase in future inherent losses in the loan portfolio identified by our loan loss reserve methodology.
Loan loss reserve methodology. Our loan loss reserve methodology is calculated separately for each product and, in the case of Rise loans originated under the state lending model (including CSO program loans), is calculated separately based on the state in which each customer resides to account for varying state license requirements that affect the amount of the loan offered, repayment terms and other factors. For each product, loss factors are calculated based on the delinquency status of customer loan balances: current, 1 to 30 days past due, 31 to 60 days past due or 61-120 past due (for Today Card only). These loss factors for loans in each delinquency status are based on average historical loss rates by product (or state) associated with each of these three delinquency categories. Hence, another key credit quality metric we monitor is the percentage of past due combined loans receivable - principal, as an increase in past due loans will cause an increase in our combined loan loss reserve and related additional provision for loan losses to increase the reserve. For customers that are not past due, we further stratify these loans into loss rates by payment number, as a new customer that is about to make a first loan payment has a significantly higher risk of loss than a customer who has successfully made ten payments on an existing loan with us. Based on this methodology, during the past three years we have seen our combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable fluctuate between approximately 10% and 14% depending on the overall mix of new, former and past due customer loans.
Recent trends. Total loan loss provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 45% of revenues, which was within our targeted range of 45% to 55%, compared to 34% in the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues totaled 39%, compared to 41% in the prior year period. The increase in total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues in 2021 was due to the increase in new loan originations beginning in the second quarter of 2021 and the loan loss provisioning associated with a growing portfolio. We would expect to have higher charge-offs as a percent of revenue, as compared to our targeted range, in the first quarter of 2022 due to the heavier mix of new customer loans in the second half of 2021, which have a higher loss profile. We expect to return within our targeted range beginning in the second quarter as the portfolio seasons with a mix of new and returning customers. While we initially anticipated that the COVID-19 pandemic would have a negative impact on our credit quality, instead the large quantity of monetary stimulus provided by the US government to our customer base has generally allowed customers to continue making payments on their loans, which resulted in a decrease in net charge-offs as a percentage of revenue compared to last year. We continue to monitor the portfolio during the economic recovery resulting from COVID-19 and will adjust our underwriting and credit policies to mitigate any potential negative impacts as needed. As loan demand continues to return to pre-pandemic levels and the loan portfolio grows, we expect our total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues to be within our targeted range of approximately 45% to 55% of revenue.
The combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable totaled 12%, 12% and 13% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The relatively steady loan loss reserve percentage reflects the stable credit performance of the portfolio, and we would expect the loan loss reserve to stabilize in the 12-13% range as we manage the portfolio to ensure a consistent mix of new and returning customers within the portfolio and return the portfolio to a normalized credit profile. Past due loan balances at December 31, 2021 were 10% of total combined loans receivable - principal, up from 6% from a year ago, due to the number of new customers originated beginning in the second quarter of 2021, and is consistent with our historical past due percentages prior to the pandemic. We, and the bank originators we support, are no longer offering specific COVID-19 payment deferral programs, but continue to offer other payment flexibility programs if certain qualifications are met. We are continuing to see that most customers are meeting their scheduled payments once they exit the payment deferral program. We anticipate the combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable, as well as our past due loan balances as a percentage of total combined loans receivable-principal, will maintain at their historic norms as we continue to grow our loan portfolio with a consistent mix of new and returning customers.
We also look at Rise and Elastic principal loan charge-offs (including both credit and fraud losses) by loan vintage as a percentage of combined loans originated-principal. As the below table shows, our cumulative principal loan charge-offs for Rise and Elastic through December 31, 2021 for each annual vintage since the 2013 vintage are generally under 30% and continue to generally trend at or slightly below our 20% to 25% long-term targeted range. During 2019, we implemented new fraud tools that have helped lower fraud losses for the 2019 vintage and rolled out our next generation of credit models during the second quarter of 2019 and continued refining the models during the third and fourth quarters of 2019. Our payment deferral programs have also assisted in reducing losses in our 2019 and 2020 vintages coupled with a lower volume of new loan originations in our 2020 vintage. The 2019 and 2020 vintages are both performing better than the 2017 and 2018 vintages. While still early, we would expect the 2021 vintage to be at or near 2018 levels or slightly lower given the increased volume of new customer loans originated this year and a return of net charge-offs to our targeted range of 45-55% of revenue. It is also possible that the cumulative loss rates on all vintages will increase and may exceed our recent historical cumulative loss experience due to the economic impact of a prolonged crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
(1) The 2020 and 2021 vintages are not yet fully mature from a loss perspective.
(2) UK included in the 2013 to 2017 vintages only.
We also look at Today Card principal loan charge-offs (including both credit and fraud losses) by account vintage as a percentage of account principal originations. As the below table shows, our cumulative principal credit card charge-offs through December 31, 2021 for the 2020 account vintage is under 7%. While our 2021 account vintage is currently performing better than 2020, we expect the 2021 account vintage to have losses at or higher than the 2020 account vintage based on the volume of new customers originated in the second half of 2021. The Today Card requires accounts to be charged off that are more than 120 days past due which results in a longer maturity period for the cumulative loss curve related to this portfolio. Our 2018 and 2019 vintages are considered to be test vintages and were comprised of limited originations volume and not reflective of our current underwriting standards.
Margins
_________
(1)Non-GAAP measure. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses.”
Gross margin is calculated as revenues minus cost of sales, or gross profit, expressed as a percentage of revenues, and operating margin is calculated as operating income expressed as a percentage of revenues. Due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on our loan balances and revenue, we are monitoring our profit margins closely. Long-term, we intend to continue to manage the business to a targeted 20% operating margin.
Recent operating margin trends. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our operating margin was 5%, which was a decrease from 26% in the prior year period, as well as a decrease from 16% in 2019. The margin decreases experienced in 2021 were primarily driven by the upfront costs associated with credit provisioning and direct marketing expense associated with the increased new and former customer loan origination volume as we grow and rebuild our loan portfolio from the impacts of COVID-19. The margins achieved in 2020 were not reflective of our historical performance as we experienced a significant decline in the loan portfolio due to a lack of customer demand resulting from the effects of COVID-19 and related government stimulus programs. These impacts resulted in a lower level of direct marketing expense and materially lower credit losses during 2020, leading to an increased gross margin.
Our operating expense metrics have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on loan balances and revenue. We began to see improvements in our operating expense metric in the third and fourth quarter of 2021 due to the growth in the portfolio and associated increase in revenue during those periods as we continued to manage and maintain a relatively consistent operating expense between the two quarters. In the short term, with the growth in the loan portfolio experienced in 2021, we expect our expense metrics to continue to improve and move toward our target range as we focus on growth to increase our new and former customer loan volume and continue to scale the overall loan portfolio. In the long term, as we grow the loan portfolio while actively managing our operating expenses, we expect to see our operating expense metrics return to approximately 20-25% of revenue. However, management will continue to look for opportunities to reduce our expenses to help offset the increased loan origination and direct marketing expenses.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
We believe that the inclusion of the following non-GAAP financial measures in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business, provide transparency and useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, and enable investors to better compare our operating performance with the operating performance of our competitors. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures frequently in its decision-making because they provide supplemental information that facilitates internal comparisons to the historical operating performance of prior periods and give an additional indication of our core operating performance. However, non-GAAP financial measures are not a measure calculated in accordance with US generally accepted accounting principles, or US GAAP, and should not be considered an alternative to any measures of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with US GAAP. Other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do.
Adjusted Earnings (Loss)
Adjusted earnings (loss) represent our net income (loss) from continuing operations, adjusted to exclude:
•Uncertain tax position
•Contingent losses related to legal matters
•Cumulative tax effect of adjustments
Adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share is Adjusted earnings (loss) divided by Diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) from continuing operations and diluted earnings (loss) per share to Adjusted earnings (loss) and Adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share, which excludes the impact of the contingent losses and uncertain tax position for each of the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA represents our net income (loss) from continuing operations, adjusted to exclude:
•Net interest expense primarily associated with notes payable under the debt facilities used to fund the loan portfolios;
•Share-based compensation;
•Depreciation and amortization expense on fixed assets and intangible assets;
•Gains and losses from dispositions or contingent losses related to legal matters included in non-operating loss; and
•Income taxes.
Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful supplemental measures to assist management and investors in analyzing the operating performance of the business and provide greater transparency into the results of operations of our core business.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be considered as alternatives to net income from continuing operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with US GAAP. Our use of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under US GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect expected cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital assets;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest associated with notes payable used for funding the loan portfolios, for other corporate purposes or tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin for each of the periods indicated:
Free cash flow
Free cash flow (“FCF”) represents our net cash provided by continuing operating activities, adjusted to include:
•Net charge-offs - combined principal loans; and
•Capital expenditures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by continuing operating activities to FCF for each of the periods indicated:
_________
(1)Net cash provided by continuing operating activities includes net charge-offs - combined finance charges.
Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses
We break out our total provision for loan losses into two separate items-first, the amount related to net charge-offs, and second, the additional provision for loan losses needed to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss provision methodology. We believe this presentation provides more detail related to the components of our total provision for loan losses when analyzing the gross margin of our business.
Net charge-offs. Net charge-offs comprise gross charge-offs offset by recoveries on prior charge-offs. Gross charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due (Rise and Elastic) or 120 days (Today Card), or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud. Any payments received on loans that have been charged off are recorded as recoveries and reduce total gross charge-offs.
Additional provision for loan losses. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology.
Combined loan information
The Elastic line of credit product is originated by a third-party lender, Republic Bank, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. Republic Bank retains 10% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells a 90% loan participation in the Elastic lines of credit to a third-party SPV, Elastic SPV, Ltd. Elevate is required to consolidate Elastic SPV, Ltd. as a VIE under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 90% of Elastic lines of credit originated by Republic Bank and sold to Elastic SPV.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2018, we started licensing our Rise installment loan brand to a third-party lender, FinWise Bank, which originates Rise installment loans in 17 states. FinWise Bank retains 4% of the balances of all the loans originated and sells a 96% participation to a third-party SPV, EF SPV, Ltd. We do not own EF SPV, but we are required to consolidate EF SPV as a VIE under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 96% of Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and sold to EF SPV.
Beginning in 2018, we started licensing the Today Card brand and our underwriting services and platform to launch a credit card product originated by CCB, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. CCB retains 5% of the credit card receivable balance of all the receivables originated and sells a 95% participation in the Today Card lines of credit to us. The Today Card program was expanded in 2020.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we also license our Rise installment loan brand to an additional bank, CCB, which originates Rise installment loans in three different states than FinWise Bank. Similar to the relationship with FinWise Bank, CCB retains 5% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining 95% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to EC SPV. We do not own EC SPV, but we are required to consolidate EC SPV as a VIE under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 95% of the Rise installment loans originated by CCB and sold to EC SPV.
The information presented in the tables below on a combined basis are non-GAAP measures based on a combined portfolio of loans, which includes the total amount of outstanding loans receivable that we own and that are on our balance sheets plus outstanding loans receivable originated and owned by third parties that we guarantee pursuant to CSO programs in which we participate. There were no new loan originations in 2021 under our CSO programs, but we continued to have obligations as the CSO until the wind-down of this portfolio was completed in the third quarter of 2021. See “-Basis of Presentation and Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance and liability for estimated losses on consumer loans.”
We believe these non-GAAP measures provide investors with important information needed to evaluate the magnitude of potential loan losses and the opportunity for revenue performance of the combined loan portfolio on an aggregate basis. We also believe that the comparison of the combined amounts from period to period is more meaningful than comparing only the amounts reflected on our balance sheets since both revenues and cost of sales as reflected in our financial statements are impacted by the aggregate amount of loans we own and those CSO loans we guaranteed.
Our use of total combined loans and fees receivable has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under US GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•Rise CSO loans were originated and owned by a third-party lender; and
•Rise CSO loans were funded by a third-party lender and were not part of the VPC Facility.
As of each of the period ends indicated, the following table presents a reconciliation of:
•Loans receivable, net, Company owned (which reconciles to our Consolidated Balance Sheets included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
•Loans receivable, net, guaranteed by the Company (as disclosed in Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
•Combined loans receivable (which we use as a non-GAAP measure); and
•Combined loan loss reserve (which we use as a non-GAAP measure).
_________
(1)Represents loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
(2)Represents finance charges earned by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our consolidated financial statements. The wind-down of the CSO program was completed in the third quarter of 2021.
(3)Non-GAAP measure.
(4)Combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable is determined using period-end balances.
COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
Our revenues are composed of Rise finance charges and CSO fees (inclusive of finance charges attributable to the participation in Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and CCB), cash advance fees attributable to the participation in Elastic lines of credit that we consolidate, finance charges and fee revenues related to the Today Card credit card product (inclusive of finance charges attributable to the participations in the credit card receivables originated by CCB), and marketing and licensing fees received from third-party lenders related to the Rise, Rise CSO, Elastic, and Today Card products. See “-Overview” above for further information on the structure of Elastic.
Cost of sales
Provision for loan losses. Provision for loan losses consists of amounts charged against income during the period related to net charge-offs and the additional provision for loan losses needed to adjust the loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss methodology.
Direct marketing costs. Direct marketing costs consist of online marketing costs such as sponsored search and advertising on social networking sites, and other marketing costs such as purchased television and radio advertising and direct mail print advertising. In addition, direct marketing cost includes affiliate costs paid to marketers in exchange for referrals of potential customers. All direct marketing costs are expensed as incurred.
Other cost of sales. Other cost of sales includes data verification costs associated with the underwriting of potential customers and automated clearing house (“ACH”) transaction costs associated with customer loan funding and payments.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses consist of compensation and benefits, professional services, selling and marketing, occupancy and equipment, depreciation and amortization as well as other miscellaneous expenses.
Compensation and benefits. Salaries and personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses and share-based compensation expense, comprise a majority of our operating expenses and these costs are driven by our number of employees.
Professional services. These operating expenses include costs associated with legal, accounting and auditing, recruiting and outsourced customer support and collections.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing costs include costs associated with the use of agencies that perform creative services and monitor and measure the performance of the various marketing channels. Selling and marketing costs also include the production costs associated with media advertisements that are expensed as incurred over the licensing or production period. These expenses do not include direct marketing costs incurred to acquire customers, which comprises CAC.
Occupancy and equipment. Occupancy and equipment include rent expense on our leased facilities, as well as telephony and web hosting expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. We capitalize all acquisitions of property and equipment of $500 or greater as well as certain software development costs. Costs incurred in the preliminary stages of software development are expensed. Costs incurred thereafter, including external direct costs of materials and services as well as payroll and payroll-related costs, are capitalized. Post-development costs are expensed. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the depreciable assets.
Other expense
Net interest expense. Net interest expense primarily includes the interest expense associated with the VPC Facility that funds the Rise installment loans, the ESPV Facility related to the Elastic lines of credit and related Elastic SPV entity, the EF SPV and EC SPV Facilities that fund Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and CCB, respectively, and the TSPV facility used to fund credit card receivable purchases. Interest expense also includes any amortization of deferred debt issuance cost and prepayment penalties incurred associated with the debt facilities.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated. Effective June 29, 2020, ECIL was placed into administration in the UK, and we deconsolidated ECIL and present it as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $48.7 million, or 10%, from $465.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $416.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in revenue is primarily attributable to a lower average combined loans receivable-principal balance coupled with lower effective APRs earned on the loan portfolio.
The tables below break out this change in revenue (including CSO fees and cash advance fees) by product:
_________
(1)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our consolidated financial statements..
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances. Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See reconciliation table accompanying this release for a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
Our average combined loans receivable principal decreased $21 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. This decrease in average balance is primarily due to lower combined loans receivable-principal balances in the Rise and Elastic portfolios in the first half of 2021 which were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and substantial government assistance to our customers prior to the growth which commenced in late second quarter 2021. The decrease in average balances accounted for approximately $32 million of the reduction in revenue for the period. Our average APR declined from 102% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 95% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This reduction in the effective APR is due to both the lower effective interest rates earned on loans in a deferral status under the payment flexibility tools that were implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the growth of Today Card relative to the total loan portfolio, which has the lowest APR. The lower effective APR accounted for approximately $20 million of the reduction in revenue for the period. We expect the overall effective APR of the loan portfolio to remain flat going forward.
Cost of sales
Provision for loan losses. Provision for loan losses increased by $28.9 million, or 18%, from $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $185.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The tables below break out these changes by loan product:
_________
(1)Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
Total loan loss provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 45% of revenues, which was within our targeted range of 45% to 55%, and higher than 34% for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues was 39%, a decrease from 41% for the comparable period in 2020. The increase in total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues in 2021 compared to last year was due to the increase in new loan originations beginning in the second quarter of 2021 and charge-offs and loan loss provisioning associated with a growing portfolio. While we initially anticipated that the COVID-19 pandemic would have a negative impact on our credit quality, instead the large quantity of monetary stimulus provided by the US government to our customer base has generally allowed customers to continue making payments on their loans, which resulted in a decrease in net charge-offs as a percentage of revenue compared to last year. We continue to monitor the portfolio during the economic recovery resulting from COVID-19 and will adjust our underwriting and credit policies to mitigate any potential negative impacts as needed. As loan demand continues to return to pre-pandemic levels and the loan portfolio grows, we expect our total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues to be within our targeted range of approximately 45% to 55% of revenue.
The combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable totaled 12% as of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The loan loss reserve percentage is flat at December 31, 2021, reflecting the stable credit performance of the portfolio, and we would expect the loan loss reserve to stabilize in the 12-13% range as we manage the portfolio to ensure a consistent mix of new and returning customers within the portfolio and return the portfolio to a normalized credit profile. Past due loan balances at December 31, 2021 were 10% of total combined loans receivable - principal, up significantly from 6% from a year ago, due to the number of new customers originated beginning in the second quarter of 2021, but is consistent with our historical past due percentages prior to the pandemic.
Direct marketing costs. Direct marketing costs increased by approximately $21.3 million, or 105%, from $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $41.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had limited marketing activities and new loan origination volume in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have seen a return to more normalized new customer acquisition in all the three loan products in 2021 as the economy continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and demand for the loan products returns. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of new customers acquired increased to 168,339 compared to 68,245 during the year ended December 31, 2020. We anticipate our direct marketing costs will continue to increase as we focus on growing our loan portfolio. Our CAC for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the year ended December 31, 2020 at $247 as compared to $297, with 2020 not reflective of our historical CAC due to the significant reduction in new loan originations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe our CAC in future quarters will continue to remain within or below our target range of $250 to $300 as we continue to optimize the efficiency of our marketing channels and continue to grow the Today Card which successfully generated new customers at a sub-$100 CAC.
Other cost of sales. Other cost of sales increased by approximately $5.8 million, or 72%, from $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to increased data verification costs resulting from increased loan origination volume.
Operating expenses
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits decreased by $7.7 million, or 9%, from $84.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $76.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the reduction in staff related to an operating expense reduction plan we implemented in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the pandemic.
Professional services. Professional services increased by $0.9 million, or 3%, from $31.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to increased legal expenses, partially offset by decreased board of directors' stock compensation expense.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing decreased by $0.2 million, or 6%, from $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to decreased marketing agency fees.
Occupancy and equipment. Occupancy and equipment increased by $2.9 million, or 15%, from $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $21.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to increased web hosting, partially offset by licenses and rentals expense.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $0.3 million, or 2%, from $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the acceleration of a board member's non-compete agreement of $0.5 million with a slight depreciation expense decrease between the two years.
Net interest expense
Net interest expense decreased $10.5 million, or 22%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 versus the year ended December 31, 2020. Our average balance of notes payable outstanding under the debt facilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $74.7 million from $467.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $393.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to debt paydowns, including the maturity of one of our term notes, partially offset by new draws to fund loan portfolio growth. This reduction resulted in a decrease in interest expense of approximately $7.3 million. In addition, our average effective cost of funds on our notes payable outstanding decreased from 10.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 9.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in a decrease in interest expense of approximately $3.2 million. At December 31, 2021, our effective cost of funds on new borrowings on our VPC facilities is currently 8%, which is expected to reduce our overall effective costs of funds as we continue to borrow on our debt facilities in the future.
The following table shows the effective cost of funds of each debt facility for the period:
(1)Average facility balance from inception at October 12, 2021 to December 31, 2021.
In July 2020, we entered into a new facility, the EC SPV Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we have drawn $55.5 million on the EC SPV facility. In October 2021, we entered into a new facility, the TSPV facility, and have drawn $37 million as of December 31, 2021. Per the terms of the February 2019 amendments and the July 31, 2020 EC SPV agreement, we qualified for a 25 bps rate reduction on the VPC, ESPV, EF SPV, and EC SPV facilities effective January 1, 2021. We have evaluated the interest rates for our debt and believe they represent market rates based on our size, industry, operations and recent amendments. As a result, the carrying value for the debt approximates the fair value. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities" for more information.
Non-operating loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we accrued $22.8 million in contingent losses related to legal matters related to our spin-off from our predecessor company in 2014 and a regulatory litigation matter, partially offset by a $0.5 million recovery related to an indemnification for a former executive of the Company. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $24.1 million in non-operating expenses related to an estimated $17 million contingent loss associated with a legal matter related to our spin-off from our predecessor company in 2014 and a separate $7 million indemnification accrual related to a legal matter for a former executive of the Company.
Income tax expense (benefit)
Our income tax expense decreased $18.7 million, or 171%, from $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a income tax benefit of $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We recognized an uncertain tax position of $1.3 million in income tax expense due to a recent change in tax regulation in the state of Texas that impacted our previously recognized research and development state tax credits. Our effective tax rates for continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 19% and 23%, respectively. Our effective tax rates are different from the standard corporate federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to the uncertain tax position, of which $1.2 million would impact our effective tax rate if realized, permanent non-deductible items, and corporate state tax obligations in the states where we have lending activities. Our US cash effective tax rate was approximately 0.3% for 2021.
Net loss from discontinued operations
Our loss from discontinued operations on our UK entity (ECIL) for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of an investment loss of $28.0 million, operating losses of $5.1 million, and a goodwill impairment loss of $9.3 million, partially offset by an income tax benefit of $28.4 million.
Net income (loss)
Our net income (loss) decreased $54.2 million, or 263%, from net income of $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a net loss of $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the earnings compression experienced due to loan portfolio growth (upfront costs associated with credit provision and direct marketing expense) during the second half of 2021, as well as non-operating losses related to litigation accruals.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As previously discussed, we are closely monitoring the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across our business, including the resulting uncertainties around customer demand, credit performance of the loan portfolio, our levels of liquidity and our ongoing compliance with debt covenants. We had cash and cash equivalents available of $85 million at December 31, 2021, compared to cash and cash equivalents available of $198 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $113 million, primarily due to increased loan origination and participation purchases. Our principal debt payment obligation of $18 million was paid off in January 2021 prior to its maturity in February 2021, and there are no additional required principal payments on our outstanding debt until January 2024. Throughout the first half of 2021, we made additional net paydowns on the debt facilities of approximately $70 million. As we are experiencing increased demand for the loan products, resulting in increased origination volume, we are drawing down on our available debt facilities to fund the loan portfolio growth. In the second half of 2021, we made draws on the debt facilities of approximately $154 million. In January 2022, we entered into a sub-debt facility with Pine Hill Finance LLC of $20 million to supplement our working capital.
While the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations is dependent on future developments which are highly uncertain, we believe that our actions taken to date, future cash provided by operating activities, availability under our debt facilities with VPC and PCAM, and possibly the capital markets, as well as certain potential measures within our control that could be put in place to maintain a sound financial position and liquidity will provide adequate resources to fund our operating and financing needs.
We are continuing to assess our minimum cash and liquidity requirements and implementing measures to ensure that our cash and liquidity position is maintained through the current economic cycle created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that our existing cash balances, together with the available borrowing capacity under the debt facilities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash operating expense and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next year. We principally rely on our working capital and our credit facilities with VPC and PCAM to fund the loans we make to our customers. At December 31, 2021, we have contractual obligations for our operating leases and long-term debt totaling $4 million in 2022, and an additional $475 million in total due in the next three years. We also are committed, among other things, to pay $41 million in 2022 as a result of the Think Finance and District of Columbia litigation settlements, as described further in Note 14 - Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees and Note 19 - Subsequent Events. If our loan growth exceeds our expectations or other unexpected liquidity needs arise, our available cash balances may be insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, and we may seek additional equity or debt financing. This additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
Stock Repurchase Program
At December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding stock repurchase plan authorized by our Board of Directors providing for the repurchase of up to $80 million of our common stock through July 31, 2024, inclusive of two $25 million increases to the plan authorized by the Board of Directors in January and October 2021. The Board of Directors further authorized a $10 million increase to the annual fiscal limit of repurchases in October 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased $19.8 million of common stock. We repurchased 7,337,277 common shares at a total cost of $27.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. In January 2022, we repurchased an additional 47,981 of common shares at a total cost of $148 thousand. Separately from the repurchase plan, have repurchased approximately 925 thousand shares of common stock during the first quarter of 2022 pursuant to the Think Finance litigation settlement agreement executed in February 2022.
The amended stock repurchase program provides that up to a maximum aggregate amount of $35 million shares may be repurchased in any given fiscal year. Repurchases will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time-to-time in the open market and/or in privately negotiated transactions at our discretion, subject to market conditions and other factors. The share repurchase program does not require the purchase of any minimum number of shares and may be implemented, modified, suspended or discontinued in whole or in part at any time without further notice. Any repurchased shares will be available for use in connection with equity plans and for other corporate purposes.
Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, loans (net of allowance for loan losses), and cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, loans receivable, net and cash flows for the periods indicated:
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 were held primarily for working capital purposes. We may, from time to time, use excess cash and cash equivalents to fund our lending activities, paydown debt or repurchase stock. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes. Our policy is to invest any cash in excess of our immediate working capital requirements in investments designed to preserve the principal balance and provide liquidity. Accordingly, our excess cash is invested primarily in demand deposit accounts that are currently providing only a minimal return.
Net cash provided by operating activities
We generated $156.2 million in cash from our operating activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily from revenues derived from our loan portfolio. This was down $53.9 million from the $210.1 million of cash provided by operating activities-continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a decrease in revenues resulting from a smaller average loan portfolio and lower effective APR as compared to the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was down $123.33 million from the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease in revenues.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, cash provided by (used in) investing activities-continuing operations was $(304.6) million, $25.6 million and $(307.8) million, respectively. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in net loans issued to customers and a growing loan portfolio compared to prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash provided by investing activities increased from the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in net loans originated to customers related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table summarizes cash provided by (used in) investing activities-continuing operations for the periods indicated:
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Cash flows from financing activities-continuing operations primarily include cash received from issuing notes payable, payments on notes payable, and activity related to stock awards. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations was $38.2 million, $(108.0) million and $(2.9) million, respectively. The following table summarizes cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations for the periods indicated:
The increase in cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus the comparable period of 2020 was primarily due to increased draws on our debt facilities during the year ended December 31, 2021, which were partially offset by payments on the facilities early in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities increased compared to the prior year primarily due to increased payments made on notes payable and increased repurchases of common stock, which commenced in the third quarter of 2019.
Free Cash Flow
In addition to the above, we also review FCF when analyzing our cash flows from operations. We calculate free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities-continuing operations, adjusted for the principal loan net charge-offs and capital expenditures incurred during the period. While this is a non-GAAP measure, we believe it provides a useful presentation of cash flows derived from our core continuing operating activities.
Our FCF was $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $49.3 million for the prior year. The decrease in our FCF was the result of the decrease in cash provided by continuing operations and a slight increase in capital expenditures, partially offset by a decrease in net-charge-offs - combined principal loans during the year ended December 31, 2021.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Debt Facilities
We have debt facilities to support the loans we make directly to our customers and the loan and credit card participations we, or our consolidated VIEs purchase from the third-party banks that license our brands. Each of these facilities have certain covenants for the Company overall, as well as certain covenants for the underlying product portfolios. All of our assets are pledged as collateral to secure one or more of the debt facilities. Previously, we had a debt facility, the 4th Tranche Term note, used to fund working capital. This facility was paid in full in early 2021.
See Note 7 - Notes Payable, Net in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for further information.
The outstanding balances of the debt facilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
The following table presents the future debt maturities, as of December 31, 2021:
Other Commitments
We are a party to other contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties. These obligations may impact our short-term or long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Our primary contractual obligations include our operating leases, loss contingencies for legal matters (including amounts payable pursuant to the Think Finance and District of Columbia litigation settlements), and various compensation and benefit plans. See Note 9 - Leases, Note 10 - Share-based Compensation and Note 14 - Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees included in this report for further information on our leases, loss contingencies and compensation plans, respectively.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We previously provided services in connection with installment loans originated by independent third-party lenders (“CSO lenders”) whereby we acted as a credit service organization/credit access business on behalf of consumers in accordance with applicable state laws through our “CSO program.” The CSO program included arranging loans with CSO lenders, assisting in the loan application, documentation and servicing processes. Under the CSO program, we guaranteed the repayment of a customer’s loan to the CSO lenders as part of the credit services we provided to the customer. As of September 30, 2021, the CSO program has completed its wind-down and we no longer have a guarantee under this program.
Prior to ECIL entering administration and being classified a discontinued operation by us on June 29, 2020, the VPC Facility included the UK Term Note. Upon deconsolidation of ECIL, this note was removed from our Consolidated Balance Sheets and is presented within Liabilities from discontinued operations in all prior periods presented. Under the terms of the VPC Facility, we had provided a guarantee to VPC for the repayment of the debt of any subsidiary, which included the outstanding debt of ECIL. ECIL completed payment of the UK Term Note in the third quarter of 2020 and any guarantee obligation associated with the UK Term Note was released with the repayment.
RECENT REGULATORY DEVELOPMENTS
Federal Regulations: The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) amended Regulation F, 12 CFR part 1006, which implements the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA), to prescribe Federal rules governing certain activities of debt collectors. The final rule, among other things, clarifies the information that a debt collector must provide to a consumer at the outset of debt collection communications and provides a model notice containing such information, prohibits debt collectors from bringing or threatening to bring a legal action against a consumer to collect a time-barred debt, and requires debt collectors to take certain actions before furnishing information about a consumer’s debt to a consumer reporting agency. The rule became effective on November 30, 2021.
On March 31, 2021, the Federal Reserve Board, the CFPB, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), the National Credit Union Administration ("NCUA") and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") announced the request for information ("RFI") to gain input from financial institutions, trade associations, consumer groups, and other stakeholders on the growing use of Artificial Intelligence ("AI") by financial institutions. The request seeks comments regarding the use of AI, including machine learning, by financial institutions; appropriate governance, risk management and controls over AI; as well as challenges in developing, adopting and managing AI. The comment period was extended from May 30, 2021 to July 1, 2021 and is now closed.
On July 13, 2021, the Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the FDIC issued proposed guidance on managing risks associated with third-party relationships, including relationships with fintech entities and bank/fintech sponsorship arrangements. The guidance sets forth expectations for managing risk throughout the life cycle of such arrangements, including planning, due diligence and contract negotiation, oversight and accountability, ongoing monitoring, and termination. We will continue to monitor this guidance as it potentially becomes final.
On August 31, 2021, the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas issued an order in Community Financial Services Association of America, LTD. v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, granting the Bureau's motion for summary judgment and staying the date for complying with the CFPB's Rulemaking on Payday, Vehicle Title, and High-Cost Installment Loans for 286 days until June 13, 2022. On October 1, 2021, the trade groups appealed the Texas federal district court’s final judgment and argued that the compliance date should be 286 days after their appeal to the Fifth Circuit is resolved. On October 14, 2021, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals agreed to an extension of the compliance date until after resolution of the appeal. Regardless of outcome of the appeal, it is anticipated that the rule will increase costs and create challenges in the Company's collection activities.
State Privacy Laws: The California Consumer Privacy Act went into effect Jan. 1, 2020, and enforcement by California’s Office of the Attorney General began July 1, 2020. The California Privacy Rights Act ballot initiative passed in November 2020, with the majority of its provisions becoming operative Jan. 1, 2023. Virginia passed the Consumer Data Protection Act which establishes a framework for controlling and processing personal data in the Commonwealth. The bill applies to all persons that conduct business in the Commonwealth and either (i) control or process personal data of at least 100,000 consumers or (ii) derive over 50 percent of gross revenue from the sale of personal data and control or process personal data of at least 25,000 consumers. The bill outlines responsibilities and privacy protection standards for data controllers and processors and has a delayed effective date of January 1, 2023. On July 7, 2021, Colorado Governor Jared Polis signed the Colorado Privacy Act into law that will go into effect on July 1, 2023. Once effective, covered entities will be required to provide Colorado residents with various privacy rights, including the right to access, correct, and delete their personal data and to opt out of the sale of their personal data. Covered entities also will need to provide privacy policy disclosures and create data protection assessments for certain types of processing activities. Ongoing implementation of and changes to state-enacted privacy laws will increase the Company's costs and could create challenges in the relevant markets. Many states have also introduced similar legislation to govern privacy.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Revenue recognition
We recognize consumer loan fees as revenues for each of the loan products we offer. Revenues on the Consolidated Statements of Operations include: finance charges, lines of credit fees, fees for services provided through CSO programs (“CSO fees”), and interest, as well as any other fees or charges permitted by applicable laws and pursuant to the agreement with the borrower. Other revenues also include marketing and licensing fees received from the originating lender related to the Elastic product and Rise bank-originated loans and from CSO fees related to the Rise product. Revenues related to these fees are recognized when the service is performed.
We accrue finance charges on installment loans on a constant yield basis over their terms. We accrue and defer fixed charges such as CSO fees and lines of credit fees when they are assessed and recognize them to earnings as they are earned over the life of the loan. We accrue interest on credit cards based on the amount of the credit card balance outstanding and their contractual interest rate. Annual credit card membership fees are amortized to revenue over the card membership period. Other credit card fees, such as late payment fees and returned payment fees, are accrued when assessed. We do not accrue finance charges and other fees on installment loans or lines of credit for which payment is greater than 60 days past due. Credit card interest charges are recognized based on the contractual provisions of the underlying arrangements and are not accrued for which payment is greater than 90 days past due. Installment loans and lines of credit are considered past due if a grace period has not been requested and a scheduled payment is not paid on its due date. Credit cards have a grace period of 25 days and are considered delinquent after the grace period. Payments received on past due loans are applied against the loan and accrued interest balance to bring the loan current. Payments are generally first applied to accrued fees and interest, and then to the principal loan balance.
The spread of COVID-19 since March 2020 has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in unprecedented disruption to businesses and economies. In response to the pandemic's effects and in accordance with federal and state guidelines, we expanded our payment flexibility programs for our customers, including payment deferrals. This program allows for a deferral of payments for an initial period of 30-60 days, and generally up to a maximum of 180 days on a cumulative basis. The customer will return to their normal payment schedule after the end of the deferral period with the extension of their maturity date equivalent to the deferral period, which is generally not to exceed an additional 180 days. Per FASB guidance, the finance charges will continue to accrue at a lower effective interest rate over the expected term of the loan considering the deferral period provided (not to exceed an amount greater than the amount at which the borrower could settle the loan) or placed on non-accrual status. The COVID-19 payment flexibility programs were no longer offered effective July 1, 2021, eliminating any new payment deferrals up to 180 days. We and the bank originators continue to offer certain payment flexibility programs if certain qualifications are met.
Our business is affected by seasonality, which can cause significant changes in portfolio size and profit margins from quarter to quarter. Although this seasonality does not impact our policies for revenue recognition, it does generally impact our results of operations by potentially causing an increase in its profit margins in the first quarter of the year and decreased margins in the second through fourth quarters.
Allowance and liability for estimated losses on consumer loans
We have adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance for disclosures about the credit quality of financing receivables and the allowance for loan losses (“allowance”). We maintain an allowance for loan losses for loans and interest receivable for loans not classified as TDRs at a level estimated to be adequate to absorb credit losses inherent in the outstanding loans receivable. We primarily utilize historical loss rates by product, stratified by delinquency ranges, to determine the allowance, but we also consider recent collection and delinquency trends, as well as macro-economic conditions that may affect portfolio losses. Additionally, due to the uncertainty of economic conditions and cash flow resources of our customers, the estimate of the allowance for loan losses is subject to change in the near-term and could significantly impact the consolidated financial statements. If a loan is deemed to be uncollectible before it is fully reserved, it is charged-off at that time. For loans classified as TDRs, impairment is typically measured based on the present value of the expected future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate. We have elected to adopt the Current Expected Credit Losses ("CECL") model as of January 1, 2022, which requires a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. See "- Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements And JOBS Act Election" for more information.
We classify loans as either current or past due. An installment loan or line of credit customer in good standing may request a 16-day grace period when or before a payment becomes due and, if granted, the loan is considered current during the grace period. Credit card customers have a 25-day grace period for each payment. Installment loans and lines of credit are considered past due if a grace period has not been requested and a scheduled payment is not paid on its due date. Credit cards are considered past due if the grace period has passed and the scheduled payment has not been made. Increases in the allowance are created by recording a Provision for loan losses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Installment loans and lines of credit are charged off, which reduces the allowance, when they are over 60 days past due or earlier if deemed uncollectible. Credit cards are charged off, which reduces the allowance, when they are over 120 days past due or earlier if deemed uncollectible. Recoveries on losses previously charged to the allowance are credited to the allowance when collected.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in each business combination. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350-20-35, Goodwill-Subsequent Measurement, we perform a quantitative approach method impairment review of goodwill and intangible assets with an indefinite life annually at October 1 and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment ("ASU 2017-04"), our impairment evaluation of goodwill was already based on comparing the fair value of our reporting units to their carrying value. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 as of January 1, 2020 had no impact on our evaluation procedures. The fair value of the reporting units is determined based on a weighted average of the income and market approaches. The income approach establishes fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting units, discounted by an estimated weighted-average cost of capital developed using the capital asset pricing model, which reflects the overall level of inherent risk of the reporting units. The income approach uses our projections of financial performance for a six to nine-year period and includes assumptions about future revenues growth rates, operating margins and terminal values. The market approach establishes fair value by applying cash flow multiples to the reporting units’ operating performance. The multiples are derived from other publicly traded companies that are similar but not identical from an operational and economic standpoint.
Internal-use software development costs
We capitalize certain costs related to software developed for internal-use, primarily associated with the ongoing development and enhancement of our technology platform. Costs incurred in the preliminary development and post-development stages are expensed. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, generally three years.
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences and benefits attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts that are more likely than not to be realized.
Relative to uncertain tax positions, we accrue for losses we believe are probable and can be reasonably estimated. The amount recognized is subject to estimate and management judgment with respect to the likely outcome of each uncertain tax position. The amount that is ultimately sustained for an individual uncertain tax position or for all uncertain tax positions in the aggregate could differ from the amount recognized. If the amounts recorded are not realized or if penalties and interest are incurred, we have elected to record all amounts within income tax expense.
At December 31, 2021, we recorded a gross liability for an uncertain tax position of $1.3 million. No liability was recorded at December 31, 2020. Tax periods from fiscal years 2014 to 2020 remain open and subject to examination for US federal and state tax purposes. As we had no operations nor had filed US federal tax returns prior to May 1, 2014, there are no other US federal or state tax years subject to examination.
Share-Based Compensation
In accordance with applicable accounting standards, all share-based payments, consisting of stock options, and restricted stock units ("RSUs") issued to employees are measured based on the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the period during which the recipient is required to perform services in exchange for the award (the requisite service period). We also offer an employee stock purchase plan ("ESPP"). The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards and ESPP purchase rights on the date of grant using option-pricing models is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise activity, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and expected term. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing Model to estimate the grant-date fair value of stock options. We also use an equity valuation model to estimate the grant-date fair value of RSUs. Additionally, the recognition of share-based compensation expense requires an estimation of the number of awards that will ultimately vest and the number of awards that will ultimately be forfeited.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND JOBS ACT ELECTION
Under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the “JOBS Act”), we meet the definition of an emerging growth company. We have irrevocably elected to opt out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards pursuant to Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.