Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. For a complete discussion of forward-looking statements, see the section above titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.” Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on developing novel therapies for neuronal excitability disorders to address unmet needs in chronic pain, psychiatry, epilepsy and other disorders of the peripheral and central nervous systems. These disorders often occur when neurons are overly excited or inhibited, leading to an imbalance, and our focus is on restoring homeostasis. We are developing a pipeline of clinically differentiated product candidates focused on validated mechanisms of action with broad therapeutic potential to deliver improved therapeutics for patients with these disorders.
Our two lead clinical-stage candidates are ETX-810 and ETX-155. ETX-810 is a novel palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) prodrug initially being developed for the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain (DPNP) and lumbosacral radicular pain (LSRP), commonly referred to as sciatica. ETX-810 is being evaluated in two Phase 2a clinical trials that are expected to report topline data in 2022 (DPNP Phase 2a in the first half of 2022, and LSRP Phase 2a in the second half of 2022). ETX-155 is a neurosteroid GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulator (PAM) initially being developed for the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), perimenopausal depression (PMD) and focal onset seizures (FOS), the most common type of seizure in people with epilepsy. In the first half of 2022, assuming FDA clearance of our IND filed in the first quarter of 2022, we plan to initiate two Phase 2a clinical trials for ETX-155 in patients with MDD and PMD, and we expect both to report topline data in the second half of 2023. In addition, we have initiated a Phase 1b proof-of-concept clinical trial in patients with photosensitive epilepsy that is expected to report interim data in the first half of 2022.
Below is a summary of our wholly owned pipeline.
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception, as we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, identifying potential product candidates, business planning, raising capital, undertaking research, executing preclinical studies and clinical development trials, and providing general and administrative support for business activities. We incurred net losses of $47.5 million and $20.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $75.6 million and $28.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily with an aggregate of $208.3 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock and our initial public offering of our common stock. We had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $161.4 million and $20.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Based on our current operating plan, we estimate that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into late 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We anticipate that our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially over the foreseeable future. The expected increase in expenses will be largely driven by our ongoing activities as we:
•continue to develop and conduct clinical trials, including for ETX-810 and ETX-155 for our initial and any potential additional indications; initiate and continue research and development, including preclinical, clinical and discovery efforts for any future product candidates; seek regulatory approvals for ETX-810 and ETX-155, or any other product candidates that successfully complete clinical development;
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product candidate development and help us comply with our obligations as a public company;
•hire and retain additional personnel, such as clinical, manufacturing, quality control, scientific, commercial and administrative personnel; maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•establish sales, marketing, distribution, manufacturing, supply chain and other commercial infrastructure in the future to commercialize various products for which we may obtain regulatory approval; and
•add equipment and physical infrastructure to support our research and development and growing staff; acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and incur increased costs as a result of operating as a public company.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales since our inception. Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development, regulatory approval and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates, if approved. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
We will require substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and further the development of our product candidates. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which could include income from collaborations, strategic partnerships or other strategic arrangements. To a lesser extent, we also expect to continue to rely on U.K. research and development tax credits and incentives for funding. Adequate funding may not be available when needed or on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital as needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue development of our product candidates. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide, resulting from increased volatility in the trading prices for shares in the biopharmaceutical industry, the ongoing pandemic, or otherwise. In addition, our ability to continue to benefit from research and development tax credits and incentives will depend on our ability to continue meet the applicable requirements for them. If we fail to obtain necessary capital when needed on acceptable terms, or at all, it could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs, commercialization efforts or other operations. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose.
Acquisition
In October 2020, we acquired 100% of the share capital of Athenen Therapeutics, Inc. (the Athenen Acquisition), a company developing ETX-155, in a one-for-one exchange of their outstanding preferred and common stock. As a result, we issued a total of 2.5 million shares of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock and 1.55 million shares of common stock, valued at $5.80 per share and $1.32 per share, respectively, for total purchase consideration of $16.5 million. The IPR&D acquired in this acquisition will enable us to continue to develop ETX-155. The Athenen Acquisition is accounted for as an asset acquisition. Since the acquired IPR&D did not have an alternative future use, we recognized a charge of $9.2 million which is included as a component of in-process research and development on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations
In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. Since then, extraordinary actions have been taken by international, federal, state, and local public health and governmental authorities to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19 in regions throughout the world, including the U.K. and the State of Washington, where most of our operations are conducted. These actions substantially restricted daily activities for individuals and caused many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic as it continues to progress and its potential impact on our business. As a result of COVID-19, we have taken precautionary measures in order to minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, including the suspension of all non-essential business travel during peak periods of outbreak. In addition, all of our workforce has the ability to work remotely. To date, we have been able to continue our key business activities and advance our clinical programs. We have experienced delays in availability and shipping of preclinical and clinical supplies and delays in vendor services caused by understaffing or illness. However, to date, these delays have not materially impacted our business. However, in the future, it is possible that delays such as these or other disruptions such as delays related to enrolling participants in our clinical trials could impact our clinical development timelines. While the broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, it has, to date, not had a material adverse impact on our results of operations or our ability to raise funds to sustain operations. The economic effects of the pandemic and resulting societal changes are currently not predictable, and the future financial impacts could vary from those foreseen.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of (i) research and development expenses, including expenses incurred with related parties, (ii) in-process research and development, and (iii) general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of direct and indirect costs incurred in connection with our discovery efforts, preclinical studies, and clinical trial activities related to our pipeline, including our lead product candidates, ETX-810 and ETX-155.
Our direct research and development costs include:
•expenses incurred in connection with research, laboratory consumables and preclinical and clinical trial activities;
•the cost to manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical and clinical trials; and
•consulting fees, including services provided by a related party.
Our indirect research and development costs include:
•personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, for our scientific personnel performing research and development activities; and
•facility rent.
Total direct costs and indirect costs are as follows (in thousands):
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used over time for research and development are capitalized and recognized as goods are delivered or as the related services are performed. Costs to acquire technologies used in research and development that have not yet received regulatory approval and that are not expected to have an alternative future use are expensed when incurred. We categorize costs by stage of development clinical or preclinical. Given our stage of development and the utilization of our resources across our various programs, we have not historically tracked our research and development costs by program. Research and development expenses are presented net of reimbursement received for refundable research and development tax credits from the U.K. government.
Research and development costs by stage of development are as follows (in thousands):
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to ramp up our clinical development activities and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. Our research and development expenses may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•the number and scope of clinical studies needed for regulatory approval;
•the number and scope of preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•the phases of development of our product candidates;
•the progress and results of our research and development activities;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible subjects and initiate clinical trials;
•the number of subjects that participate in the clinical trials;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of subject participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing of our product candidates;
•the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•the hiring and retention of research and development personnel;
•the degree to which we obtain, maintain, defend and enforce our intellectual property rights; and
•the extent to which we establish collaborations, strategic partnerships or other strategic arrangements and the performance of any related third parties.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development expenses, related party included expense reimbursements paid to Carnot Pharma, LLC, a related party, of $1.3 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In-process Research and Development
Our IPR&D expense consists of the relative fair value of the assets acquired and consideration given in connection with the Athenen Acquisition. As the assets acquired were in the research and development phase and were determined to not have any alternative future use, it was expensed as in-process research and development.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, finance and accounting, human resources, business development and other administrative functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting, tax and consulting services, insurance costs, and travel expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will substantially increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to increase our general and administrative headcount to support our continued research and development activities and, if any product candidates receive marketing approval, commercialization activities, as well as to support our operations generally. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with operating as a public company, including costs related to accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirements, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Tranche Liability
Our redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche lability was accounted for at fair value at inception, with changes in the fair value recorded in earnings at each reporting period through settlement. Refer to Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements.
Foreign Currency Gain (Loss)
Our foreign currency gain (loss) primarily consists of foreign exchanges gains and losses resulting from remeasurement and foreign currency transactions between the British Pound and the U.S. Dollar.
Other Income, net
Our other income consists of interest income, accretion and amortization related to our investments.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth our operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
Research and Development and Research and Development, related party
Research and development expenses increased 151.4% from $8.8 million in 2020 to $22.0 million in 2021. Research and development expenses, related party increased 122.7% to $1.3 million in 2021. In total, research and development expenses increased 149.6% from $9.3 million in 2020 to $23.3 million in 2021. This increase was primarily driven by a $9.5 million increase in clinical expenses associated with Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials of ETX-155 and ETX-810, a $5.8 million increase in preclinical expenses associated with ETX-155, ETX-810, and our preclinical programs, and a $2.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses from increased headcount and stock-based compensation. Clinical and preclinical costs have increased and are expected to continue to increase due to the further advancement of our programs into later stages of clinical development where clinical studies may have increased numbers of subjects, longer duration and more substantial data collection and analysis. The increase was partially offset by a $4.2 million increase in the refundable research and development tax credits from the U.K. generated from the increased research and development activities.
In-process Research and Development
In-process research and development expenses decreased by $9.2 million from 2020 to 2021 as the Athenen Acquisition was completed in October 2020, and we did not acquire any IPR&D in 2021.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased 409.3% from $2.4 million in 2020 to $12.4 million in 2021. The increase is primarily due to a $5.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses from increased headcount and stock-based compensation, as well as an increase of $3.1 million in consulting and legal expenses and an increase of $0.9 million in insurance costs.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table sets forth our other income (expense) (dollars in thousands):
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Tranche Liability
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an $11.7 million charge from the remeasurement of our Series A-1 preferred stock tranche liability immediately prior to settlement.
Foreign Currency Gain (Loss)
Foreign currency gain (loss) decreased from a $0.3 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a $0.2 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2021. The loss was due to unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates between the British Pound and the U.S. Dollar.
Other Income, net
Other income, net increased by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due to the interest income, partially offset by amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts recognized on our investments recognized during the year. In 2020, we held no investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We primarily generate cash and cash equivalents from the sale of our equity securities, including common stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock, and to a lesser extent from cash received pursuant to U.K. research and development tax credits and incentives. From our inception to December 31, 2021, we raised aggregate proceeds of $208.3 million from the issuance of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock and from our initial public offering of our common stock. We have not generated any revenue from product sales or otherwise. We have incurred net losses from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $161.4 million and $20.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $75.6 million and $28.1 million, respectively.
Funding Requirements
We have experienced recurring net losses since inception. Our transition to profitability is dependent upon the successful development, approval and commercialization of our product candidates and achieving a level of revenue adequate to support our cost structure. We do not expect to achieve such revenue and expect to continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We believe our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $161.4 million as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through late 2023.
We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future. As a result, we will need significant additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings or other third-party funding, including potential strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amount of increased capital we will need to raise to support our operations and the outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of our product candidates and build additional manufacturing capacity, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress of our current and future product candidates through preclinical and clinical development;
•potential delays in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, whether current or planned, or other factors;
•continuing our research and discovery activities;
•initiating and conducting additional preclinical, clinical, or other studies for our product candidates;
•changing or adding additional contract manufacturers or suppliers;
•seeking regulatory approvals and marketing authorizations for our product candidates;
•establishing sales, marketing, and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we obtain approval;
•acquiring or in-licensing product candidates, intellectual property and technologies;
•making milestone, royalty, or other payments due under any current or future collaboration or license agreements;
•obtaining, maintaining, expanding, protecting, and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio;
•potential delays or other issues related to our operations;
•meeting the requirements and demands of being a public company;
•defending against any product liability claims or other lawsuits related to our products; and
•the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may exacerbate the magnitude of the factors discussed above.
We have based our estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, in which case, we would be required to obtain additional financing sooner than currently projected, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our development strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development and commercialization of our product candidates or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline. We may also be required to sell or license to other parties’ rights to develop or commercialize our product candidates that we would prefer to retain.
Cash Flows
The following table summarized our cash flows (in thousands):
Operating activities
In 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $36.1 million. This consisted primarily of net loss of $47.5 million and a net increase in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.2 million, primarily related to research and development activities, which was partially offset by the non-cash charges for changes in the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability of $11.7 million and stock-based compensation of $3.7 million.
In 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $14.1 million. This consisted primarily of net loss of $20.7 million and an increase in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.9 million, mostly related to research and development activities, which was partially offset by the non-cash charges for in-process research and development expenses of $9.2 million and stock-based compensation of $0.7 million
Investing activities
In 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $115.0 million. This consisted of purchases of investments in U.S. government debt securities, commercial paper, and corporate bonds.
In 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $8.1 million, which was attributable to the $8.3 million in cash acquired from the Athenen Acquisition which was partially offset by the legal fees of $0.2 million paid for such acquisition
Financing activities
In 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $177.2 million, primarily attributable to the proceeds, net of issuance costs, from the issuance of our Series A-1 and Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock, and the issuance of our common stock in our initial public offering.
In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $4.9 million, attributable to the proceeds, net of issuance costs, from the issuance of our Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts with contract research organizations (CROs), contract development and manufacturing organizations (CDMOs), and other third parties for preclinical studies and clinical trials, research and development supplies, and other testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain material minimum purchase commitments and generally provide us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust our requirements based on our business needs, prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. However, it is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these agreements due to the conditional nature of our obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each agreement.
We lease various operating spaces in the U.S. and the U.K. under non-cancelable operating lease arrangements that expire on various dates through January 31, 2025. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable lease agreements were approximately $1.0 million and $47,000, respectively.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A summary of the significant accounting policies is provided in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•it requires a significant level of estimation uncertainty; and
•changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
We believe the following critical accounting policies and estimates describe the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure our stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employee directors, consultants and independent advisors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of our stock option awards. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make assumptions and judgements about the variables used in the calculation, including the fair value of common stock, expected term, expected volatility of our common stock, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation is recognized. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation recognized in future periods could be materially different.
Refer to Note 2 and 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding the development and evaluation of the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards, and the related effect of stock-based compensation expense on the consolidated financial statements.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Following the closing of our IPO, the fair market value of our common stock is based on its closing price as reported on the date of grant on the Nasdaq Global Market, on which our common stock is traded. Prior to our IPO, because there was no public market for our common stock, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by the board of directors as of the date of each option grant with input from management, considering the most recently available third-party valuation of common stock, and the board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates which involved inherent uncertainties. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding the factors considered and valuation approaches utilized in determining the best estimate of fair value of our common stock prior to our IPO.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
Our Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock included an obligation whereby the investors agreed to buy, and the Company agreed to sell, additional shares at a fixed price if certain agreed upon milestones were achieved (Series A-1 Tranche Rights). This redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability was determined to be a freestanding financial instrument that should be accounted for as a liability at fair value and was revalued at each reporting period until settlement, with changes in the fair value recorded as a change in redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Upon the closing of the redeemable convertible preferred stock, the redeemable convertible preferred stock purchase rights liability was extinguished, and the mark-to-market fair value of the liability was included in the carrying value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock issued.
We estimated the fair value of the Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability using a probability-weighted present value model that considered the probability of triggering the Series A-1 Tranche Rights through achievement of the clinical development milestones specified in the Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock purchase agreement. Significant estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement included the estimated fair value per share of the underlying Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock, risk-free rate, expected dividend yield, time to liquidity, expected volatility of the price of the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock and determining the type of option (call option and/or forward contract) and associated probabilities. The most significant assumptions impacting the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche feature included the estimated fair value of our Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock, estimated time to achieve the tranche milestone, and the determination of the type of option (call option and/or forward contract) and associated probability of success of completing the milestone.
We determined the estimated fair value per share of the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock by taking into consideration the most recent sales of our redeemable convertible preferred stock as well as additional factors that we deemed relevant. We assessed these assumptions and estimates on a quarterly basis as additional information impacting the assumptions became available. The risk-free rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the preferred stock tranche feature. We estimated a 0% dividend yield based on the expected dividend yield and the fact that we have never paid or declared dividends. We estimated the time to liquidity by weighting potential timelines associated with reaching various pipeline milestones. We historically have been a private company and lack company-specific historical and implied volatility information of our stock. Therefore, we estimated our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a representative group of public companies in the biotechnology industry for the expected terms. The determination of the type of option is based on the payouts available to the holders of the Series A-1 Tranche Rights and the level of control the investors had over exercising these rights.
These estimates involved inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes changed and we used significantly different assumptions or estimates, our redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability could have been materially different.
Internal Controls over Financial Reporting
In connection with the audit of our consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Common Stock -We have identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting. If we are unable to remediate the material weaknesses, or if we identify additional material weaknesses in the future or otherwise fail to maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to accurately or timely report our financial condition or results of operations, which may adversely affect our business.”
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (JOBS Act). Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act for emerging growth companies include presentation of only two years audited consolidated financial statements in a registration statement for an initial public offering, an exemption from the requirement to provide an auditor’s report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, an exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation, and less extensive disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that (i) we are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act.
As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt instruments during the previous three fiscal years, (iii) the date on which we are deemed a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding equity securities held by non-affiliates, or (iv) December 31, 2026.