ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto. Our fiscal year ends December 31. This Report contains certain forward-looking statements including, among others, anticipated trends in our financial condition and results of operations and our business strategy. These forward-looking statements are based largely on our current expectations and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Please see “Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" of this Report. Actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements. Important factors to consider in evaluating such forward-looking statements include changes in external factors or in our internal budgeting process which might impact trends in our results of operations; unanticipated working capital or other cash requirements; changes in our business strategy or an inability to execute our strategy due to unanticipated changes in the industries in which we operate; and various competitive market factors that may prevent us from competing successfully in the marketplace. Forward-looking statements do not represent our views as of any date other than the date of this Report.
Business
We design, develop, manufacture and market organic light emitting diode, or OLED miniature displays, which we refer to as OLED-on-silicon microdisplays, virtual imaging products that utilize OLED microdisplays, and related products. We also perform research in the OLED field. Our virtual imaging products integrate OLED technology with silicon chips to produce high-resolution microdisplays which, when viewed through a magnifying headset, create virtual images that appear comparable in size to that of a computer monitor or a large-screen television. Our products enable our original equipment manufacturer, or OEM, customers in the military and commercial markets to develop and market improved or new electronic products which enable the visualization of digital information and imagery.
We believe that our OLED microdisplays offer a number of significant advantages over comparable liquid crystal microdisplays, including higher contrast, greater power efficiency, less weight, more compact size, and negligible image smearing. Using our active matrix OLED technology, many computer and electronic system functions can be built directly into the OLED microdisplays silicon backplane, resulting in compact, high resolution and power efficient systems. Already proven in military and commercial systems, our product portfolio of OLED microdisplays deliver high-resolution, virtual images that perform effectively even in extreme temperatures and high-vibration conditions.
We have been deemed to be an essential business in the State of New York and have continued to produce and ship products during the COVID-19 pandemic. We have implemented employee health and safety measures per Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC, guidelines, and monitor, federal, state and local governmental regulations to respond to the latest health and safety guidelines. As of the date of this Report, we have experienced disruptions in supply, had several employees test positive for the COVID-19 virus and had to close our facilities for cleaning purposes. There is no assurance that our operations will not be disrupted in the future by additional impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Omicron variant, or other resurgences of the virus, on either our internal operations or those of our suppliers or customers, including the possible impact of disruptions in the supply of silicon wafers or other raw materials that could harm our ability to meet demand for our products in a timely manner, or within budget. In addition, please review the various risk factors relating to the COVID-19 pandemic discussed in Part II, Item 1A of this Report.
Operating expenses for 2021, including R&D expenses, increased approximately $1.3 million compared to 2020. The majority of the increase was in R&D expenses due to materials and other overhead costs related to development and qualification of our higher brightness XLE and dPd displays and a decrease in costs allocated to contracts cost of goods sold, reflecting lower contract revenues in the 2021 periods.
We are continually making improvements in production processes; however the majority of our equipment is older and malfunctions in single point of failure equipment has the potential to delay our production until repairs can be made. We experienced equipment issues in 2020, and experienced some equipment issues during 2021. In addition, we have also experienced delays in the delivery of certain of the components used in the manufacture of our products, and also had delays in getting vendor support personnel, due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, resulting in occasional production disruptions. Equipment purchased during 2021, and expected to be purchased in 2022 under our government awards programs is expected to reduce our single point of failure risk and improve manufacturing yields and throughput. As part of our ongoing efforts to improve our throughput, yield, and quality practices, we are working with an industrial engineering firm to develop an operations excellence strategy and to obtain the AS9100 quality certification.
Our backlog at December 31, 2021 was $13.8 million compared to backlog of $10.9 million at December 31, 2020. Backlog is comprised of orders believed to be firm with scheduled delivery dates over the next twelve months and does not include contract revenues.
We believe that our U.S.-based design and manufacturing, combined with in-house advanced backplane design, and our dPd technology give us a competitive advantage. Our direct patterning equipment is operational. We have fabricated full color displays including our 4kX4k and WUXGA displays, using our dPd tool, which was newly upgraded and installed during 2021. In July 2021, using our dPd technology we created full color WUXGA displays with a brightness of over 10,000 cd/m2 and exhibited these displays to industry analysts in October 2021. We continue our development work for a tier one consumer customer and are targeting similar levels of brightness on proof-of-concept displays using our full color dPd process.
We received a validation of our products and technology during 2020 from the U.S. government. In 2020, we received two Department of Defense, or DOD, awards totaling $39.1 million. We believe we are the only commercial U.S. manufacturer of OLED microdisplays and our displays are used in many U.S. military programs.
Consumer, commercial (in which we include the medical and industrial sectors), and military customers are increasingly turning to us because of our technological leadership in display brightness and resolution. This leadership in brightness is further demonstrated by our proprietary dPd capability. Unlike traditional OLEDs that produce colors by using a white source with filters that eliminate about 80% of the emitted light, with dPd, we make full color displays by directly depositing each of the primary color materials on respective sub-pixels, without the use of filters. In July 2021, we achieved full color brightness levels of over 10,000 cd/m2 and expect to achieve a brightness level of over 28,000 cd/m2 ready for mass production of full color displays by 2023. We achieved the highest monochrome brightness levels in the market years ago and are continuing our leadership with color displays. Display brightness is critical for AR/VR devices because of optics inefficiency and the need to eliminate motion artifacts. This is especially important for heads up displays used in bright, daylight environments. Our high resolution and low pixel pitch are also important to eliminate the “screen door” effect that comes with expanding lower resolution displays over wide fields of view.
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE American, and we are subject to its continued listing requirements, including maintaining certain share prices and a minimum amount of shareholder’s equity. If we are unable to comply with the NYSE American continued listing requirements, including its trading price requirements, our common stock may be suspended from trading on and/or delisted from the NYSE American.
Results of Operations
Comparative results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenues
Total revenues decreased $3.4 million to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $29.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a 12% decrease.
Product revenues are comprised primarily of sales of displays as well as sales of other hardware. In 2021, product revenues decreased $0.8 million to $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from revenues of $25.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a 3% decrease. The decrease in product revenues in 2021 was primarily due to unexpected down time of our manufacturing equipment and resulting capacity constraint resulting in $1.1 million in late orders that did not ship in 2021.
Contract revenues primarily reflected development associated with proof of concept display for a tier-one consumer customer. In 2021, contract revenues decreased $2.5 million to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from revenues of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a 57% decrease. Contract revenues of $1.9 million in 2021 primarily reflected development work for an advanced display design and proof of concept for a consumer AR/VR device, which work is ongoing through 2022. Contract revenues are milestone based and not uniformly distributed throughout the project duration.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues is comprised of costs of product revenues and contract revenues. Cost of product revenue includes materials, labor and manufacturing overhead, warranty costs and depreciation related to our products. Cost of contract revenue includes direct and allocated indirect costs associated with performance on the contracts, primarily engineering resources and materials. Total cost of revenues decreased by $1.6 million to $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues was 82% and 78%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
As discussed in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report, during the first quarter of 2021 we changed our method of allocating overhead to inventory. The impact of this change for the year ended December 31, 2021 was an increase of approximately $0.6 million in the carrying value of our work in process and finished goods inventory as of December 31, 2021, and a corresponding decrease in product cost of goods sold. This decreased our net loss by $0.6 million and our loss per share by $0.01 as compared to results that would have been obtained using the former method of estimation.
The decrease in product cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the decrease in product revenues compared to the prior year period.
The decrease in contract cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, was due to the decrease in contract revenues related to the timing of activities under our development agreement with a tier-one consumer customer.
The following table outlines product, contract and total gross profit and related gross margins for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Total gross profit is a function of revenues less cost of revenues. In 2021, total gross profit decreased approximately $1.8 million or 28% from gross profit of $6.4 million in 2020. Total gross margin was 18% for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, down from 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin for 2021 was primarily impacted by decreases in contract revenues gross profit related to timing of activities under our agreement for development work with a tier-one consumer customer.
Product revenue gross profit of 15% for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased from 16% in the prior year period due to the impact of lower product revenues in 2021.
Contract gross margin is dependent upon the mix of internal versus external third-party costs and materials, with the external third-party costs and materials causing a lower gross margin and reducing the contract gross profit. For the year ended December 31, 2021, contract revenue gross profit was $0.9 million compared to $2.4 million for the prior year period. The decrease in contract revenue gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily reflects the decrease in contract revenues.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses are company funded and are primarily comprised of salaries and related benefits, development materials and other costs specifically allocated to the development of new technologies, microdisplay products, OLED technologies and production processes. R&D related costs associated with fulfilling contracts are categorized as contract cost of revenues. R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $7.0 million as compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.3 million. The increase in R&D costs during 2021 reflects materials and other overhead costs related to development and qualification of our higher brightness XLE and dPd displays and a decrease of $0.8 million in costs allocated to contract cost of goods sold, reflecting lower contract revenues in 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses, or SG&A expenses, consist primarily of personnel expenses, professional services fees, as well as other marketing, general corporate and administrative expenses. SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $7.6 million, comparable to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of changes in the fair value of a warrant liability as well as interest expense and interest income on cash balances. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.8 million compared to other expense of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income related to the change in fair value of warrant liability was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to compared to an expense of $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This non-cash income or expense in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 is associated with changes in the liability related to registered warrants issued in May 2017 and January 2018. We are required to revalue warrants classified on our balance sheet as a liability at the end of each reporting period and reflect a gain or loss from the change in fair value in the period in which the change occurred. We calculate the fair value of the warrants outstanding using the Black-Scholes model.
In addition, during 2021 we recognized other income of $0.4 million which includes a $0.1 million gain upon settlement of an arbitration proceeding with a contract manufacturer and $0.3 million in reimbursement of labor overhead charges under government grant programs.
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.9 million as compared to net interest expense of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $0.8 million primarily relates to modifications of our facility lease agreement in December 2020 that resulted in a change in classification of related expenditures from rent expense recognized during 2020 under an operating lease to interest expense and amortization under a finance lease recognized in 2021.
Gain on forgiveness of debt
Gain on forgiveness of debt of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflects indebtedness payable to the Small Business Administration that was forgiven during the three months ended March 31, 2021, pursuant to the terms of the Paycheck Protection Program and the CARES Act.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no income tax expense. We have a full valuation allowance as we recognize the effect of income tax positions, which are more-likely-than-not of being sustained. We have determined that it was not likely that we will generate sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets.
Net Loss
As a result of the above, net loss was approximately $5.2 million and $11.4 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $5.7 million of cash and cash equivalents, working capital of $11.8 million and borrowing outstanding and borrowing availability under the ABL Facility of $2.0 million and $2.3 million, respectively. The $2.6 million decrease in cash was primarily due to cash used in operating activities of $7.4 million and investing activities of $11.9 million, offset by cash provided by financing activities of $15.4 million. The remaining decrease in cash was due to the decrease in restricted cash of $1.3 million.
On June 8, 2020, the Company received a loan under the U.S. Small Business Administration’s, or SBA, Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, from Key Bank National Association related to the COVID-19 pandemic for $1.9 million. The terms, of the PPP loan, included a fixed interest rate of 1% per annum, a maturity date two years from the date of the funding of the loan, and deferral of payments for six months. During 2020, we used the proceeds to pay qualified payroll costs, in accordance with PPP and Section 1106 of the CARES Act requirements. We applied for forgiveness of the entire loan in the fourth quarter of 2020. In April 2021, the Company received a forgiveness notice from the SBA and received a related acknowledgement letter from its lender stating that they received payment in full from the SBA effective March 31, 2021. We recorded this amount in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations as a gain on forgiveness of debt in the first quarter of 2021.
On June 11, 2020, we were granted a $5.5 million award from IBAS. We received these funds for procurement and installation of capital equipment in our NY-based manufacturing facility. This award was created to focus on strengthening the U.S. Manufacturing and Defense Industrial Base. The release of funds to us began in August 2020 in accordance with down payments and progress payment schedules of the various capital equipment vendors.
On July 28, 2020, we received a $33.6 million award for the purchase of capital equipment over the next 33 months from the U.S. Department of Defense to sustain and enhance U.S. domestic capability for high resolution, high brightness OLED microdisplays that will be based on the Company’s proprietary dPd. This investment is in addition to the $5.5 million award announced on June 11, 2020, under the IBAS Program for OLED Supply Chain Assurance and will be used to increase capacity and sustain operations at eMagin’s Hopewell Junction, New York headquarters.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has ordered all equipment awarded by these grants, including a production-capable dPd organic deposition tool that is expected to improve yield and throughput of this innovative technology. The Company has taken delivery of four pieces of production equipment and received $12.5 million of the total $39.1 million in government granted awards for initial deposits required by capital equipment vendors. Overall, the Company remains on track and within requirements of the U.S. Defense Production Act Title III and IBAS funding grants.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used by operating activities were $7.4 million, which was attributable to our net loss of $5.2 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.4 million and net non-cash gain of $1.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used by operating activities were $4.9 million, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $11.4 million and the effect of net non-cash expenses of $7.6 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used by investing activities were $11.9 million and $2.5 million, respectively, primarily due to equipment purchases for improving manufacturing yields and production capacity and to advance our dPd technology including grant proceeds for capital expenditures of $10.5 million in 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding commitments to purchase approximately $1.4 million in capital expenditures, and expect to make additional capital expenditures during 2022 to improve our manufacturing and R&D capabilities. These commitments exclude $20.5 million expected to be purchased and funded by the DOD, as described above. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.4 million for equipment purchases.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $15.4 million, including $9.1 million in proceeds from government grants, $6.4 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and employee stock options. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities were $14.3 million of which $9.8 million were from the net proceeds from a public offering and associated private placement of our common stock and $1.9 million in net borrowings under our ABL Facility.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will continue to operate as a going concern and which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.
The Company’s ABL Facility expires on December 31, 2022, and renews automatically for another year unless terminated pursuant to its terms. The ABL Facility agreement contains certain lenders remedies that give the bank the ability to impose discretionary reserves against our borrowing availability or terminate the facility upon events of default. Although our relationship with the lender is positive, there is no assurance the lender will renew or extend this facility or continue to make funds available during 2022 and beyond at present availability levels, or at all.
Due to continuing losses, the Company’s financial position, and uncertainty regarding the Company’s ability to borrow under its ABL Facility, or continue to raise funds under its ATM facility, the Company may not be able to meet its financial obligations as they become due without additional financing or sources of capital. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly increased economic and demand uncertainty across the globe and contributed to supply chain shortages and disruptions. Although demand for
the Company’s products has remained steady, the Company’s ability to obtain components and other materials or services on a timely basis has resulted in manufacturing delays, and increased costs. If these trends worsen as a result of COVID-19 or other semiconductor supply chain issues or result in lost orders it could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Management is prepared to reduce expenses and raise additional capital, but there can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in sufficiently reducing expenses or raising capital to meet its operating needs.
We have taken actions to increase revenues and to reduce expenses and is considering financing alternatives. Our plans with regard to these matters include the following actions:
focus production and engineering resources on improving manufacturing yields and increasing production volumes;
continue the Work Status Reduction program that began in October 2019 wherein senior management work status was reduced by approximately 20%;
continue to utilize government grants for purchase of capital equipment and funding manufacturing personnel;
reduce discretionary and other expenses;
seek to enter new markets;
sale of common shares under our ATM equity facility; and
consider additional financing and/or strategic alternatives.
We are reassessing our business plan and forecasts over the next two years. Based on our known cash needs as of March 2022, and the anticipated availability of its ABL facility, we have developed plans to extend our liquidity to support its working capital requirements through the first quarter of 2023.
However, there can be no assurance the Company’s plans will be achieved and the Company will be able to meet its financial obligations as they become due without obtaining additional financing or sources of capital. Therefore, in accordance with applicable accounting guidance, and based on the Company’s current financial condition and availability of funds, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through twelve months from the date these financial statements were issued.
In addition, even if we successfully generate additional funds through the sale of additional equity securities, borrowings or alternative financing, there can be no assurances that the revenue or capital infusion will be sufficient to enable us to develop our business to a level where it will be profitable or generate positive cash flow. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of our stockholders could be significantly diluted, and these newly issued securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing stockholders. If we incur additional debt, a substantial portion of its operating cash flow may be dedicated to the payment of principal and interest on such indebtedness, thus limiting funds available for our operational business activities. The terms of any debt securities issued could also impose significant restrictions on our operations. In addition, broad market and industry factors may seriously harm the market price of our common stock, regardless of its operating performance, and may adversely impact its ability to raise additional funds.
Equity Raises
On November 18, 2021, we entered into an ATM offering agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, or Wainwright, relating to sales of shares of our common stock under an ATM facility. On November 18, 2021 we also filed a prospectus supplement to allow the sale of shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $10.0 million under the ATM facility.
During 2021, we raised $0.2 million, net of offering expenses, through the sale of shares under the ATM facility. We used and intend to use the net proceeds from sales made under the ATM facility for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
ABL Facility
On December 21, 2016, we entered into an asset based revolving credit facility with a lender that provides for up to a maximum amount of $5 million based on a borrowing base equivalent of 85% of eligible accounts receivable plus the lesser of $2 million or 50% of eligible inventory. The interest on the ABL Facility is equal to the Prime Rate plus 3% but may not be less than 6.5% with a minimum monthly interest payment of $2,000. We are obligated to pay the lender a monthly administrative fee of $1,000 and an annual facility fee equal to 1% of the maximum amount borrowable under the facility.
The ABL Facility renewed on December 31, 2021 and will automatically renew on December 31, 2022 for a one-year term unless written notice to terminate the Financing Agreement is provided by either party.
The ABL Facility is secured by a lien on all receivables, property and the proceeds thereof, credit insurance policies and other insurance relating to the collateral, books, records and other general intangibles, inventory and equipment, proceeds of the collateral and accounts, instruments, chattel paper, and documents. The ABL Facility contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and
negative covenants and events of default, including a provision that we maintain a minimum tangible net worth of $13 million and a minimum working capital balance of $4 million. As of December 31, 2021, there were $2.0 million in net borrowings outstanding under the Financing Agreement, the interest rate was 6.5% and had unused borrowing availability of $2.3 million. We were in compliance with all financial debt covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Change in Control Agreements
The Company entered into change in control agreements with certain of its executive officers, non-executive officers and managers. The agreements specify various employment-related matters, including annual compensation, performance incentive bonuses, and severance benefits in the event of termination with or without cause.
Dividends
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, no dividends were declared or paid. It is our intention to retain any future profits for use in the development and expansion of our business and for general corporate purposes. Future decisions to pay cash dividends are at the discretion of our Board of Directors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Refer to Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for a discussion of our significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The following accounting estimates are viewed by management to be critical because they required significant judgment on the part of management. Management has discussed and reviewed the development, selection, and disclosure of critical accounting estimates with the Company’s Audit Committee. Financial results could be materially different if other methodologies were used or if management modified its assumptions. Estimates are based on information available through the date of the issuance of the financial statements and, accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ from these estimates.
Contract Revenue and Cost Recognition
All of the Company’s revenues are earned from contracts with customers and are classified as either Product or Contract revenues. Contracts include written agreements and purchase orders, as well as arrangements that are implied by customary practices or law. Refer to Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for the Company’s discussion of product revenues.
The Company recognizes contract revenue over time as we provide services to satisfy our performance obligations. We generally use the cost-to-cost percentage-of-completion measure of progress as it best depicts how control transfers to our customers. The cost-to-cost approach measures progress towards completion based on the ratio of contract cost incurred to date compared to total estimated contract cost. Use of the cost-to-cost measure of progress requires us to prepare estimates of total expected revenue and cost to complete our projects.
Due to the nature of our industry, there is significant complexity in our estimation of total expected revenue and cost, for which we must make significant judgments. Our contracts with our customers typically contain date and performance milestones and deliverables, and due to the innovative nature of the R&D processes involved, estimate of labor, materials and contract costs are difficult to predict with certainty, and are subject to change as the related projects progress.
At a project level, we have specific practices and procedures to review our estimates of total revenue and cost. Each project team reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations, which impact the project’s accounting outcome. As part of this process, the project team reviews information such as any outstanding key contract matters, progress towards completion and the related program schedule and identified risks and opportunities. The accuracy of our revenue and profit recognition in a given period depends on the accuracy of our project estimates, which can change from period to period due to a variety of factors including:
Complexity in original design;
Extent of changes from original design;
Different site conditions than assumed in our bid;
The productivity, availability and skill level of labor;
Length of time to complete the project;
Availability and cost of equipment and materials; and
Our ability to recover for additional contract costs.
We recognize changes in contract estimates on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the changes are identified. Such changes in contract estimates can result in the recognition of revenue in a current period for performance obligations which were satisfied or partially satisfied in prior periods. Changes in contract estimates may also result in the reversal of previously recognized revenue if the current estimate adversely differs from the previous estimate. If we estimate that a project will have costs in excess of revenue, we recognize the total loss in the period it is identified.
Refer to Note 2 and Note 6 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for further information on our contract revenues and cost recognition.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined by the first-in, first-out methodology, or net realizable value. We use a standard cost methodology to determine the cost basis for our inventories. Cost includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related to the production of OLED displays. The standard cost for our products is subject to fluctuation from quarter to quarter, depending primarily on the number of displays produced, fluctuations in manufacturing overhead and labor hours incurred, and the yields experienced in the manufacturing process. Under the principles of full absorption costing, these costs are allocated to each unit of production in work in process and finished goods inventory based on actual use of production facilities. In applying this principle, the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC 330-10-30-4, “Inventory” require that a company determine the range of normal capacity, or production expected to be achieved over a number of periods or seasons, and limits the amount of fixed production overheads allocated to inventory in periods of abnormally low production. Financial results could be materially different if other methodologies were used or if management modified its assumptions.
During the first quarter of 2021, we redefined the Company’s range of normal capacity, in recognition of a shift in product demand toward larger, more complex displays yielding fewer die per wafer. We concluded that measuring output by the number of displays produced per quarter was no longer an accurate measure of productive capacity. Management determined that measuring output based on the number of wafers produced per quarter was a more appropriate measure of production volume. Refer to Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for further information, as well as additional detail on the change in estimate during 2021.
Effect of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on results of operations and financial condition.