Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 19, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our initial public offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a Business Combination after the Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on the marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $99,988, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $100,518, offset by interest income on cash held in trust account of $530.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 20, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 22,000,000 units generating gross proceeds of $220,000,000. Each unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-half of one redeemable warrant, with each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock for $11.50 per share. On January 11, 2022, the underwriter partially exercised its over-allotment option, resulting in the sale on January 14, 2022 of an additional 2,869,342 units for total gross proceeds of $28,693,420, bringing the aggregate gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering to $248,693,420.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 890,000 Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Placement Unit in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,900,000. On January 11, 2022, the underwriter partially exercised its over-allotment option, resulting in the sale of 86,081 Placement Units to our Sponsor for total gross proceeds of $860,810, bringing the total aggregate gross proceeds of the Private Placement to $9,760,810.
We incurred $12,603,430 in transaction costs, including $4,400,000 of underwriting fees ($660,000 of which was reimbursed to us to pay the advisory fee due to CCM), $7,700,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $503,430 of other offering costs. In connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, we incurred $573,868 of underwriting fees and $1,004,270 of deferred underwriting fees.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Placement Units, a total of $251,180,354 ($10.10 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of a Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to the Company’s stockholders, as described below.
As at December 31, 2021, we had $1,227,914 in cash and working capital of $1,545,690. Prior to the completion of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the sponsor of $25,000 and a loan to us of up to $300,000 by our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note, which had no outstanding balance as of December 31, 2021. The outstanding balance under the promissory note of $105,260 was repaid on December 27, 2021 and the promissory note was terminated.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, investments and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $222,200,530. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender at the time of the Business Combination. The units would be identical to the Placement Units. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. As of December 31, 2021, no such loans were outstanding.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from the date of this Annual Report. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
Other than the below, we do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
We entered into an administrative services agreement pursuant to which we pay the sponsor or its designee a monthly fee of $30,000 for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on December 16, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation. As of December 31, 2021, we accrued $16,451 for the administrative support services in Due to Related Party.
The holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and units that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (including securities contained therein) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to the Class A common stock). The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act.
We granted the underwriter of the Initial Public Offering a 45-day option to purchase up to 3,300,000 additional Units to cover any over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 14, 2022, the underwriter purchased an additional 2,869,342 Units pursuant to the over-allotment option.
The underwriter earned a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $4,973,868. Additionally, the underwriter will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $8,704,270. The deferred underwriting discount will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We engaged Cohen & Company Capital Markets, a division of J.V.B. Financial Group, LLC (“CCM”), to provide financial advisory services in connection with the Initial Public Offering. We paid CCM a fee in an amount equal to 0.3% of the aggregate proceeds of the Initial Public Offering (excluding the proceeds of the exercise of the over-allotment option) net of underwriter’s expenses, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. We also intend to engage CCM to act as an advisor in connection with the Business Combination for which it will earn an advisory fee of 0.525% of the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering payable at closing of the Business Combination. CCM will also be entitled to an advisory fee equal to 0.825% of the aggregate proceeds of the exercise of the over-allotment option, payable at the closing of the Business Combination. CCM’s fees will be reimbursed to us by the underwriters as it becomes payable out of the underwriting commission and will not result in any incremental fees to us. Accordingly, a reimbursement receivable and deferred advisory fee of $1,155,000 has been reflected in the accompanying balance sheet.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
Offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the Initial Public Offering. The Company complies with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction of equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. As of December 31, 2021, the Company incurred offering costs amounting to $12,603,430 consisting of $4,400,000 of underwriting commissions, $7,700,000 of deferred underwriting fees, and $503,430 of other offering costs. These offering costs are allocated between components of temporary and permanent equity based on the relative fair value of these components.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified in temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the 22,000,000 Class A common stock is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of Class A common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Class A common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Stock
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. We have not considered the effect of the warrants in the calculation of diluted loss per share, if any, since their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net loss per common stock is the same as basic net loss per common stock.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.