ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and the other financial information included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Company Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company engaged in the discovery, development, marketing and sale of innovative treatments and therapies, primarily for rare and orphan diseases. Our lead product, Endari® (prescription-grade L-glutamine oral powder) is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, to reduce the severe complications of sickle cell disease (“SCD”) in adult and pediatric patients five years of age and older. Endari® has received Orphan Drug designation from the FDA and Orphan Medical designation from the European Commission, which designations afford marketing exclusivity for Endari® for a seven-year period in the U.S. and a ten-year period in the European Union, respectively, following marketing approval. The Orphan Drug designation for Endari® will expire July 7, 2024.
Endari® is marketed and sold in the U.S. by our internal commercial sales team. Endari® is reimbursable by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and every state provides coverage for Endari® for outpatient prescriptions to all eligible Medicaid enrollees within their state Medicaid programs. Endari® is also reimbursable by many commercial payors. We have agreements in place with the nation’s leading distributors as well as physician group purchasing organizations and pharmacy benefits managers, making Endari® available at selected retail and specialty pharmacies nationwide.
Until we began marketing and selling Endari® in the U.S. in early 2018, we had minimal revenues and relied upon funding from sales of equity securities and debt financings and loans, including loans from related parties to fund our business and operations. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $241.3 million, and we had cash and cash equivalents of $2.3 million. We expect net revenues to increase as we expand our commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and expand or commence early access programs and eventual marketing and commercialization abroad.
Until we can generate sufficient net revenues, our future cash requirements are expected to be financed through public or private equity or debt financings, loans from related parties and possible corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. We are unable to predict if or when we will become profitable.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the present circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below under “Revenues, net” are the most critical to assist you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Financial Overview
Revenues, net
We realize net revenues primarily from sales of Endari® to our distributors and specialty pharmacy providers. Distributors resell our products to other pharmacy and specialty pharmacy providers, health care providers, hospitals, and clinics. In addition to agreements with these distributors, we have contractual arrangements with specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, physician group purchasing organizations, pharmacy benefits managers and government entities that provide for government-mandated or privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products. These various discounts, rebates, and chargebacks are referred to as “variable consideration.” Revenue from product sales is recorded net of variable consideration.
Under the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of our product, which typically occurs on delivery. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for the product, or transaction price. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to our performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the relevant performance obligations.
Revenue from product sales is recorded at the transaction price, net of estimates for variable consideration consisting of sales discounts, returns, government rebates, chargebacks and commercial discounts. Management estimates variable consideration using the expected-value amount method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible transaction prices. Actual variable consideration may differ from our estimates. If actual results vary from the estimates, we adjust the variable consideration in the period such variances become known, which adjustments are reflected in net revenues in that period. The following are our significant categories of variable consideration:
Sales Discounts: We provide our customers prompt payment discounts and from time to time offer additional discounts to encourage bulk orders to generate needed working capital. Sales attributable to one-time discounts offered by us increased in 2021 over 2020 and may adversely affect sales in subsequent periods.
Product Returns: We offer our distributors a right to return product principally based upon (i) overstocks, (ii) inactive product or non-moving product due to market conditions, and (iii) expired product. Product return allowances are estimated and recorded at the time of sale.
Government Rebates: We are subject to discount obligations under state Medicaid programs and the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap program. We estimate Medicaid and Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap rebates based upon a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenues and the establishment of a current liability that is included as accounts payable and accrued expenses on our balance sheet. Our liability for these rebates consists primarily of estimates of claims expected to be received in future periods related to recognized revenues.
Chargebacks and Discounts: Chargebacks for fees and discounts represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell products to certain specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities at prices lower than the list prices charged to distributors. The distributors charge us for the difference between what they pay for the products and our contracted selling price to these specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities. In addition, we have contractual agreements with pharmacy benefit managers who charge us for rebates and administrative fee in connection with the utilization of product. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of revenues. Chargeback amounts are generally determined at the time of resale of product by our distributors.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of expenses for raw materials, packaging, shipping and distribution of Endari®.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenditures for new products and technologies consisting primarily of fees paid to contract research organizations (“CRO”) that conduct clinical trials of our product candidates, payroll-related expenses, study site payments, consultant fees and activities related to regulatory filings, manufacturing development costs and other related costs. The costs of later stage clinical studies such as Phase 2 and 3 trials are generally higher than those of earlier studies. This is primarily due to the larger size, expanded scope, patient related healthcare and regulatory compliance costs, and generally longer duration of later stage clinical studies.
Our contracts with CROs are generally based on time and materials expended, whereas study site agreements are generally based on costs per patient as well as other pass-through costs, including start-up costs and institutional review board fees. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones.
Future research and development expenses will depend on any new product candidates or technologies that we may introduce into our research and development pipeline. In addition, we cannot predict which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree, if any, such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of the drug approval process and the interpretation of the regulatory requirements, we are unable to estimate the amount of costs of obtaining regulatory approvals of Endari® outside of the U.S. or the development of our other preclinical and clinical programs. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations and can vary widely. These and other risks and uncertainties relating to product development are described in this Annual Report under the headings “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business” and “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Regulatory Oversight of our Business and Compliance with Law.”
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists principally of salaries and related employee costs, including share-based compensation for our directors, executive officers and employees. Other general and administrative expense includes facility costs, patent filing costs, and professional fees and expenses for legal, consulting, auditing and tax services.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel involved in the launch, promotion, sales and marketing of our products. Other selling cost include advertising, third party consulting costs, the cost of contracted and in-house sales personnel and travel-related costs. We expect selling expenses to increase as we acquire additional sales personnel to support the commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and abroad.
Inflation
Inflation has not had a material impact on our expenses or results of operations over the past two years, but may result in increased manufacturing, research and development, general and administrative and selling expenses in the foreseeable future.
Environmental Expenses
The cost of compliance with environmental laws has not been material over the past two years and any such costs are included in general and administrative costs.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, finished goods and work-in-process and are valued on a first-in, first-out basis and at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Substantially all raw materials purchased during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were supplied by one supplier.
Notes Payable, Convertible Notes Payable and Warrants
From time to time, we obtain financing from the sale and issuance of promissory notes or other debt instruments with detachable stock purchase warrants, some of which notes or debt instruments are convertible into shares of our common
stock and some of which are issued to related parties. We analyze all of the terms of our notes payable and promissory notes issued with warrants to determine the appropriate accounting treatment, including determining whether conversion features are required to be bifurcated and treated as a discount, proper allocation of proceeds and issuance costs between the notes or debt instrument and the detachable warrants and the applicable classification of the notes payable and warrants as debt, derivative liabilities, equity or temporary equity (i.e., mezzanine capital).
We allocate the proceeds from the issuance of debt instruments with detachable stock purchase warrants to the two elements based on the relative fair values of the debt instruments without the warrants and of the warrants themselves at the time of issuance. We account for the portion of the proceeds allocated to warrants in additional paid-in capital and the remaining proceeds are allocated to the debt instruments. The allocation to warrants results in a discount to notes payable which is amortized using the effective interest method to interest expense over the expected term of the note. We also include the intrinsic value of the embedded conversion feature of convertible debentures and promissory notes in the discount to notes payable, which is amortized and charged to interest expense over the expected term of the debentures and promissory notes.
We also estimate the total value of any beneficial conversion feature and accompanying warrants in allocating debt proceeds. The proceeds allocated to the beneficial conversion feature are determined by taking the estimated fair value of shares issuable under the convertible debentures and promissory notes less the fair value of the number of shares that would be issued if the conversion rate equaled the fair value of our common stock as of the date of issuance. In situations where the debt includes both a beneficial conversion feature and a warrant, the proceeds are allocated to the warrants and beneficial conversion feature based on the pro-rata fair value. We used the Binomial Monte-Carlo Cliquet (aka Ratchet) Option Pricing Model option pricing model to determine the fair value of our warrants prior to the Merger and Black-Scholes after the Merger.
Notes payable to related parties, interest expense and accrued interest to related parties are separately identified in our consolidated financial statements. We also disclose significant terms of all transactions with related parties.
Share-based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for share-based compensation awards during the service term of the recipients of the awards. The fair value of share-based awards is calculated using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires subjective assumptions regarding future stock price volatility and expected time to exercise, which greatly affect the calculated values. The expected term of awards granted is calculated using the simplified method allowed under the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110. The risk-free rate used to value an award is based on the U.S. Treasury rate as of the date of the award that corresponds to the vesting period of the award. Until July 2019, as the accounting acquirer in the Merger, our common stock was not publicly traded and we lacked company specific historical and implied volatility information for our common stock. Therefore, the expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies.
Fair Value Measurements
We define fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in accordance with ASC 820. We measure fair value under a framework that provides a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described as follows:
Level 1: Inputs to the valuation methodology are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2: Inputs to the valuation methodology include:
•
Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets;
•
Quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets;
•
Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability; and
•
Inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
If the asset or liability has a specified (contractual) term, the Level 2 input must be observable for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
Level 3: Inputs to the valuation methodology that are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
An asset’s or liability’s fair value measurement level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Valuation techniques used need to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs The fair value of our debt instruments is not materially different from their carrying values as presented. The fair value of our convertible debt instruments was determined based on Level 2 inputs. The carrying value of the debt was discounted based on allocating proceeds to other financial instruments within the arrangement as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
Certain of our outstanding warrants contain price adjustment provisions and, consequently, are accounted for as liabilities that are remeasured at fair value on a recurring basis using Level 3 inputs. The Level 3 inputs in the valuation of warrants include expected term and expected volatility.
Related Party Transactions
For a discussion of our related party transactions, refer to Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
Financial Highlights
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Income (Loss). Net loss increased by $17.3 million, or 1,278% to $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net income of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to a $10.8 million increase in other expense as discussed below, a $2.6 million decrease in net revenues, and a $2.5 million increase in operating expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $241.3 million. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 included approximately $2.7 million of net loss on equity method investment attributable to our equity interest in EJ Holdings, a variable interest entity, or VIE. The loss attributable to our equity interest in EJ Holdings for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.1 million.
Revenues, Net. Net revenues decrease by $2.6 million, or 11% to $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $23.2 million in 2020. Substantially all net revenues were attributable to Endari® sales. The decrease was due to lower volume sales of Endari® in 2021 and a higher level of price discounts related to large volume orders in 2021 than in 2020. We expect net revenues to increase in the foreseeable future as we expand our distribution channels for Endari® in the U.S. and commercialize Endari® in the MENA region.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased by $1.1 million, or 47% to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.2 million in 2020 due primarily to the establishment of $2.2 million reserve relating to Endari® inventory with a shelf-life of less than two years.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased by $1.7 million, or 71%, to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.4 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $1.5 million paid to Kainos Medicine, Inc. in connection with the parties; collaboration agreement and Licensing Agreement regarding Kainos’s patented IRA4 inhibitor. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as the study progresses and as we undertake additional studies.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses increased by $1.0 million, or 21%, to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.9 million in 2020. The increase was due to an increase of $0.4 million in travel related expenses, an increase of $0.2 million in distribution fees, an increase of $0.2 million in sales team compensation, and an increase of $0.1 million in promotional expenses. We expect that our selling expenses will continue to increase as we expand Endari® marketing and sales activities both in the U.S. and outside the U.S.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expense decreased by $0.2 million, or 2%, to $13.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $13.7 million in 2020. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we add additional sales and administrative personnel to support the commercialization of Endari outside of the U.S.
Other Income (Expense). Other expense increased by $10.8 million, or 1,074%, to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to other income of $1.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $3.5 million increase in foreign exchange loss and $2.0 million increase in change in fair value of conversion feature derivatives partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in interest expense in 2021. We also realize a net gain on investment in marketable securities of $7.7 million in 2020 from sales of Telcon securities. There was no similar net gain in 2021.
Income Tax (Expense). Income tax expenses increased by $0.4 million, or 106%, to $25,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income tax benefit of $0.4 million in 2020. A valuation allowance for net deferred tax assets recorded when it is more likely than not that we will not realize these assets through future operations. The valuation allowance increased by approximately $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, while it decreased by $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no unrecognized tax benefits or position which, in the opinion of management would be reversed if challenged by a tax authority.
Seasonality
There may be seasonal variations in our Endari® sales due to factors such as year-end holidays, severe winter weather conditions in certain regions of the U.S., seasonal conditions that may affect medical practices and provider activity, including influenza or the Covid-19 outbreaks that may inhibit patients from seeking treatment for their SCD or filling or refilling prescriptions for Endari® and possibly other factors relating to the timing of patient deductibles and co-insurance limits.
COVID-19
We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental responses have adversely affected our sales efforts but have not had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We believe the ongoing elimination of travel and other restrictions may benefit our sales efforts and contribute to increased Endari® sales in 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based on our losses to date, anticipated future net revenues and operating expenses, debt repayment obligations, funding commitment to EJ Holdings and cash and cash equivalents balance of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2021, we do not have sufficient operating capital for our business without raising additional capital. We realized a net loss of $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future and until we can generate increased net revenues from Endari® sales. While we anticipate increased net revenues as we expand our commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. through telehealth and other initiatives, as well as in the MENA region, there is no assurance that we will be able to increase our Endari® sales or attain sustainable profitability or that we will have sufficient capital resources to fund our operations until we are able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations.
Our subsidiary, Emmaus Medical, Inc., or Emmaus Medical, is party a purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital Finance, LLC, or Prestige Capital, pursuant to which Emmaus Medical may offer and sell to Prestige Capital from time to time eligible accounts receivable in exchange for Prestige Capital’s down payment, or advance, to Emmaus Medical of 70% (subject to increase to 75%) of the face amount of the accounts receivable, subject to a $7,500,000 cap on advances at any time. The balance of the face amount of the accounts receivable will be reserved by Prestige Capital and paid to Emmaus Medical, less discount fees of Prestige Capital ranging from 2.25% to 7.25% of the face amount, as and when Prestige Capital collects the entire face amount of the accounts receivable.
Liquidity represents our ability to pay our liabilities when they become due, fund our business operations, fund the operations and retrofitting of EJ Holdings’ amino acid production plant in Ube, Japan, and meet our contractual obligations, including our obligations to purchase API under our supply arrangements with Telcon, and execute our business plan. Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash balances at the beginning of each period, proceeds from our accounts receivable factoring arrangement with Prestige Capital and proceeds from related-party loans and other financing activities. Our short-term and long-term cash requirements consist primarily of working capital requirements, general corporate needs, our contractual obligations to purchase API from Telcon, debt service under our convertible notes payable and notes payable and planned ongoing loan funding to sustain EJ Holdings’ operations. We have no contractual commitment to provide funding to EJ Holdings, but plan to continue to do so in the foreseeable to the extent we have cash available for this purpose.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding $17.6 million in principal amount of convertible promissory notes and $4.7 million in principal amount of other notes payable. Our minimum lease payment obligations were $5.1 million, of which $1.2 million was payable within 12 months.
Our API supply agreement with Telcon provides for an annual API purchase target of $5 million and a target “profit” (i.e., gross margin) to Telcon of $2.5 million. To the extent these targets are not met, Telcon may be entitled to payment of the shortfall or to offset the shortfall against the Telcon convertible bond and proceeds thereof that are pledged as collateral to secure our obligations. With our consent, in February 2022 Telcon retained cash collateral and made offsets against the outstanding balance of our Telcon convertible bond for shortfalls under the API supply agreement for 2020 and 2021.
Due to uncertainties regarding our ability to meet our current and future operating and capital expenses, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for 12 months from the date of this filing and the report of our independent public accounting firm on our financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in Item 15 of this Annual Report contains a going concern qualification.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $1.2 million, or 48.8% to $ 1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an increase of $17.3 million in net loss, partially offset by an $12.4 million increase in non-cash adjustments to net loss and a $6.1 million increase in working capital. The increase in non-cash adjustments to net loss was primarily attributable to the lack of net gain on investment in marketable securities in 2021 compared to a $7.7 million net gain in 2020, a $2.8 million
decrease in the fair value of conversion feature derivative and warrant derivative liabilities, $2.7 million attributable to foreign exchange adjustments and $0.7 million attributable to loss on equity method investment, partially offset by a $2.2 million decrease in amortization of discount on convertible notes payable.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $11.8 million, or 217%, to a $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from net cash provided by investing activities of $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to $35.6 million of proceeds realized in 2020 from the sale of Telcon shares, partially offset by $26.1 million used to purchase of a Telcon convertible bond in 2021 and a $2.3 million increase in loans made to EJ Holding in 2021.
Net cash from financing activities
Net cash from financing activities increased by $9.7 million, or 421%, to $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from net cash used in financing activities of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $13.4 million increase in cash proceeds from the issuance of promissory notes and convertible notes, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in cash used for repayment of convertible notes.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements in the periods presented.