Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The information and financial data discussed below is only a summary and should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this 10-K. The financial statements contained elsewhere in this 10-K fully represent the Company’s financial condition and operations; however, they are not indicative of the Company’s future performance. Although management believes that the assumptions made and expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, there is no assurance that the underlying assumptions will, in fact, prove to be correct or that actual results will not be different from expectations expressed in this 10-K.
Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward Looking Statements
The information contained in Item 2 contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Actual results may materially differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain risks and uncertainties set forth in this report. Although management believes that the assumptions made and expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, there is no assurance that the underlying assumptions will, in fact, prove to be correct or that actual results will not be different from expectations expressed in this report.
This filing contains a number of forward-looking statements which reflect management’s current views and expectations with respect to our business, strategies, products, future results and events, and financial performance. All statements made in this filing other than statements of historical fact, including statements addressing operating performance, events, or developments which management expects or anticipates will or may occur in the future, including statements related to distributor channels, volume growth, revenues, profitability, new products, adequacy of funds from operations, statements expressing general optimism about future operating results, and non-historical information, are forward looking statements. In particular, the words “believe,” “expect,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “may,” variations of such words, and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements, but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements, and their absence does not mean that the statement is not forward-looking. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including those discussed below. Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from historical results as well as those expressed in, anticipated, or implied by these forward-looking statements. We do not undertake any obligation to revise these forward-looking statements to reflect any future events or circumstances.
Readers should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are based on management’s current expectations and projections about future events, are not guarantees of future performance, are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions (including those described below), and apply only as of the date of this filing. Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from the results expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements. Factors which could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, the risks discussed in prior filings, in press releases and in other communications to shareholders issued by us from time to time which attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors which may affect our business. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (U.S. GAAP). In doing so, we have to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. In some cases, we could reasonably have used different accounting policies and estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss further below.
Impairment of Other Intangible and Long-Lived Assets
The Company accounts for its intangible assets under the provisions of ASC 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other”. In accordance with ASC 350, intangible assets with a definite life are analyzed for impairment under ASC 360-10-05 “Property, Plant and Equipment” and intangible assets with an indefinite life are analyzed for impairment under ASC 360 annually, or more often if circumstances dictate. The Company performs its annual simplified impairment test in the fourth quarter of each year. The Company reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of assets may not be fully recoverable or that the useful lives of these assets are no longer appropriate. If impairment is indicated, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value.
Use of estimates
Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. The significant estimates were made for the fair value of common stock issued for services, with notes payable arrangements, in connection with note extension agreements, and as repayment for outstanding debt, in estimating the useful life used for depreciation and amortization of our long-lived assets, in the valuation of the derivative liability, and the valuation of deferred income tax assets. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management’s estimates and assumptions.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06 (“ASU 2020-06”) “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.” ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. In addition, ASU 2020-06 amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. The Amendments also affects the diluted EPS calculation for instruments that may be settled in cash or shares and for convertible instruments. The amendments are effective for public entities excluding smaller reporting companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods. The Company adopted the new standard update on January 1, 2021, which did not result in a material impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations Year Ended December 31, 2021, vs. Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue of the Company’s SofPulse® product during the current year decreased by $92,691 or 55.9% compared to the previous year.
Revenues for our SofPulse® product is typically recognized at the time the product is shipped, at which time the title passes to the customer, and there are no further performance obligations. Revenue has been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 contagious disease outbreak in March 2020. We anticipate that revenue will increase in future periods as the roll out of the SofPulse® product continues.
In connection with offering products and services provided to the end user by third-party vendors, we review the relationship between us, the vendor and the end user to assess whether revenue should be reported on a gross or net basis. In asserting whether revenue should be reported on a gross or net basis, we consider whether we act as a principal in the transaction and control the goods and services used to fulfill the performance obligation(s) associated with the transaction.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased by $50,384 or 77.1% from the previous year to $14,985 during the current year compared to $65,369 during the previous year. Cost of revenue is recognized on those sales recorded as gross for which we are the principal in the transaction as opposed to net sales which reflect no cost of revenue.
It is anticipated that cost of revenue will increase in future periods as the roll out of the SofPulse® product continues.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses decreased by $727,958 or 24.2% to $2,284,667 in 2021 compared to $3,012,625 for 2020. The operating expenses were comprised primarily of consulting, professional fees, amortization expenses, and stock-based compensation. This change was due primarily to a decrease in consulting fees of approximately $0.3 million, and a decrease in stock-based compensation of approximately $0.4 million.
Depreciation and Amortization
We incur depreciation and amortization expense for costs related to our assets, including our patents, information technology and software. Our depreciation and amortization expense was $648,492 in 2021 compared to $651,247 in 2020. No equipment was purchased or sold during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income / Expense
Other expense was $878,347 in 2021 compared to an income of $2,516,614 in 2020. Other Income/Expense includes interest expense, change in fair value of derivative liability, amortization of debt issuance cost, gain on extinguishment of debt and default penalty.
The increase in other expense during our fiscal year 2021 was primarily the result of re-valuations to reflect liability accounting for convertible notes issued with variable conversion rates. Change in fair value of the Company’s derivative liability decreased by $5.5 million from an income of $5.6 million in 2020 to an income of $0.1 million in 2021, resulting from changes to the inputs to the fair value model. The above was offset by a decrease in interest expense of approximately $1.2 million, the incurrence of $22,162 loss on extinguishment of debt in 2021 as opposed to a $555,430 gain on debt extinguishment in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception and through December 31, 2021, the Company has raised approximately $18 million in equity and debt transactions. These funds have been used to advance the operations of the Company, build its bio-medical platform, patent work and general corporate development. Our accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business for the twelve-month period following the date of these consolidated financial statements. However, the Company has incurred substantial losses. Our current liabilities exceed our current assets and available cash is not sufficient to fund the expected future operations. The Company is raising additional capital through debt and equity securities in order to continue the funding of its operations. However, there is no assurance that the Company can raise enough funds or generate sufficient revenues to pay its obligations as they become due, which raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. To reduce the risk of not being able to continue as a going concern, management has implemented its business plan to materialize revenues from sales and future license agreements and has also initiated an equity line of credit offering to raise capital through the sale of its common stock and has engaged an Investment Banker to raise additional capital. Although, uncertainty exists as to whether the Company will be able generate enough cash from operations to fund the Company’s working capital needs or raise sufficient capital to meet the Company’s obligations as they become due, no adjustments have been made to the carrying value of assets or liabilities as a result of this uncertainty. Our cash on hand at December 31, 2021 was $85,936. This will not be sufficient to fund operations if additional capital is not raised. The Company raised an aggregate of $0.1 million through the sale of equity and debt securities since January 1, 2022, through the date of this report.
d
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, obligations under any guaranteed contracts or contingent obligations. We also have no other commitments, other than the costs of being a public company that will increase our operating costs or cash requirements in the future.
Seasonality
Management does not believe that our current business segment is seasonal to any material extent.
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
We do not have in effect any compensation plans under which our equity securities are authorized for issuance.
Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued the following unregistered equity securities:
The above issuances of were exempt from registration pursuant to Section 4(2), and/or Regulation D promulgated under the Securities Act. These securities qualified for exemption under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act since the issuance securities by us did not involve a public offering. The offering was not a “public offering” as defined in Section 4(2) due to the insubstantial number of persons involved in the deal, size of the offering, manner of the offering and number of securities offered. We did not undertake an offering in which we sold a high number of securities to a high number of investors. In addition, these stockholders had the necessary investment intent as required by Section 4(2) since they agreed to and received share certificates bearing a legend stating that such securities are restricted pursuant to Rule 144 of the Securities Act. This restriction ensures that these securities would not be immediately redistributed into the market and therefore not be part of a “public offering.” Based on an analysis of the above factors, we have met the requirements to qualify for exemption under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act for this transaction.