Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis reflect historical results of operations and financial position. The following discussion and analysis is intended to highlight and supplement data and information presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information, and should be read in conjunction with our final prospectus for our initial public offering, or IPO, dated as of October 20, 2021 and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, on October 22, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act, or the Prospectus. Information pertaining to fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 was included in the Prospectus under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations”. To the extent that this discussion describes prior performance, the descriptions relate only to the periods listed, which may not be indicative of our future financial outcomes. In addition to the historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are discussed in the section titled “Cautionary Statement” and Item 1A. Risk Factors. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on Enfusion’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
Enfusion is a global, high-growth, software-as-a-service provider focused on transforming the investment management industry. Our solution is designed to eliminate technology and information barriers, empowering investment managers to confidently make and execute better-informed investment decisions in real time. We simplify investment and operational workflows by unifying mission critical systems and coalescing data into a single dataset resulting in a single source of truth. This allows stakeholders throughout the entire client organization to interact more effectively with one another across the investment management lifecycle.
We believe, by means of our purposefully designed interconnected systems underpinned by one dataset, we are the only solution that allows clients to see and interact with all parts of the investment management lifecycle ranging from portfolio construction, trading, risk management, accounting and operations through to investor reporting seamlessly in real time, in one screen, in one solution. As a result, our solution enables clients to better align teams, optimizing their investment decision-making operations and technology footprint and lowering operating costs. By harnessing the efficiencies, agility and scale inherent to our cloud-native, multi-tenant software that is integrated with a suite of technology-powered, managed services, we believe we have created the industry’s most compelling investment management solution, capable of shaping and addressing the evolving demands of the global investment management landscape.
Our Business Model
By virtue of our flexible and open architecture solution, we offer clients the ability to either replace their investment management systems using the end-to-end Enfusion solution integrated with technology-powered, managed services or supplement their legacy systems with select Enfusion systems such as portfolio management or accounting and over time, expand into using our full solution offering.
Additionally, our solution’s nimble, single-codebase architecture allows us to dedicate resources to our clients holistically, driving a superior client experience that is critical to our business model. When our clients subscribe to the Enfusion solution, we assign each client a dedicated service team that works with them from the moment of onboarding and throughout their contract lifetime. The continuity in the servicing team assigned to each client ensures that our clients are continuously interfacing with dedicated Enfusion employees that understand their needs, workflows and product use. It also fosters a partnership built on ongoing communication and feedback, which continuously informs the weekly upgrades and functional enhancements that we deliver to each of our clients. As we continue to scale and add clients, we benefit from an evolving solution that mirrors the needs and demands of our clients and the market, leading to a compelling competitive advantage and in turn increased client retention and revenues from expanded and new business.
Our total revenues were approximately 99.8%, 98.0% and 98.7% recurring subscription-based during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Generally, we charge our clients fees comprised of various components such as user fees, connectivity fees, market data fees and technology-powered, managed service fees, all of which take into account client complexity and that is subject to contract minimums. The weekly enhancements and upgrades that we deliver and the dedicated client service are included in the price of the contract.
To support our growth and capitalize on our market opportunity, we continue to invest across all aspects of our business. In research and development, we are focused on developing additional system functionality that will open revenue opportunities across alternative and institutional investment managers. We have also further institutionalized and increased spend in our sales and marketing efforts, both in the United States and internationally. In the latter half of 2021, we opened an office in Australia, building on our success in the APAC region and continuing to expand our global reach.
We operate as a single operating and reportable segment, which reflects the way our chief operating decision maker, or CODM, reviews and assesses the performance of our business. Our total revenues were $111.7 million, $79.6 million, and $59.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Platform subscriptions and managed services revenues were $110.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, or approximately 98.8% of total revenues, up approximately 41.5% from $78.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or approximately 98.0% of total revenues, up approximately 33.9% from $58.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We had net income (loss) of $(282.2) million, $4.1 million and $12.7 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Operating Results
Breadth of Our Client Bases
Our future revenue growth depends, in part, on our ability to expand our reach to new clients. There are significant opportunities to expand our client base across the various client segments we serve today. We believe we are the leading cloud-native, SaaS provider to the global emerging fund and hedge fund sector and expect that as the alternative investment sector grows, we will continue to extend our position. We expect that our efforts in signing new clients in this sector benefit from referrals from our existing clients, client stakeholders when they transit to other or launch new organizations, industry channel partners and strategic partners. In addition, we continue to extend this growth through increasing adoption by larger institutional asset management clients due to increasing acceptance of cloud technology and the robust capabilities of our solution that better meet their evolving needs and address their existing pain points. Taking advantage of the unique position that allows us to sell our products and services through shorter sales cycles and on faster client implementation timelines, we expect to continue to expand and invest our sales efforts to capitalize on opportunities in this client segment.
Expansion of Usage with Existing Clients
We believe there is a significant opportunity to further expand our relationships with existing clients as they continue to evolve and grow in size and expand into new markets and strategies or as we provide new functionality or release new systems or services. We also believe we have a significant opportunity to expand our relationship with existing clients that were not in a position to replace all of their systems at once when they first engaged with us. For those clients that elect to initially utilize some portion of our solution or only use our solution for a particular strategy or fund, we find that once they experience the advantages of our end-to-end solution, many seek opportunities to expand the breadth of their relationship with us to further help improve their investment management workflows and technology infrastructure. We expect our revenues from existing clients to continue to increase as they broaden their use of our solution and expand utilization into other investment groups within the firm.
Existing Client Retention and Renewals
The growth of our revenues base from expanding relationships with our existing clients is driven by our ability to retain these clients. Our client retention also strengthens the stability and predictability of our revenue model, facilitating better management of business. Our Net Dollar Retention Rate, which is described below in the section titled “Key Metrics
and Non-GAAP Financial Measures” was 115.0%, 119.6% and 111.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We believe that our delivery of excellent ongoing innovation together with superior client experience is critical to our client retention and we expect to continue to invest in both areas.
Geographic Expansion
Our future growth depends, in part, on our ability to grow our client base through geographic expansion and build on the success internationally. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated approximately 65.3% of our total revenues in the Americas and approximately 34.7% of our total revenues outside of the Americas. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated approximately 67.9% of our total revenues in the Americas and approximately 32.1% of our total revenues outside of the Americas. We are globally situated in ten offices in Chicago, New York, São Paulo, London, Dublin, Hong Kong, Singapore, Sydney, Mumbai and Bangalore. We continue to invest in expanding our presence and capitalize on opportunities in markets such as Latin America and Asia Pacific. We continue to make investments in our sales and marketing efforts in regions outside of the Americas to capture the sizeable revenue opportunity.
Leading in Ongoing Innovation & Pursuing Growth Investments
We continuously evaluate opportunities to advance our solution through increased breadth and depth of functionality to better enable our clients to achieve their investment goals and solve for a broader array of business, operational and technology challenges. Our ability to lead and compete with a differentiated solution is dependent upon our pace of innovation. We remain committed to investing in ongoing innovation which may require increased spend in technology and development.
Costs of Being a Public Company
As a newly public company, we will implement additional procedures and processes to address the standards and requirements applicable to public companies. Specifically, accounting, legal and personnel-related expenses and directors’ and officers’ insurance costs will increase as we establish more comprehensive compliance and governance functions, establish internal controls over financial reporting in accordance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and prepare and distribute periodic reports in accordance with SEC rules. Our financial statements for the year ending December 31, 2021 onward will begin to reflect the impact of these expenses.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
While the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected the global economy, it has not significantly affected our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021. While the COVID-19 pandemic had a temporary impact on the level of client dialogue, it altogether reinforced our value proposition and amplified the need for our clients to be able to operate systems remotely. In terms of demand, while general economic headwinds have adversely impacted budgets of clients, we believe actions and restrictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have served to highlight the criticality of our products, which we expect to drive increased demand over time.
As the situation surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid, we are actively managing our response. The extent of the effect on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic and governmental, regulatory and private sector responses, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict.
Effects of the Reorganization Transactions on our Corporate Structure
We were incorporated as Enfusion, Inc. on June 11, 2021 and formed for the purpose of the IPO. Following the completion of the Reorganization Transactions (as defined in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), we became a holding company and our sole material asset is an indirect ownership interest in Enfusion Ltd. LLC, or the LLC. Through our ability to control the managing member of the LLC,
we control all of the business and affairs of the LLC. All of our business is conducted through the LLC and its subsidiaries and the financial results of the LLC will be included in the consolidated financial statements of Enfusion, Inc.
The historical results of operations discussed in these sections are those of the LLC prior to the completion of the Reorganization Transactions, including the IPO, and do not reflect certain items that we expect will affect our results of operations and financial condition after giving effect to the Reorganization Transactions and the use of proceeds from the IPO.
The LLC has been treated as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes and accordingly has not been subject to U.S. federal or state income tax. After the IPO, the LLC will continue to be treated as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes. As a result of our ownership of Common Units in the LLC, we are subject to U.S., federal, state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of the LLC and will be taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. In addition to tax expenses, we also will incur expenses related to our operations and we will be required to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Due to the uncertainty of various factors, we cannot estimate the likely tax benefits we will realize as a result of LLC Common Unit exchanges and the resulting amounts we are likely to pay out to LLC Common Unit holders pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement; however, we estimate that such payments may be substantial. We intend to cause the LLC to make distributions in an amount sufficient to allow us to pay our tax obligations and operating expenses, including distributions to fund any ordinary course payments due under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
Platform subscriptions
Platform subscriptions revenues consists primarily of user fees to provide our clients access to our cloud-based solution. Fees consider various components such as number of users, connectivity, trading volume, data usage and product coverage. Platform subscription clients do not have the right to take possession of the platform’s software and do not have any general return right. Platform subscription revenues are generally recognized ratably over the period of contractually enforceable rights and obligations, beginning on the date that the client gains access to the platform. Historically, our platform subscription contracts have typically had a one-year term and were cancellable with 30 days’ notice, though our more recent contracts have typically been for multi-year terms without cancellation for convenience. Installment payments are invoiced at the end of each calendar month during the subscription term.
Managed services
Managed services revenues primarily consists of client-selected middle- and back-office, technology-powered services. We recognize revenues monthly as the managed services are performed with invoicing occurring at the end of the month. Generally, invoices have a 30-day payment period in accordance with the associated contract. There is no financing available.
Other
Other revenues consists of non-subscription-based revenues, such as software enhancements developed for individual, sponsoring clients, but received by all clients, and data conversion and services that integrate a client’s historical data into our solution. We recognize revenues monthly as these services are performed with invoicing occurring at the end of each month.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of personnel-related costs associated with the delivery of our software and services, including base salaries, bonuses, employee benefits and related costs. Additionally, cost of revenues includes amortization of capitalized software development costs, allocated overhead and certain direct data and hosting costs, and
stock-based compensation (approximately $380 thousand in 2021). Our cost of revenues has fixed and variable components and depends on the type of revenues earned in each period. We expect our cost of revenues to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to hire personnel to provide hosting services and technical support to our growing client base. We anticipate additional expenses as a result of stock-based compensation expenses for the contingently issuable shares of our Class A common stock that will vest within one year of the IPO due to continued employment requirements, or the Contingently Issuable Shares, restricted stock units granted in connection with the IPO, and other equity awards to be issued under our equity plans.
Operating Expenses
We recognized an aggregate amount of approximately $268.5 million in stock-based compensation expense in the fourth quarter of 2021 in connection with the future issuance of shares of Class A common stock to former holders of Award Units under our former Change in Control Bonus Plan and to a non-executive employee in exchange for the termination of the profit sharing agreement, described in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, in 2021 we recognized approximately $21 million in stock-based compensation expenses related to the Contingently Issuable Shares and restricted stock units granted in connection with the IPO. We present stock-based compensation expense within Cost of revenues, General and administrative, Sales and marketing and Technology and development based on the individual employees’ department. We anticipate additional operating expenses as a result of stock-based compensation expense related to the Contingently Issuable Shares and restricted stock units granted in connection with the IPO, and other equity awards to be issued under our equity plans.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs and related expenses for executive, finance, legal, human resources, recruiting and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits and bonuses fees for external legal, accounting, recruiting and other consulting services, and stock-based compensation. We expect these expenses will increase as we continue to expand our client base and our geographic footprint and as we incur costs associated with being a publicly-traded company, including additional legal, audit and consulting fees.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related costs associated with our sales and marketing staff, including base salaries, employee benefits, bonuses and commissions, and stock-based compensation. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase as we implement new marketing strategies and build our professional sales organization to support our client base growth and geographic expansion.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses consist primarily of research and development activities, non-capitalizable costs of developing content and certain overhead allocations, and stock-based compensation. These costs include employee-related costs, consulting services, expenses related to the product design, development, testing and enhancements of our subscription services. We expect that our technology and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars and may increase as a percentage of our revenues as we continue to enhance our platform functionality and develop new content and features. Additionally, our technology and development expense may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period depending on the timing of development.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income (expense) consists of interest expense and other income (expense). Interest expense consists primarily of interest accrued or paid associated with our debt, including the amortization of debt issuance costs. We expect interest expense to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding indebtedness and prevailing interest rates. Other income (expense) consists primarily of foreign currency translation gains and losses.
Income Tax
Enfusion Ltd. LLC has historically been treated as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal tax purposes and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. Income tax provision represents the income tax expense or benefit associated with our foreign operations based on the tax laws of the jurisdictions in which we operate.
After consummation of the Reorganization Transactions, Enfusion, Inc. became subject to U.S. federal income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any U.S. taxable income of Enfusion, Ltd. LLC and will be taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. Enfusion, Inc. will be treated as a U.S. corporation for U.S. federal, state and local income tax purposes. Accordingly, a provision for income taxes will be recorded for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations for federal income taxes.
Non-Controlling Interests
Non-controlling interests represent the portion of profit or loss, net assets and comprehensive loss of our consolidated subsidiary that is not allocable to the Company based on our percentage of ownership of this entity. Income or loss attributed to the non-controlling interests is based on the Common Units outstanding during the period and is presented on the consolidated statements of operations and consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In connection with the management of our business, we identify, measure and assess a variety of key metrics and use certain non-GAAP financial measures. The key metrics and non-GAAP financial measures we use in managing our business are set forth below.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We calculate Annual Recurring Revenue, or ARR, by annualizing platform subscriptions and managed services revenues recognized in the last month of the measurement period. We believe ARR provides important information about our future revenue potential, our ability to acquire new clients and our ability to maintain and expand our relationship with existing clients. ARR was $127.1 million, $93.4 million, and $68.0 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and, 2019, respectively. ARR is included in a set of metrics we calculate monthly to review with management as well as periodically with our board of directors.
Net Dollar Retention Rate
We calculate Net Dollar Retention Rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR for all clients as of twelve months prior to such period end or Prior Period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from those same clients as of the current period end, or Current Period ARR. Current Period ARR includes expansion within existing clients inclusive of contraction and voluntary attrition, but excluding involuntary cancellations. We define involuntary cancellations as accounts that were cancelled due to the client no longer being in business. We identify involuntary cancellations based on representations made by the client at the time of cancellation. Our Net Dollar Retention Rate is equal to the Current Period ARR divided by the Prior Period ARR.
Our Net Dollar Retention Rate was 115%, 119.6%, and 111.3% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We believe Net Dollar Retention Rate is an important metric because, in addition to providing a measure of retention, it indicates our ability to grow revenues within existing client accounts.
Revenue Churn Rate and Adjusted Revenue Churn Rate
We calculate our Revenue Churn Rate by measuring the revenue contribution associated with clients that cancel all of their product and service agreements with us over the measurement year. This cancelled revenue contribution for each such client is calculated as the revenues recognized for such clients over the trailing 12 months prior to the month in which the client cancelled its product and service agreements. We then divide this cancelled revenue contribution by the
ARR calculated for the prior period to calculate our Revenue Churn Rate. Our Revenue Churn Rate for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was 3.7%, 5.2% and 10.1%, respectively.
We also calculate an Adjusted Revenue Churn Rate which excludes all involuntary cancellations as described above. Our Adjusted Revenue Churn Rate for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was 0.6%, 0.9% and 0.3%, respectively. We believe our Revenue Churn Rate and Adjusted Revenue Churn Rate are important metrics because they indicate our ability to retain our existing client base.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, U.S. GAAP, and our calculations thereof may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted to exclude certain items of a non-recurring or unusual nature, as well as payments to repurchase management incentive awards from our Change in Control Bonus Plan and initial public offering costs, and stock-based compensation expense. We believe excluding these expenses from the non-GAAP financial measures is useful to both management and investors because it facilitates comparability of period to period results, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our core operating performance, and does not result in the non-GAAP measures being misleading. In particular, stock-based compensation expense is not comparable across companies given the variety of valuation methodologies and assumptions. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenues.
These measures are presented because they are the primary measures used by management to evaluate our financial performance and for forecasting purposes. This non-GAAP financial information is useful to investors because it eliminates certain items that affect period-over-period comparability and provides consistency with past financial performance and additional information about underlying results and trends by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. Additionally, we believe that these and similar measures are widely used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties as a means of evaluating a company’s operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures, are not measurements of our financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to net income, income from operations or any other performance measures determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have limitations as analytical tools and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP, but rather as supplemental information to our business results. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in methods of calculation and items or events being adjusted. In addition, other companies may use different measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as tools for comparison.
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted EBITDA. Net income, calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, is the most directly comparable financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods shown:
Revenues
Total revenue was $111.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $32.1 million or 40.4%.
Platform subscriptions
Platform subscriptions revenue increased from $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $103.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $29.7 million. The increase in platform subscription revenues was primarily driven by an increase in revenues from new clients of approximately $22 million. Revenue also increased for existing clients; this increase includes the full-period impact of prior period sales, sales of new services, and contractual growth, partially offset by reductions in revenue due to client churn. In addition, a price increase for our OEMS contributed to the increase in revenues for platform services.
Managed services
Managed services revenue increased from $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $2.7 million. The increase in managed services revenues was driven by increased revenues from new clients of approximately $2 million, and increases in revenue from existing clients, partially offset by reductions in revenue due to client churn.
Other
Other revenues decreased from $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $257 thousand. The decrease in other revenues was driven by a decrease in non-recurring service fees.
Cost of Revenues, Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $10.5 million from $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, or an increase of 49.1%. For both platform subscriptions and managed services, the increase was primarily driven by an increase in personnel-related costs resulting from headcount additions to support our continued growth. Greater hosting costs, data fees, and stock-based compensation expense of approximately $377 thousand also contributed to the increase over the prior period.
Gross profit increased by $21.6 million from $58.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in overall gross profit margin as a percentage of sales was primarily attributable to increased personnel costs for onboarding and client services.
Operating Expenses
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $114.7 million from $35.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $150.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to stock-based compensation expense of $112.8 million. Increased corporate personnel costs and expenditures for professional services, such as consulting and corporate insurance fees, also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expenses. The increase in general and administrative expenses was offset by a decrease due to a non-recurring payment of $16.9 million to repurchase Award Units recorded in the prior year (see Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $41.8 million from $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily attributable to stock-based compensation expense of $36.3 million. The increase was also driven by higher personnel costs related to our continued focus on the growth of our professional sales organization, and increased commission expenses.
Technology and development
Technology and development expense increased by $147.1 million from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $153.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in technology and development expense was primarily attributable to stock-based compensation expense of $140.3 million. In addition, the increase in technology and development expense was driven by an increase in personnel costs to support growth of our product development and client services groups.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
The overall change in non-operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven primarily by an increase of approximately $2.9 million in interest expense, and a loss on debt extinguishment of $1.2 million related to the payment of the term loan in connection with the IPO, included in Other (income) expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have funded our capital needs through collections from our clients and issuances of debt. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $64.4 million and $5.0 million in available borrowing capacity under our Revolving
Debt (as defined below). On October 25, 2021, we completed our IPO, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 21,562,500 shares of our Class A common stock at the IPO price of $17.00, generating net proceeds of approximately $260.5 million (on a cash basis) after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs, of which we used $98.8 million to repay the outstanding indebtedness under our term loan, $87.8 million to purchase Common Units from our Pre-IPO Common Unitholders, and $10.6 million for the payment of withholding taxes on stock-based compensation. We believe that our current sources of liquidity, cash flows from operations and existing available cash, together with our other available external financing sources, will be adequate to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. Risk Factors. As a result of the IPO, we expect that our future uses of cash will also include paying income taxes and obligations under our Tax Receivable Agreement. Further, we will incur charges to satisfy payroll withholding taxes arising from obligations to issue 1,725,708 shares of Class A common stock to former holders of Award Units under our former Change in Control Bonus Plan, which will vest upon satisfaction of associated service conditions. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, which could decrease our cash and cash equivalents and increase our cash requirements. As a result of these and other factors, we could use our available capital resources sooner than expected and may be required to seek additional equity or debt.
Cash Flow Information
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating activities
We used $318 thousand in cash flows from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from our net loss of $282.2 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $296.7 million (of which $289.8 million is related to stock-based compensation expense), and offset by $14.7 million of cash used in working capital activities.
We generated $1.7 million in cash flows from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our net income of $4.1 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $3.4 million, and offset by $5.8 million of cash used in working capital activities. Cash flows from operations was impacted by a non-recurring cash payment of $16.9 million to repurchase Award Units awarded under the Change in Control Bonus Plan (see Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Cash used by working capital accounts was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable, consistent with our revenue growth.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $8.0 million and $5.1 million, respectively, which was comprised of cash outflows for property and equipment purchases.
Financing activities
We generated $58.8 million in cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from net proceeds from the issuance of our Class A common stock in connection with the IPO of $260.5 million (on a cash basis), offset by the purchase of common units from our Pre-IPO common unit holders of $87.8 million, the repayment of our Term Loan of $100.0 million, payment of withholding taxes on stock-based compensation of $10.6 million, and the payment of $3.3 million in tax distributions to certain members prior to the IPO.
We generated $11.6 million in cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from the issuance of Class D Units for $93.3 million, largely offset by redemptions of Class A Units of $76.6 million. We also received proceeds of $71.2 million from the increased Term Loan borrowing, of which $71.1 million was distributed to certain members of Enfusion Ltd. LLC, and paid $4.6 million in tax distributions to certain members.
Indebtedness
On August 2, 2019, we entered into a credit agreement, or the Credit Agreement, with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, that provided for a $30.0 million term loan, or the Term Loan, and a $2.0 million revolving debt facility, or the Revolving Debt. Net proceeds of $24 million were distributed to certain members of Enfusion Ltd. LLC (see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. On April 13, 2020, we drew $1.8 million of the Revolving Debt to expand our liquidity amid the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic. We repaid the $1.8 million of Revolving Debt principal (plus de minimis interest) on September 24, 2020. On August 9, 2020, the Credit Agreement was amended and restated to increase the commitment amount of the Revolving Debt from $2.0 million to $5.0 million. On December 17, 2020, the Term Loan agreement was amended and restated to increase the outstanding principal balance to $100.0 million. Net proceeds of $71.1 million from the Term Loan were distributed to certain Members of Enfusion Ltd. LLC.
On October 19, 2021, we amended and restated the Credit Agreement. This amendment and restatement did not change the terms of the Credit Agreement other than joining Enfusion, Inc. as a co-borrower and providing transition and replacement rates for the LIBOR rate. On October 25, 2021, we repaid the outstanding indebtedness under the Term Loan, totaling approximately $98.8 million in aggregate principal amount. The Credit Agreement continues to provide for the Revolving Debt in the amount of $5.0 million.
Prior to its repayment, borrowings under the Term Loan bore interest with a fixed component of 4.25% as well as a variable component based on LIBOR. The LIBOR rate for the Term Loan was subject to a minimum of 1%. The selected one-month LIBOR rate for the Term Loan on December 31, 2020 was below the 1% minimum. Thus, the interest rate for the Term Loan as of December 31, 2020 was 5.25%. In addition, we were required to pay $1.25 million each quarter of principal repayment commencing on September 30, 2021.
The Credit Agreement contains certain covenants with which we must comply, including a fixed charge ratio covenant and a leverage ratio covenant. We were in compliance with all loan covenants and requirements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have service agreements for the use of data processing facilities. As of December 31, 2021, these service agreements expire at various dates through 2023. We also lease office space under operating lease agreements.
As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations consisted of: (i) operating lease obligations of $11.0 million, of which $4.4 million is due in 2022 and $6.6 million is due thereafter, and (ii) service agreement obligations of $489 thousand, a majority of which are due in 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that may be material to investors.
Tax Receivable Agreement
The payment obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement is an obligation of Enfusion, Inc. and not of Enfusion Ltd. LLC. We expect that as a result of the size of the existing tax basis and basis adjustments acquired in the IPO, the increase in existing tax basis and the anticipated tax basis adjustment of the tangible and intangible assets of Enfusion Ltd. LLC upon the purchase or exchange (or deemed exchange) of Common Units for shares of Class A common stock or distributions (or deemed distributions) with respect to Common Units and our possible utilization of certain tax attributes, the payments that we may make under the Tax Receivable Agreement will be substantial. We estimate the amount of existing tax basis and basis adjustments acquired in the IPO to be approximately $228.9 million. If all of the Pre-IPO Common Unitholders had exchanged or sold to us all of their outstanding Common Units as of December 31, 2021, we would have recognized a deferred tax asset of approximately $393.9 million and a liability under the Tax Receivable Agreement of approximately $334.3 million, assuming: (i) all exchanges or purchases occurred on the same day, (ii) a price of $20.94 per share, which was the price per share of Class A common stock as of December 31, 2021, (iii) a constant corporate tax rate of 32.13%, (iv) that we would have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize the tax benefits, and (v) no material changes in tax law.
There may be a material negative effect on our liquidity if, as a result of timing discrepancies or otherwise, the payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement exceed the actual cash tax benefits that Enfusion, Inc. realizes in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement and/or if distributions directly and/or indirectly to Enfusion, Inc. by Enfusion Ltd. LLC are not sufficient to permit Enfusion, Inc. to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement after it has paid taxes and other expenses. Late payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement generally will accrue interest at an uncapped rate equal to one-year LIBOR (or its successor rate) plus 100 basis points. The payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are not conditioned upon continued ownership of us by the pre-IPO owners.
Dividend policy
Assuming Enfusion Ltd. LLC makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, Tax Receivable Agreement payments and expenses will be made at the sole discretion of our board of directors. Our board of directors may change our dividend policy at any time.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statement and amounts of revenues and expenses reported during the period. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition requires judgment and the use of estimates. We derive revenues primarily from fees for platform subscriptions to our cloud-native solution and managed service fees which include fees related to client-selected middle and back-office services on our clients’ behalf using our platform. Historically, most of our contracts had a one-year term and were cancellable with 30 days’ notice, though our most recent contracts have typically been for multi-year terms without cancellation for convenience. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our clients in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for these services. Revenues are recognized net of taxes applicable to service contacts.
Our service contracts with clients can include multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. However, all distinct performance obligations within a contract are satisfied over the same period of time with the same measure of progress. Accordingly, each distinct performance obligation within a contract has the same pattern of revenue recognition. We have determined that
implementation services are not distinct from the ongoing platform subscription services due to the highly specialized knowledge required to execute on our solution. Such services are recognized with the platform subscription services revenue over time.
Stock-based Compensation
In connection with the IPO, we adopted the 2021 Stock Option and Incentive Plan, or 2021 Plan. The 2021 Plan allows our compensation committee to make incentive awards to our officers, employees, directors and service providers. We also adopted the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or 2021 ESPP. The Company measures stock compensation expense for its share-based payment awards at fair value on the grant date. The fair value of share-based payment awards is determined using the fair market value of the underlying Class A common stock on the date of grant. The Company applies a discount for lack of marketability, estimated using the Finnerty Model, to the fair value of awards with post-vesting restrictions, which includes the vested shares of Class A common stock and the Contingently Issuable Shares of Class A common stock issued on the IPO effectiveness date.
For RSUs for which vesting is subject to the achievement of a market capitalization hurdle, the Company determines the fair value of these RSUs using a Monte Carlo simulation. The Monte Carlo simulations used to estimate the fair value include subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, expected volatility of the price of the Company’s common stock, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield of common stock, and the Company’s cost of equity capital.
We record forfeitures as they occur. The cost of services received from employees and non-employees in exchange for awards of equity instruments is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations based on the estimated fair value of those awards on the grant date or reporting date, if required to be remeasured, and amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, and deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying values of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that it is believed that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, carryback potential if permitted under the tax law, and results of recent operations. A valuation allowance is provided if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
The Company evaluates and accounts for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. Recognition (step one) occurs when the Company concludes that a tax position, based solely on its technical merits, is more-likely-than-not to be sustainable upon examination. Measurement (step two) determines the amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Derecognition of a tax position that was previously recognized would occur when the Company subsequently determines that a tax position no longer meets the more likely-than-not threshold of being sustained. The Company records interest (and penalties where applicable), net of any applicable related income tax benefit, on potential income tax contingencies as a component of Income tax expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the Reorganizational Transactions and IPO, the Company entered into a Tax Receivable Agreement, or the TRA, with certain of our Pre-IPO Owners that provides for the payment by Enfusion, Inc. to such Pre-
IPO Owners of 85% of the benefits, if any, that Enfusion, Inc. actually realizes, or is deemed to realize (calculated using certain assumptions), as a result of: (i) existing tax basis acquired in the IPO; (ii) increases in existing tax basis and adjustments to the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of Enfusion Ltd. LLC as a result of sales or exchanges (or deemed exchanges) of Common Units for shares of Class A common stock or distributions (or deemed distributions) with respect to Common Units; (iii) Enfusion, Inc.’s utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies; and (iv) certain other tax benefits related to entering into the Tax Receivable Agreement, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. The existing tax basis, increases in existing tax basis and the tax basis adjustments generated over time may increase (for tax purposes) the depreciation and amortization deductions available to Enfusion, Inc. and, therefore, may reduce the amount of U.S. federal, state and local tax that Enfusion, Inc. would otherwise be required to pay in the future, although the IRS may challenge all or part of the validity of that tax basis, and a court could sustain such a challenge.
The Company accounts for amounts payable under the TRA in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies. The amounts payable under the TRA will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the amount, character, and timing of the taxable income of the Company in the future. Actual tax benefits realized by the Company may differ from tax benefits calculated under the TRA as a result of the use of certain assumptions in the agreement. Any such changes in these factors or changes in the Company’s determination of the need for a valuation allowance related to the tax benefits acquired under the TRA could adjust the Tax receivable agreement liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Subsequent changes in the fair value of the Tax receivable agreement liabilities between reporting periods, as well as any interest accrued on the TRA between the Company's annual tax filing date and the TRA payment date, are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, and, for so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
In addition, under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we: (i) are no longer an emerging growth company; or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.