ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is qualified in its entirety by, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
ENGlobal Corporation is a leading provider of innovative, delivered project solutions primarily to the energy industry. We deliver these solutions to our clients by combining our vertically-integrated engineering and professional project execution services with our automation and systems integration expertise and fabrication capabilities. We believe our vertically-integrated strategy allows us to differentiate our company from most of our competitors as a full service provider, thereby reducing our clients’ dependency on and coordination of multiple vendors and improving control over their project cost and schedules. Our strategy and positioning has also allowed the Company to pursue larger scopes of work centered around many different types of modularized engineered systems.
We focus on four strategic markets where we have a long history of delivering project solutions and can provide complete project execution and have focused our business development teams on communicating these offerings to their clients. These four targeted markets include: (i) Renewables, (ii) Automation, (iii) Oil, Gas, and Petrochemicals, and (iv) Government Services.
We continue to be mindful of our overhead structure. We have made significant investments in key business development and other essential personnel, product developments and new facilities and equipment, which have all negatively impacted our selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense. In addition, during the year ended December 25, 2021, we recorded a $1.4 million bad debt reserve due to one of our major customers filing for bankruptcy and suspending operating during the second quarter. We believe the addition of these key personnel will allow the Company to expand its client base and acquire new projects. We recognize that the level of our SG&A is greater than it could be for a company our size; however, we have maintained our overhead structure in anticipation of higher revenue levels.
COVID-19 Update
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared that the worldwide spread and severity of a new coronavirus, referred to as COVID-19, was severe enough to be characterized as a pandemic. In response to the continued spread of COVID-19, governmental authorities in the United States and around the world have imposed various restrictions designed to slow the pace of the pandemic, including restrictions on travel and other restrictions that prohibit employees from going to work, in cities where we have offices, employees, and customers causing severe disruptions in the worldwide economy, including the global demand for oil and natural gas. In response, companies within the energy industry (including many of our customers) have announced capital spending cuts which, in turn, may result in a decrease in new project awards or adjustments, reductions, suspensions, cancellations or payment defaults with respect to existing project awards. We have been fortunate that we entered 2020 with a robust backlog and that the larger projects in our backlog have not been cancelled or postponed. This has allowed us to keep a significant portion of our workforce productive. However, we have not been successful in replacing our backlog as quickly as it has been converted to revenues. As a result, our backlog has decreased by approximately $11.5 million from $24.3 million at December 26, 2020 to $12.8 million at December 25, 2021. While we have many potential opportunities in our sales pipeline that could replace a significant portion of this backlog reduction, inefficiencies and complications resulting from many of our clients’ remote working conditions combined with the uncertainty of new project necessity and funding caused by COVID-19 related disruptions have largely contributed to delays in project awards and our inability to replace our backlog as quickly as it has been converted to revenue. While we believe our backlog is sufficient to keep a significant portion of our workforce productive in the near term, it may not be at our current operating levels. The extent to which the disruption of COVID-19 may impact our business, financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The duration and intensity of these impacts and resulting disruption to our business, financial condition and results of operations is uncertain and we will continue to monitor the situation and assess the operational and financial impact on our business.
As a result of these current and future uncertainties, we felt it necessary to utilize all avenues of available assistance as they may not be available in the future when needed. On April 13, 2020, we obtained a $4.9 million loan (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which was forgiven in full during 2021. We are also utilizing relief for employees impacted by COVID-19 under the Families First Coronavirus Response Act in order to minimize the impact to both our employees and our business. Further, we are utilizing some of the tax payment deferral opportunities and federal refund acceleration opportunities provided by the IRS and the CARES Act.
On May 21, 2020, in order to provide additional liquidity, the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Borrowers”) entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) with Pacific Western Bank dba Pacific Western Business Finance, a California state-chartered bank (the “Lender”), pursuant to which the Lender agreed to extend credit to the Borrowers in the form of revolving loans in the aggregate amount of up to $6.0 million, subject to a credit limit. For additional information, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” As we continue to monitor the situation and assess the operational and financial impact on our business, we may determine to take further actions in response.
On June 27, 2020, we temporarily closed one of our operational facilities and sponsored COVID-19 testing for employees in response to a potential COVID-19 exposure. During the closure, we cleaned and sanitized the facility, and we reopened the facility after one week. Employees and visitors were allowed to return to the facility only after negative test results were received or after a fourteen day quarantine period. Although the closure was only for one week, the disruption to our operations was longer as testing results were received slower than expected and project progress was delayed.
Because the severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic consequences are uncertain, rapidly changing and difficult to predict, the impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations remains uncertain and difficult to predict. If COVID-19 continues to spread or if the response to contain the COVID-19 pandemic is unsuccessful, we could experience a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For additional information, see Part II. Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
Results of Operations
Our revenue is comprised of services revenue and the sale of engineered modular solutions. We generally recognize service revenue as soon as the services are performed. During 2021, we worked on 275 projects ranging in size from $1 thousand to $28.3 million. The average size of the projects during 2021 was $408 thousand and we recorded an average revenue of $132 thousand per project.
In the course of providing our services, we routinely provide materials and equipment and may provide construction management or construction services. Generally, these materials, equipment and subcontractor costs are passed through to our clients and reimbursed, along with handling fees, which in total are at margins much lower than those of our services business. In accordance with industry practice and generally accepted accounting principles, all such costs and fees are included in revenue. The use of subcontractor services can change significantly from project to project; therefore, changes in revenue and gross profit, SG&A expense and operating income as a percent of revenue may not be indicative of our core business trends.
Segment operating SG&A expense includes management and staff compensation, office costs such as rents and utilities, depreciation, amortization, travel, bad debt and other expenses generally unrelated to specific client contracts, but directly related to the support of a segment’s operations. Corporate SG&A expenses includes investor relations, business development, governance, finance, accounting, health, safety, environmental, human resources, legal and information technology which are unrelated to specific projects but which are incurred to support corporate activities.
Reporting Segments
Our segments are strategic business units that offer different services and products and therefore require different marketing and management strategies. Separate operational leaders are in charge of our engineering offices and our automation offices, including the office that contracts with government agencies. The operating performance of our segments is regularly reviewed with the operational leaders of the two segments, the CEO, CFO and others. This group represents the CODM for ENGlobal.
Our corporate and other expenses that do not individually meet the criteria for segment reporting are reported separately as Corporate expenses.
Comparison of the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020
The following table set forth below, for the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, provides financial data that is derived from our consolidated statements of operations (amounts in thousands, except per share data). The data for the year ended December 26, 2020 has been recast to align with our current reportable segments.
Revenue - Overall, our revenue for the year ended December 25, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 26, 2020, decreased $28.0 million, or 43.5%, to $36.4 million from $64.4 million. Revenue from the Commercial segment decreased $26.4 million, or 48.5%, to $28.0 million for the year ended December 25, 2021, as compared to $54.4 million for the comparable period in 2020. Revenue from the Government Services segment decreased $1.7 million, or 16.4%, to $8.4 million for the year ended December 25, 2021 as compared to $10.1 million for the comparable period in 2020. Our 2021 revenue for the Commercial segment decreased primarily due to the completion of several large projects and projects that were not renewed as our clients decreased their activities in all sectors of the energy industry due to COVID-19. Our 2021 revenue for the Government Services segment decreased primarily due to base closures and travel restrictions imposed by the U.S. Government as a result of COVID-19.
Gross Profit (Loss) - Gross loss for the year ended December 25, 2021 was $0.6 million, a decrease of $9.1 million, or 107.6%, from a gross profit of $8.5 million for the comparable period in 2020. Gross loss margin was 1.8% for the year ended December 25, 2021, a decrease from the 13.1% gross profit margin for the year ended December 26, 2020. The decrease in gross profit margin is primarily attributable to an increase in Commercial segment costs associated with maintaining essential staffing, for which we obtained employee retention credits in the first and third quarters of 2021, as projects were completed without subsequent renewals or replacements in addition to increased proposal activity from our efforts to replenish our backlog.
Gross profit (loss) in our Commercial segment decreased $8.5 million, or 122.7%, to $1.6 million of gross loss for a gross loss margin of 5.6% for the year ended December 25, 2021 as compared to $6.9 million of gross profit and gross profit margin of 12.7% for the year ended December 26, 2020. The decrease in gross profit (loss) margin is primarily attributable to costs associated with maintaining essential staffing, for which we obtained the employee retention credit recorded in other income, completed projects without subsequent renewals or replacements during 2021, and increased proposal activity from our efforts to replenish our backlog.
Gross profit in the Government Services segment decreased $0.6 million, or 40.5%, to $0.9 million for a gross profit margin of 11.0% for the year ended December 25, 2021 as compared to $1.6 million of gross profit with a gross profit margin of 15.4% for the year ended December 26, 2020. The decrease in gross profit is due to base closures and travel restrictions imposed by the U.S. government as a result of COVID-19.
Selling, General and Administrative - Overall, our SG&A expenses increased by $4.0 million for the year ended December 25, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 26, 2020. This increase in SG&A is driven by increases in salaries and burden costs of $1.9 million from our investment in key business development personnel, bad debt expense of $1.3 million, legal costs of $0.2 million, recruiting expense of $0.1 million, computer software expense of $0.1 million, insurance costs of $0.1 million, travel costs of $0.1 million, accounting services of $0.1 million, and marketing costs of $0.1 million. We continue to look for ways to streamline our processes and delay expenditures while we continue to invest in our business development activities.
Other income, net - Other income, net of expense, increased $8.1 million for the year ended December 25, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily due to a $1.7 million employee retention credit recorded in the first quarter of 2021, $5.0 million of PPP loan forgiveness in the third quarter of 2021, and $1.4 million employee retention credit recorded in the third quarter of 2021, with no comparable occurrences in 2020.
Tax expense - Tax expense was $0.1 million for the year ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020.
Net Income (Loss) - Net loss for the year ended December 25, 2021 was $5.7 million compared to a net loss of $0.6 million for the year ended December 26, 2020, primarily as a result of decreases in revenue and gross margin, in addition to increased business development costs and bad debt reserve within our Commercial segment, partially offset by the employee retention credit in the first and third quarters of 2021 in addition to the PPP Loan forgiveness in the third quarter of 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We define liquidity as our ability to pay liabilities as they become due, fund business operations and meet monetary contractual obligations. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand, internally generated funds, sales of common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement (defined below), and borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. Our cash increased to $19.2 million at December 25, 2021 from $13.7 million at December 26, 2020, as our operating activities used approximately $13.7 million in net cash during the year ended December 25, 2021 primarily due to cash used to fund our operating loss, PPP Loan forgiveness, an increase in other current assets, an increase in trade payables, an increase in accrued compensations and benefits, and an increase in other current liabilities and other components of working capital, partially offset by a decrease in contract assets net of contract liabilities, share-based compensation and depreciation, and a decrease in trade receivables. Our working capital as of December 25, 2021 was $26.2 million as compared to $14.0 million as of December 26, 2020.
On May 21, 2020, we entered into the Revolving Credit Facility pursuant to which the Lender agreed to extend credit of up to $6.0 million, subject to a credit limit. As of December 25, 2021, the credit limit under the Revolving Credit Facility was $2.4 million and outstanding borrowings were $1.0 million, which yields enough interest to cover our minimum monthly interest charge. As of December 25, 2021, we were in compliance with all of the covenants under the Revolving Credit Facility. On April 13, 2020, we obtained the PPP Loan, and on July 12, 2021, we received notification from our lender that the PPP Loan was forgiven in full by the U.S. Small Business Administration. For additional information on the Revolving Credit Facility and PPP Loan, see Part II, Item 8, Note 7 - Debt -.
In addition, on January 29, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, at our option, securities having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million. On January 29, 2021, we entered into an at market issuance sales agreement with B. Riley Securities, Inc., which was subsequently terminated pursuant to its terms on January 7, 2022.
On June 1, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) pursuant to which we sold and issued an aggregate of 7,142,859 shares of the Company’s common stock to certain institutional investors at an offering price of $2.80 per share in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under NASDAQ rules for net proceeds of approximately $18.7 million after deducting the fees of A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, the placement agent, and related offering expenses.
On January 11, 2022, we entered into sales agreement (the "ATM Agreement") with Lake Street Capital Markets, LLC (“Lake Street”) pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $30 million to or through Lake Street, as sales agent, from time to time, in an “at the market offering”. The Company is not obligated to make any sales under the agreement and any determination by the Company to do so will be dependent, among other things, on market conditions and the Company’s capital raising needs. Upon the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252572), including the accompanying prospectus and related prospectus supplements related to the “at the market offering”, is subject to the provisions of General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3, which provides that we may not sell securities in a public primary offering with a value exceeding one-third of our public float in any twelve-month period unless our public float is at least $75 million. As of March 7, 2022, the Company’s public float (i.e., the aggregate market value of its outstanding equity securities held by non-affiliates) was approximately $56.1 million, based on the closing price per share of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market on March 7, 2022, as calculated in accordance with General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3. If our public float meets or exceeds $75 million at any time, we will no longer be subject to the restrictions set forth in General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3, at least until the filing of our next Section 10(a)(3) update as required under the Securities Act.
We believe our cash on hand, internally generated funds, availability under the Revolving Credit Facility and sales of common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement, along with other working capital will be sufficient to fund our current operations and expected activity for the next twelve months.
Cash and the availability of cash could be materially restricted if (1) outstanding invoices billed are not collected or are not collected in a timely manner, (2) circumstances prevent the timely internal processing of invoices, (3) we lose one or more of our major customers or our major customers significantly reduce the amount of work requested from us, (4) we are unable to win new projects that we can perform on a profitable basis or (5) we are unable to reverse our use of cash to fund losses. If any such event occurs, we would be forced to consider alternative financing options.
Our Board of Directors continues to review strategic transactions, which could include strategic acquisitions, mergers, reverse mergers, the issuance or buyback of public shares, or the purchase or sale of specific assets, in addition to other potential actions aimed at increasing shareholder value. The Company does not intend to disclose or comment on developments related to its review unless and until the Board has approved a specific transaction or otherwise determined that further disclosure is appropriate. There can be no assurance that the Board’s strategic review will result in any transaction, or any assurance as to its outcome or timing.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Operating activities used approximately $13.7 million in net cash during the year ended December 25, 2021 primarily due to cash used to fund our operating loss of $5.7 million, $4.9 million of PPP Loan forgiveness, a $3.1 million increase in other current assets, a $0.1 million decrease in trade payables, a $1.4 million decrease in accrued compensations and benefits, and a $0.1 million decrease in other current liabilities and other components of working capital, partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in contract assets net of contract liabilities, $0.8 million of share-based compensation and depreciation, and a $0.1 million decrease in trade receivables. The primary drivers of the cash used by operations for the year ended December 26, 2020 was a decrease of $4.4 million in contract assets net of contract liabilities, a decrease of $1.1 million in trade payables, and our $0.6 million operating loss, partially offset by cash provided from decreases of $3.7 million in trade receivables, $0.5 million in deprecation, $0.2 million in share-based compensation, an increase of $1.3 million in accrued compensation and benefits, and a decrease of $0.1 million in other components of working capital.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Investing activities used cash of $0.2 million during the year ended December 25, 2021 primarily related to our office remodel and computer equipment and used cash of $0.4 million during the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily related to the purchase of equipment used to outfit our fabrication facility and to upgrade our accounting and purchasing system.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Financing activities provided cash of $19.4 million during the year ended December 25, 2021 due to net proceeds from sales of common stock under the ATM Agreement and Purchase Agreement, partially offset by payments on the Revolving Credit Facility and finance leases. Financing activities provided cash of $6.3 million during the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily due to the proceeds from the PPP Loan and Revolving Credit Facility partially offset by payments on our finance leases.
Contractual Obligations
The Company is obligated to make future cash payments under the Revolving Credit Facility, operating leases, finance leases, and other liabilities. Amounts below are undiscounted and may differ from balances reflected on the financial statements. The table below sets forth certain information about our contractual obligations as of December 25, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)
Other liabilities includes short-term notes payable.
Stock Repurchase Program
On April 21, 2015, the Company announced that our Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 million of our common stock from time to time through open market or privately negotiated transactions, based on prevailing market conditions. We were not obligated to repurchase any dollar amount or specific number of shares of common stock under the repurchase program, which may be suspended, discontinued or reinstated at any time. From April 2015 through December 2017, the Company purchased and retired 1,191,050 shares at a cost of $1.5 million. The stock repurchase program was suspended on May 16, 2017 and was reinstated on December 19, 2018. During the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, no shares were repurchased. Management does not intend to repurchase any shares in the near future.
Accounts Receivable
We typically sell our products and services on short-term credit and seek to minimize our credit risk by performing credit checks and conducting our own collection efforts. Our trade accounts receivable decreased $0.1 million, or 0.1%, to $7.7 million as of December 25, 2021 compared to $7.8 million as of December 26, 2020. We had bad debt expense of $1.4 million for the year ended December 25, 2021 primarily due to a major customer filing bankruptcy during the third quarter of the year and $0.1 of bad debt expense for the year ended December 26, 2020. Our allowance for uncollectible accounts was $1.7 million as of December 25, 2021 and $0.4 million as of December 26, 2020 and increased as a percentage of trade accounts receivable to 22.1% for 2021 from 5.0% for 2020. We continue to manage this portion of our business very carefully.
Risk Management
In performing services for our clients, we could potentially face liability for breach of contract, personal injury, property damage or negligence, including professional errors and omissions. We often agree to indemnify our clients for losses and expenses incurred as a result of our negligence and, in certain cases, the sole or concurrent negligence of our clients. Our quality control and assurance program includes a control function to establish standards and procedures for performance and for documentation of project tasks, and an assurance function to audit and to monitor compliance with procedures and quality standards. We maintain liability insurance for bodily injury and third-party property damage, professional errors and omissions, and workers’ compensation coverage, which we consider sufficient to insure against these risks, subject to self-insured amounts.
Seasonality
Our revenues are generated by services, and therefore holidays and employee vacations during our fourth quarter negatively impact revenues for that quarter, which is only partially offset by the year-end efforts on the part of many clients to spend any remaining funds budgeted for services and capital expenditures during the year. Our clients’ annual budget process is normally completed in the first quarter, which can slow the award of new work at the beginning of the year. Principally due to these factors, our first and fourth quarters are typically less robust than our second and third quarters.
Critical Accounting Policies
Please see Part II, Item 8, Note 2 - Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements for additional information regarding our critical accounting policies.