ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion provides information regarding the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and our financial condition, liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which contain further detailed information, as well as the section of this Annual Report titled "Risk Factors" which includes a cautionary note regarding forward looking statements.
OVERVIEW
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary Heat Waves Hot Oil Service LLC ("Heat Waves"), provides various services to the domestic onshore oil and natural gas industry through two segments: 1) Production Services, which include hot oiling and acidizing; and 2) Completion and Other Services, which includes frac water heating and other services. The Company owns and operates a fleet of approximately 318 specialized trucks, trailers, frac tanks and other well-site related equipment and serves customers in several major domestic oil and gas areas, including the DJ Basin/Niobrara area in Colorado and Wyoming, the Bakken area in North Dakota, the San Juan Basin in northwestern New Mexico, the Marcellus and Utica Shale areas in Pennsylvania and Ohio, the Jonah area, Green River and Powder River Basins in Wyoming, and the Eagle Ford Shale and East Texas Oilfield in Texas.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $346,000, or 2%, from the comparable period last year. This slight decrease was due primarily to the continued broader impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the inclusion of normal activity during the first quarter of 2020 that occurred prior to the pandemic and OPEC+ events. Excluding the first quarters of each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, revenues were up approximately $3.9 million, or 62%.
Segment loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $474,000, or 31%, from the comparable period last year primarily due to the reasons noted above. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $817,000, or 16%, from the comparable period last year due primarily to a decrease in our professional services, personnel costs, and stock-based compensation from the severance awarded to our former CEO in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by an increase in our bad debt expense. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by approximately $1.6 million, or 97%, from the comparable period last year due to the cessation of recording interest expense after the troubled debt restructuring of our Credit Facility during the third quarter of 2020.
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $3.6 million compared to approximately $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease of approximately $6.7 million, or 59%, was primarily due to the non-recurrence of the $11.9 million gain on the restructuring of the Credit Facility in the third quarter of 2020, partially offset by the $2.0 million gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan, a reduction in interest expense of approximately $1.6 million, and $1.8 million in Employee Retention Credits recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $8.1 million, or $0.74 per share, compared to a net loss of approximately $2.5 million, or $0.60 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of approximately $5.6 million, or 220%, was primarily due to the reasons mentioned above for Other income, partially offset by a $1.3 million year-over-year improvement in our loss from operations.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of approximately $6.1 million compared to a loss of approximately $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure in net income (loss) see "Adjusted EBITDA*" below.
Industry Overview
During 2021, West Texas Intermediate ("WTI") crude oil prices averaged approximately $68.17 per barrel, versus an average of approximately $39.68 per barrel in 2020. The United States rig count increased to 586 rigs in operation as of December 31, 2021, compared to 351 rigs in operation at the same time a year ago. Throughout 2021, we have continued to grow our customer base and allocate resources to the most active basins to further capitalize on the recovering industry environment. We are focused on increasing utilization levels and optimizing the deployment of our equipment and workforce while maintaining high standards for service quality and safe operations. We compete on the basis of the quality, breadth of our service offerings, and price.
The United States operational rig count declined precipitously in the second quarter of 2020 and bottomed out at 244 in the fall of 2020, then increased to 351 as of December 31, 2020 and continued to show slow signs of recovery before ramping up to 586 as of December 31, 2021. This translated into increased industry drilling and completion activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Average North American rig count increased by 10% from 433 rigs in operation during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 478 average rigs in operation during the year ended December 31, 2021. The decline in industry activity also put severe downward pressure on service pricing during 2020 and 2021; however, the recent uplift in activity is beginning to allow increases in service pricing and improved margins.
Beginning in early March of 2020, the market experienced a precipitous decline in oil prices in response to oil demand concerns due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 virus and anticipated increases in supply from Russia and OPEC+, particularly Saudi Arabia. While many of these concerns for 2020 materialized and, as a result, our customers reduced activity during this period of commodity price weakness and oil supply surplus, much of this weakness and downturn has alleviated throughout the course of 2021. While demand for our services has not yet returned to pre-pandemic levels, we expect demand to continue to increase gradually as our customers continue to ramp up production with their wells and the impacts of the pandemic continue to lessen.
Segment Overview
Enservco’s reportable operating segments are Production Services and Completion and Other Services. These segments have been selected based on management’s resource allocation and performance assessment in making decisions regarding the Company. The following is a description of the segments.
Production Services
This segment utilizes a fleet of hot oiling trucks and acidizing units to provide maintenance services to the domestic oil and gas industry. These services include hot oiling services and acidizing services. Hot oiling is utilized by customers to remove paraffins from wellbores, pipes and vessels. Acidizing services are utilized by customers to clean reservoir surfaces and increase flow rates.
Completion and Other Services
This segment utilizes a fleet of frac water heating units to provide frac water heating services and related support services to the domestic oil and gas industry. These services also include other services for other industries, which consist primarily of hauling and transport of materials and heat treating for customers. Frac water heating is utilized by customers during the completion of oil and gas wells.
Unallocated
This segment includes general overhead expenses and assets associated with managing all reportable operating segments which have not been allocated to a specific segment.
Segment Results
The following tables set forth revenues from operations and segment losses for our operating segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Production Services
Production Services segment revenues, which accounted for 59% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by approximately $1.3 million, or 17%, to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to increased hot oiling activity in our Central USA Region, led by the Company's expansion of operations into East Texas late in the second quarter of 2021. This was partially offset by decreased hot oiling activity in our Rocky Mountain Region due to decreased demand.
Hot oiling revenues increased by approximately $1.2 million, or 16%, to $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was attributable to the reasons discussed above for Production Services segment revenues.
Acidizing revenues increased by $123,000, or 28%, to $567,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to increased activity levels and continued efforts to pursue customers and partner with chemical suppliers to develop new cost-effective acid programs in seeking to expand our acidizing services across our service areas.
Production Services segment loss increased by $26,000, or 4%, to a segment loss of $722,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Completion and Other Services
Completion and Other Services segment revenues, which accounted for 41% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by approximately $1.6 million, or 21%, to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily attributable to the significant decrease in segment revenues for the first quarter of 2021 compared to the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by the period-over-period increases we realized in each of the second, third and fourth quarters of this year due to increases in both crude oil prices and active rig counts during each of those quarters in 2021 compared to the same quarters in 2020.
Completion and Other Services segment loss increased by $448,000, or 54%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increased loss was attributable to the reasons discussed above for Completion and Other Services segment revenues.
Geographic Areas
The Company operates in three geographically diverse regions of the United States. The following table sets forth revenues from operations for the Company’s three geographic regions during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
Includes the DJ Basin/Niobrara field (northeastern Colorado and southeastern Wyoming), the San Juan Basin (southeastern Colorado and northeastern New Mexico), the Powder River and Green River Basins (northeastern and southwestern Wyoming), the Bakken area (western North Dakota and eastern Montana).
(2)
Includes the Eagle Ford Shale in southern Texas and the East Texas Oilfield beginning during the second quarter of 2021.
(3)
Consists of the southern region of the Marcellus Shale formation (southwestern Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia) and the Utica Shale formation (eastern Ohio).
Production Services segment revenues in the Rocky Mountain Region decreased by $476,000, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to less acidizing and hot oiling activity in the DJ and Bakken Basins during the first quarter of 2021. Completion and Other Services segment revenues in the Rocky Mountain Region decreased by approximately $2.1 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to less completion activity in the DJ and Bakken Basins in the first quarter of 2021.
Production Services segment revenues in the Central USA Region increased by approximately $1.6 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to increased hot oiling activity in the Eagle Ford Shale in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2021 as well as the expansion into East Texas in the second quarter of 2021. Completion and Other Services segment revenues in the Central USA Region increased by $20,000, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to increased completion activity in the Eagle Ford Shale in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by less completion activity in the Anadarko Basin due to the closure of our facility there.
Production Services segment revenues in the Eastern USA Region increased by $168,000, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to increased hot oiling activity in the Marcellus and Utica Basins. Completion and Other Services segment revenues in the Eastern USA Region increased by $416,000, or 33%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily resulting from increased completion activity in the Marcellus and Utica Basins.
Historical Seasonality of Revenues
Due to the seasonality of our frac water heating business and, to a lesser extent, our hot oiling business, revenues generated during the cooler first and fourth quarters of our fiscal year constitute our "heating season" and are typically significantly higher than revenues during the second and third quarters of our fiscal year. In addition, the revenue mix of our service offerings change outside our heating season as our Completion and Other Services (which includes frac water heating) typically decrease as a percentage of total revenues and our Production Services increase as a percentage of total revenues. Thus, the revenues recognized in our quarterly financial statements in any given period are not indicative of the annual or quarterly revenues that should be expected throughout the remainder of that fiscal year.
As an indication of this quarter-to-quarter seasonality, the Company generated revenues of approximately $9.2 million, or 60% of its 2021 revenues, during the first and fourth quarters of 2021 compared to approximately $6.1 million, or 40% of 2021 revenues, during the second and third quarters of 2021. Due to above average temperatures in the fourth quarter of 2021 in many of the regions the Company operates in, there was a delayed start to the heating season for 2021. As a result, this seasonality was not as exacerbated in 2021 as it has been in previous years, but full year financial results were adversely impacted without the inclusion of traditional early winter activity. For example, in 2020, the Company generated revenues of approximately $11.8 million, or 75% of its 2020 revenues, during the first and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to approximately $3.9 million, or 25% of 2020 revenues, during the second and third quarters of 2020.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses for our operating segments, which include labor costs, propane, fuel, chemicals, truck repairs and maintenance, supplies, insurance, short-term rental costs and site overhead costs, were comparable for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Sales, General and Administrative Expenses
Sales, general and administrative expenses decreased by $817,000, or 16%, from the comparable period last year due primarily to a decrease in our professional services, personnel costs, and stock-based compensation from the severance awarded to our former CEO in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by an increase in our bad debt expense.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense were comparable for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Severance and Transition Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $7,000 in severance and transitions costs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized severance and transition costs of $145,000, primarily related to the departure of personnel including its former Chief Executive Officer. The Company also recorded $301,000 in stock compensation expense during the second quarter of 2020 in connection with the separation agreement with our former Chief Executive Officer, which is included in sales, general and administrative expenses.
Loss from Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a loss from operations of approximately $11.4 million compared to a loss from operations of approximately $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreased loss of approximately $1.3 million was primarily due to year-over-year reductions in our sales, general and administrative expenses and impairment loss.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by approximately $1.6 million, or 97%, year-over-year. This decrease was due to the cessation of recording interest expense after the troubled debt restructuring of our Credit Facility during the third quarter of 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,000, compared to a loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $107,000, which represents a 93% year-over-year improvement. Loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a gain on disposal of equipment of $71,000.
Income Taxes
During the first quarter of 2021 the Company experienced a change in control pursuant to the issuance of 4,199,998 shares of Company Common Stock. As a result of this change in control, and in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 382, the realizability of the Company's deferred tax assets became limited. Based on management's judgment, the Company estimates that as of December 31, 2021, $273,000 of deferred tax liabilities could no longer be used as a source of income to recognize the benefits of deferred tax assets and, as such, required the recording of additional valuation allowance of $273,000 through deferred income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company recorded approximately $12,000 of income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA*
Management believes that, for the reasons set forth below, Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP measure) is a valuable measurement of the Company's liquidity and performance and is consistent with the measurements offered by other companies in Enservco's industry. The following table presents a reconciliation of our net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
* See below for discussion of the use of non-GAAP financial measurements.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP results are presented only as a supplement to the financial statements and for use within management’s discussion and analysis based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"). The non-GAAP financial information is provided to enhance the reader's understanding of the Company’s financial performance, but no non-GAAP measure should be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations of the most directly comparable GAAP measures to non-GAAP measures are provided herein.
EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense from EBITDA and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing the Company’s ongoing operating performance as set forth in the next paragraph. None of these non-GAAP financial measures are recognized terms under GAAP and do not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) as an indicator of operating performance or any other GAAP measure.
All the items included in the reconciliation from net income (loss) to EBITDA and from EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA are either (i) non-cash items (e.g., depreciation, amortization of purchased intangibles, stock-based compensation expense, impairment losses, etc.) or (ii) items that management does not consider to be useful in assessing the Company’s ongoing operating performance (e.g., income taxes, gains or losses on sales of assets, acquisition-related expenses, patent litigation and defense costs, severance and transition costs, impairment loss, one-time software expenses, the expenses to consolidate former Adler facilities, other expense (income), EBITDA related to discontinued operations, etc.). In the case of the non-cash items, management believes that investors can better assess the company’s operating performance if the measures are presented without such items because, unlike cash expenses, these adjustments do not affect the Company’s ability to generate free cash flow or invest in its business.
We use, and we believe investors benefit from the presentation of, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in evaluating our operating performance because it provides us and our investors with an additional tool to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our core operations. We believe that EBITDA is useful to investors and other external users of our financial statements in evaluating our operating performance because EBITDA is widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items such as interest expense, taxes, and depreciation and amortization, which can vary substantially from company to company depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which assets were acquired.
Because not all companies use identical calculations, the Company’s presentation of non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. However, these measures can still be useful in evaluating the Company’s performance against its peer companies because management believes the measures provide users with valuable insight into key components of GAAP financial disclosures.
Changes in Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA loss increased by $346,000, or 6%, to a loss of approximately $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an Adjusted EBITDA loss of approximately $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increased loss was primarily due to a year-over-year decrease in our gross margin. The large increase in other (income) expense of $3.9 million is primarily attributable to the $2.0 million gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan and $1.8 million in Employee Retention Credits recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and, combined with the working capital table and discussion below, is important for understanding our liquidity (in thousands):
The following table sets forth a summary of certain aspects of our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Overview
On March 24, 2022, the Company completed a refinancing transaction (the “Refinancing”) in which it terminated its existing credit facility with the East West Bank, which had an outstanding principal balance of $13.8 million. Pursuant to the pay-off letter dated as of March 18, 2022 by the Company, certain wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company and East West Bank, and in full satisfaction of the Company’s obligations under the East West Bank credit facility, the Company paid East West Bank $8.4 million in cash and agreed to pay East West Bank 5% of the net proceeds that the Company receives under the Receivables Financing (as defined below), up to a maximum of $1.0 million.
As part of the Refinancing, on March 24, 2022, Heat Waves entered into a Master Lease Agreement (the “Utica Facility”) with Utica Leaseco, LLC (“Utica”), pursuant to which Utica provided an equipment-collateralized loan to the Company in the amount of $6,225,000. Under the Utica Facility, the Company is required to make 51 monthly payments of $168,075 each. At the end of the fifty-one month term, the Company is required to make a residual payment to Utica between 1% and 10% of the initial principal amount, or between $62,250 and $622,500, based on a debt coverage criteria. The Utica Facility is secured by all the Company’s equipment and proceeds from the sale of such equipment. The Company also has the option, after 12 months, to prepay $1.0 million of the Utica Facility in exchange for a reduced payment schedule. The Company has agreed to guarantee the obligations of Heat Waves under the Utica Facility pursuant to an unsecured Master Lease Guaranty with Utica.
In addition, as part of the Refinancing, on March 24, 2022, Heat Waves entered into an Invoice Purchase Agreement (the “Receivables Financing” and together with the Utica Facility, the “2022 Financing Facilities”) with LSQ Funding Group, LLC (“LSQ”) pursuant to which LSQ will provide receivables factoring to Heat Waves. Under the Receivables Financing, LSQ will advance up to 85% on accounts receivable factored by Heat Waves, up to a maximum of $10.0 million. LSQ will receive fees equal to 0.1% of the receivables purchased in addition to a funds usage daily fee of 0.021% of the outstanding balance purchased. The Receivables Financing initially has an 18-month term that can be terminated upon payment of certain fees. The Receivables Financing is secured by a security interest in Heat Wave’s accounts receivables and proceeds from such accounts receivable. Heat Wave’s obligations under the Receivables Financing are guaranteed by the Company pursuant to an unsecured Entity Guaranty.
The Utica Facility and the Receivables Financing are subject to an Intercreditor Agreement dated on or about March 24, 2022 by and among Utica, LSQ, Heat Waves, and the Company (the “Intercreditor Agreement”).
Also, as part of the Refinancing, on March 22, 2022, the Company issued a $1.2 million Convertible Subordinated Note (the “Note”) to Cross River Partners, LP (“Cross River”), which is an entity controlled by Richard Murphy, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman. The Note has a six-year term and accrues interest at seven percent per annum. The Company is required to make quarterly interest-only payments under the Note for the first year starting June 30, 2022, followed by principal and interest payments for the remaining five years based upon a ten-year amortization schedule. The Note is unsecured and subordinated to any secured debt obligations, including the Utica Facility and the Receivable Financing. Subject to any required stockholder approval, outstanding principal and accrued but unpaid interest under the Note is convertible at the option of Cross River into common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to the average closing price of the Company’s common stock on the five days prior to the date of any such conversion.
We have relied on cash flows from operations to satisfy our liquidity needs. Although we had a $1.0 million line of credit under our previous Credit Facility with East West Bank, we were unable to borrow under such line of credit which impacted our ability to fund operations during our busy heating season during the fourth quarter of 2021 and the first quarter of 2022. We believe that our ability to utilize the Receivables Financing will have a positive impact on our liquidity availability, especially during the busier heating season. Our capital requirements for 2022 are anticipated to include, but are not limited to, operating expenses, debt servicing, and capital expenditures, including maintenance of our existing fleet of assets.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, our available liquidity was approximately $1.1 million, comprised of $149,000 of cash and cash equivalents and $1.0 million of availability on the line of credit under our 2017 Credit Facility. We utilize the line of credit under our 2017 Credit Facility to fund working capital requirements and investments and, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we made net line of credit repayments of $701,000.
Working Capital
As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of approximately $6.9 million, compared to working capital of $306,000 as of December 31, 2020. This $7.2 million decrease in working capital was primarily attributable to the ASC 470 compliant amount of our indebtedness under the amended 2017 Credit Agreement being classified as current as of December 31, 2021 due to the maturity date of October 15, 2022. See Note 5 - Debt for further discussion of the 2017 Credit Facility and the 2022 Financing Facilities.
Deferred Tax Liabiliy, net
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a valuation allowance of approximately $7.6 million which reduced its net deferred tax liabilities to approximately $273,000.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $4.8 million compared to cash used in operating activities of approximately $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cash used of $331,000 was primarily attributable to the decrease in cash provided by the monetization of accounts receivable and an increase in cash used for prepaid expenses and other current assets during 2021, partially offset by the decrease in net loss adjusted to net cash used and the increase in cash flows related to the change in accounts payable balances.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $200,000 compared to cash provided by investing activities of approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in cash provided by investing activities of approximately $1.2 million was primarily attributable to the non-recurrence of prior year items including proceeds received from an insurance settlement and the sale of assets related to our discontinued operations.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $3.7 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of approximately $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease of $564,000 was primarily attributable to the net proceeds from our February 2021 Public Offering, partially offset by accrued future interest payments, net paydowns of our long-term Credit Facility during both the first and fourth quarters of 2021, and the non-recurrence of proceeds from the PPP loan received during the second quarter of 2020.
Class Action Litigation
On May 23, 2022, Ali Safee, individually and on behalf of others, filed a complaint in United States District Court for the District of Colorado against the Company, Richard A. Murphy, and Majorie A. Hargrave (our former Chief Financial Officer). The complaint generally alleges violation of federal securities laws in connection with the Company’s amending of its Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, and September 30, 2021 to reflect restatements of its consolidated financial statements for such quarters. The Company vigorously denies these claims and has tendered this litigation to its insurer.
Outlook
Our business is heavily dependent on exploration and production activity levels, which fluctuate based on commodity prices, weather that affects customer demand for our frac water heating business, capital budgets and other factors. We continue to seek opportunities to expand our business operations through organic growth, including increasing the volume of current services offered to our new and existing customers and relocating more of our equipment to increase utilization. We will also continue to expand our customer relationships while maintaining an appropriate balance between recurring maintenance work and drilling and completion related services.
Over the past three years we have invested significantly in process improvement initiatives designed to make the Company operate more efficiently and take better advantage of our expanded fleet and national leadership position in hot oiling, acidizing and frac water heating. We faced a very difficult operating environment during the first quarter of 2021 which began to improve during the second quarter of 2021 with the increases in crude oil prices and active North American oil rigs. While crude oil prices and active North American oil rigs continued to rise throughout the third and fourth quarters of 2021, rig counts continue to be over 30% below pre-pandemic levels. Additionally, E&P companies have continued their recent focus on improving free cash flow and debt reduction at the expense of rapidly increasing drilling activity even as crude oil prices rose above $100 per barrel.
Recent increases in oil prices, caused in part by the war in Ukraine, combined with a relatively colder winter, has resulted in an increased demand for the Company’s services. However, the demand for oil remains uncertain given global political tensions, such as in Ukraine, and persistent supply shortages that have resulted in significant inflation un the United States. While increases in oil prices generally correlates with an increase in demand for the Company’s services, uncertainties regarding global political tensions, wars, inflation, and increasing interest rates could have a negative impact in the Company’s 2022 performance.
Through much of 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted the world economic conditions including in the United States, with significant effects beginning in February 2020, and continuing through the issuance of this report, as federal, state and local governments have reacted to the public health crisis, creating some uncertainties relating to the United States economy. COVID-19 related quarantines and business restrictions had a depressing impact on United States oil demand, and hence our business, during the latter half of March 2020 through much of 2021. Although COVID-19 related restrictions have eased somewhat during the first quarter of 2022, the situation continues to change rapidly and additional impacts to our business may arise that we are not aware of currently.
The full extent of the impact of COVID-19, inflation, supply shortages and the impact of increasing oil prices on our operations and financial performance depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable, including the outbreak of any new COVID-19 variants, its impact on capital and financial markets, any new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus, its spread to other regions as well as the actions taken to contain it, and production response of domestic oil producers to lower oil prices, among others.
Capital Commitments and Obligations
Our capital commitments and obligations as of December 31, 2021 consist primarily of the amended 2017 Credit Agreement which was recently refinanced pursuant to the 2022 Financing Facilities. In addition, we also have scheduled principal payments under certain term loans, debt obligations, finance leases and operating leases. General terms and conditions for amounts due under these commitments and obligations are summarized in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make a variety of estimates and assumptions that affect (i) the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and (ii) the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods covered by the financial statements.
Our management routinely makes judgments and estimates about the impact of matters that are inherently uncertain. As the number of variables and assumptions affecting the future resolution of the uncertainties increase, these judgments become even more subjective and complex. Although we believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in estimates and assumptions based upon actual results may have a material impact on our results of operation and/or financial condition. Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Developments included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
While all the significant accounting estimates are important to the Company’s consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, the following accounting policies and the estimates derived there from have been identified as being critical.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at the amounts billed to customers, net of an allowance for uncollectible accounts. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectable accounts based on a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information and existing economic conditions. The allowance for uncollectible amounts is continually reviewed and adjusted to maintain the allowance at a level considered adequate to cover future losses. The allowance is management's best estimate of uncollectible amounts and is determined based on historical collection experience related to accounts receivable coupled with a review of the current status of existing receivables. The losses ultimately incurred could differ materially in the near term from the amounts estimated in determining the allowance.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets, including property and equipment, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances (i.e. "triggering events") indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recovered. If a triggering event has been identified, the Company looks primarily to the undiscounted future cash flows in its assessment of whether or not long-lived assets have been impaired.
Employee Retention Tax Credits
The Employee Retention Credits program, a provision of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act"), was extended through December 31, 2021 through the American Rescue Plan Act. On November 15, 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act was signed into law and retroactively ended the Employee Retention Credits on September 30, 2021. For 2021, the Employee Retention Credits are up to $7,000 per employee per quarter on qualified wages for the first three quarters of 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $1.8 million to other income in the consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue Recognition
The Company evaluates revenue when we can identify the contract with the customer, the performance obligations in the contract, the transaction price, and we are certain that the performance obligations have been met. Revenue is recognized when the service has been provided to the customer. The vast majority of the Company's services and product offerings are short-term in nature. The time between invoicing and when payment is due under these arrangements is generally thirty to sixty days. Revenue is not generated from contractual arrangements that include multiple performance obligations.
The Company’s agreements with its customers are often referred to as "price sheets" and sometimes provide pricing for multiple services. However, these agreements generally do not authorize the performance of specific services or provide for guaranteed throughput amounts. As customers are free to choose which services, if any, to use based on the Company’s price sheet, the Company prices its separate services on the basis of their standalone selling prices. Customer agreements generally do not provide for performance, cancellation, termination, or refund type provisions. Services based on price sheets with customers are generally performed under separately issued "work orders" or "field tickets" as services are requested.
Revenue is recognized for certain projects that take more than one day as projects over time based on the number of days during the reporting period and the agreed upon price as work progresses on each project.
Contingent Liabilities
From time-to-time, the Company will have contingent liabilities that arise in the course of business, usually as it pertains to certain lawsuits in which the Company is involved. When a future contingent liability becomes both probable and estimable, the Company will record a liability for the estimated amount, as well as any offsetting receivables in the event the claim is probable to be covered by an insurance policy. In the event there is a range of outcomes and no amount is determined to be most probable, the Company will record a liability and, if applicable due to likelihood of insurance coverage, a receivable for the low end of the range. In the event the Company makes a firm offer in order to settle a lawsuit, the Company will record a liability for the amount of the offer at that time.
Classification and Valuation of Warrants
The Company analyzes warrant instruments under ASC 480-10, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, to determine the classification of the warrants. More specifically, the Company determines if the warrant contains any special redemption features or is subject to derivative accounting rules. None of the Company's issued warrants meet any of these criteria and are all classified as permanent equity.
The Company uses a Lattice model to determine the fair value of certain warrants. The expected term used was the remaining contractual term. Expected volatility is based upon historical volatility over a term consistent with the remaining term. The risk-free interest rate is derived from the yield on zero-coupon United States government securities with a remaining term equal to the contractual term of the warrants. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
Going Concern
The Company utilizes a cash forecast model to evaluate the ability of future cash flows to fund continuing operations. The Company analyzes projected cash flows to determine if they are sufficent to fund the operations and obligations of the Company for a period of time that extends twelve months or more from the date of the applicable filing.