Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Enterprise 4.0 Technology Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on May 3, 2021 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the period from May 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $253,198, which consisted of interest earned on investment held in the Trust Account of $17,160, offset by operating expenses of $270,358.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 21, 2021, the Company consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 Class A ordinary shares, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,900,000 public shares, at $10.00 per public share, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 700,000 placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit in a private placement to Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the placement shares, a total of $306,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred transaction costs of $17,078,457, consisting of $5,220,000 of underwriting fees, and $11,280,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $578,457 of other offering costs.
For the period from May 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $835,777. Net loss of $253,198 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities of $17,160. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $565,419 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $306,017,160. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the v to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $637,566 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or certain of the Company’s directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a business combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into units of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the placement units.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor monthly fee of $12,500 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on October 19, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters were entitled to a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5,220,000 in the aggregate, which was paid upon the closing of the initial public offering. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) $0.35 per unit of the gross proceeds of the Initial 26,100,000 Units sold in the initial public offering, or $9,135,000, and (ii) $0.55 per unit of the gross proceeds from the Units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $2,145,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Concurrent with the closing date of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor loaned the Company $6,220,000 to be deposited into the trust account and be used to fund the redemption of public shares (as necessary). The Sponsor Loan is non-interest
bearing and will be repaid or converted into units at a conversation price of $10.00 per unit, at the discretion of the Sponsor at any time up until the consummation of a Business Combination. If the Company does not consummate a Business Combination, the Company will not repay the sponsor loan and its proceeds will be distributed to the public shareholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary share outstanding for the period. The Company applies the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares are excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Management is currently evaluating the impact of adopting ASU 2020-06.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.