Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Envestnet, through its subsidiaries, is transforming the way financial advice and insight are delivered. Our mission is to empower financial advisors and service providers with innovative technology, solutions and intelligence. Envestnet has been a leader in helping transform wealth management, working towards its goal of expanding a holistic financial wellness ecosystem so that our clients can deliver an Intelligent Financial Life to their clients.
Over 108,000 advisors and more than 6,000 companies, including 18 of the 20 largest U.S. banks, 47 of the 50 largest wealth management and brokerage firms, over 500 of the largest RIAs and hundreds of FinTech companies, leverage Envestnet technology and services that help drive better outcomes for enterprises, advisors and their clients.
Through a combination of platform enhancements, partnerships and acquisitions, Envestnet uniquely provides a financial network connecting technology, solutions and data, delivering better intelligence and enabling its customers to drive better outcomes.
Envestnet, a Delaware corporation originally founded in 1999, serves clients from its headquarters based in Chicago, Illinois, as well as other locations throughout the United States, India and other international locations.
We also operate five RIAs registered with the SEC. We believe that our business model results in a high degree of recurring and predictable financial results.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, a novel strain of Coronavirus, a global pandemic. This outbreak continues to cause disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide as the virus spreads and new variants emerge. The extent of the effect on our operational and financial performance will continue to depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic, the emergence of variants and additional outbreaks of COVID-19, the availability and efficacy of vaccines, further governmental, regulatory and private sector responses and the timing and extent normal economic and operating conditions resume, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict. Although we are unable to estimate the overall financial effect of the pandemic at this time, as the pandemic continues, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. As of December 31, 2021, these consolidated financial statements do not reflect any adjustments as a result of the pandemic.
Recent Developments
Credit Agreement Amendment
On February 4, 2022, we entered into a Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Third Credit Agreement”) with a group of banks. The Third Credit Agreement amends and restates, in its entirety, our prior Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of July 18, 2017, as amended (the “Prior Credit Agreement”).
The Third Credit Agreement amended certain provisions under the Prior Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) extend the maturity of loans and the revolving credit commitments, (ii) reduce the interest rate payable on the loans and (iii) increase capacity and flexibility under certain of the negative covenants.
The Third Credit Agreement provides, subject to certain customary conditions, for a revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”), in an aggregate amount of $500.0 million, with a $20.0 million sub-facility for letters of credit.
The Credit Facility matures on February 4, 2027.
Outstanding loans under the Credit Facility accrue interest, at Envestnet’s option, at a rate equal to either (i) a base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.75% per annum or (ii) an adjusted Term SOFR rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.75% per annum, based upon the total net leverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to the Third Credit Agreement. The undrawn portion of the commitments under the Credit Facility is subject to a commitment fee at a rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.30% per annum, based upon the total net leverage ratio as calculated pursuant to the Credit Agreement.
The obligations of Envestnet under the Third Credit Agreement are guaranteed by substantially all of Envestnet’s domestic subsidiaries and are secured by a first-priority lien on substantially all of the personal property (other than intellectual property) of Envestnet and the guarantors, subject to certain exclusions.
Investment in YieldX
On October 1, 2021, we acquired a 6.8% ownership interest in YieldX Inc. ("YieldX"), a Delaware corporation, for cash consideration of $15.0 million. YieldX provides an end-to-end digital platform with smart workflows, artificial intelligence powered analytics and a reimagined user experience for financial professionals and investors in the fixed income markets. We elected the measurement alternative for this investment as it did not have a readily determinable fair value. The investment is measured at cost, less impairment, adjusted by observable price changes.
In connection with this investment, we also entered into a commercial agreement with YieldX to integrate the products and solutions of YieldX into our platform offering. The consideration under the commercial agreement includes a warrant and quarterly cash payments subject to the satisfaction of certain performance targets.
Procurement of Technology Solutions
On June 21, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement with a privately held company to acquire the technology solutions being developed by this privately held company for a purchase price of $18.0 million, including an advance of $3.0 million. The transaction closed on February 1, 2022 and we paid the remaining $15.0 million on February 2, 2022. This asset will be integrated into the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment. In addition, the agreement includes an earn-out payment of $10.0 million based upon the achievement of certain target metrics within five years after the date of our launch of the technology solutions.
Acquisition of Harvest
On April 7, 2021, we acquired Harvest Savings & Wealth Technologies (“Harvest”), a Delaware corporation (the "Harvest Acquisition"). Harvest provides automated goals-based saving and wealth solutions to banks, credit unions, trust companies and other financial institutions. Harvest has been integrated into the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment. The acquisition optimizes our API-based financial wellness ecosystem and also helps strengthen our foothold to enable embedded finance, which we see as a key driver of the future of financial services.
In connection with the Harvest Acquisition, we paid estimated consideration of $32.8 million (of which approximately $3.0 million is being held in escrow for 18 months after the closing date), net of cash acquired, subject to certain post-closing adjustments. we funded the acquisition with cash on hand.
We recorded estimated goodwill of $18.5 million, which is not deductible for income tax purposes, and estimated identified intangible assets of $9.5 million. The tangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed were not material.
Acquisition of Proprietary Technology
We previously owned approximately 29% of the outstanding units in a privately held company and accounted for it as an equity method investment. On March 11, 2021, we entered into an intellectual property purchase agreement with this privately held company to acquire all of the proprietary technology developed by the privately held company for approximately $35.5 million. Concurrent with the intellectual property purchase agreement, the Company also entered into a redemption agreement with the same privately held company to redeem the Company's previously held equity interest for approximately $10 million. The Company accounted for these two arrangements as a single unit of account. As of the acquisition date, the net cost of the proprietary technology acquired, including capitalized transaction costs, was approximately $24.5 million, which will be amortized over a five-year period on a straight-line basis. The proprietary technology has been integrated into the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment.
Accelerated Investment Plan
In February 2021, we announced that we would be accelerating our investment in our ecosystem, to fulfill our strategy of:
•Capturing more of the addressable market;
•Modernizing the digital engagement marketplace; and
•Opening the platform.
These investments totaled approximately $35.5 million in 2021. We expect to incur an additional $45 - $50 million in 2022 as we continue to invest in our ecosystem.
Organizational Realignment
In the fourth quarter of 2020, as part of an organizational realignment, we entered into separation agreements with several employees. In connection with this realignment, we recognized approximately $5.2 million and $5.1 million of severance expense during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have accrued approximately $1.4 million and $5.1 million in accrued compensation and related taxes associated with these separation agreements, respectively.
Key Metrics
Envestnet Wealth Solutions Segment
The following table provides information regarding the amount of assets utilizing our platforms, financial advisors and investor accounts in the periods indicated:
The following table provides information regarding the degree to which gross sales, redemptions, net flows and changes in the market values of assets contributed to changes in AUM or AUA in the periods indicated:
The above AUM/A gross sales figures include $34.9 billion in new client conversions. We onboarded an additional $312.4 billion in subscription conversions during 2021, bringing total conversions for the year to $347.3 billion.
The above AUM/A gross sales figures include $38.6 billion in new client conversions. We onboarded an additional $119.6 billion in subscription conversions during 2020, bringing total conversions for the year to $158.2 billion.
Asset and account figures in the “Reclass to Subscription” columns for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 represent enterprise customers whose billing arrangements in future periods are subscription-based, rather than asset-based. Such amounts are included in Subscription metrics at the end of the quarter in which the reclassification occurred, with no impact on total platform assets or accounts.
Envestnet Data & Analytics Segment
Paid Users
A paid user is defined as a user of an application or service provided to our customer using the Envestnet Data & Analytics platform whose status corresponds to a billable activity under the associated customer contract. We believe that our ability to increase the number of paid users is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business, and our potential future business opportunities.
Paid users were approximately 32 million, 35 million and 25 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease from 2020 to 2021 is driven by a significant change in a current client's business and digital strategy.
Revenues
Overview
We earn revenues primarily under three pricing models. First, a majority of our revenues is derived from fees charged as a percentage of the assets that are managed or administered on our technology platforms by financial advisors. These revenues are recorded under asset-based revenues. Our asset-based fees vary based on the types of investment solutions and services that financial advisors utilize. Asset-based fees accounted for approximately 60%, 54% and 54% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In future periods, the percentage of our total revenues attributable to asset-based fees is expected to vary based on fluctuations in securities markets, whether we enter into significant subscription agreements, the mix of AUM or AUA, and other factors.
We also generate revenues from recurring, contractual subscription fees for providing access to our technology platforms. This subscription revenue includes both contractual minimum payments and usage-based fees and is driven primarily by the number of customers, including new customers as well as customers who renew their existing subscription contracts, and the number of paid users. These revenues are recorded under subscription-based revenues. Subscription fees vary based on the scope of technology solutions and services being used, and are priced in a variety of constructs based on the size of the business, number of users or number of accounts and in many cases can increase over time based on the growth of these factors. Subscription fees accounted for 38%, 43% and 42% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Finally, a portion of our revenues are generated from fees received in connection with professional services and other revenue.
Asset-based recurring revenues
We generally charge our customers fees based on a higher percentage of the market value of AUM than the fees we charge on the market value of AUA, because we provide fiduciary oversight and/or act as the investment advisor in connection with assets we categorize as AUM. The level of fees varies based on the nature of the investment solutions and services we provide, as well as the specific investment manager, fund and/or custodian chosen by the financial advisor. A portion of our revenues from assets under management or administration include costs paid by us to third parties for sub-advisory, clearing, custody and brokerage services. These expenses are recorded under cost of revenues. We do not have fiduciary responsibility in connection with AUA and, therefore, generally charge lower fees on these assets. Our fees for AUA vary based on the nature of the investment solutions and services we provide.
Over 75% of our asset-based recurring revenues from AUM/A are billed to customers at the beginning of each quarter and are based on the market value of their assets on our platforms as of the end of the prior quarter. For example, asset-based recurring revenues recognized during the fourth quarter of 2021 were primarily based on the market value of assets as of September 30, 2021. Our asset-based recurring revenues are generally recognized ratably throughout the quarter based on the number of days in the quarter.
Our asset-based recurring revenues are affected by the amount of new assets that are added to existing and new client accounts, which we refer to as gross sales. Gross sales, from time to time, also include conversions of client assets to our technology platforms. The amounts of assets that are withdrawn from client accounts are referred to as redemptions. We refer to the difference between gross sales and redemptions as net flows. Positive net flows indicate that the market value of assets added to client accounts exceeds the market value of assets that have been withdrawn from client accounts.
Our asset-based revenues are also affected by changes in the market values of securities held in client accounts due to fluctuations in the securities markets. Certain types of securities have historically experienced greater market price fluctuations, such as equity securities, than other securities, such as fixed income securities, though in any given period the type of securities that experience the greatest fluctuations may vary.
Subscription-based recurring revenues
Subscription-based recurring revenues are recognized ratably over the contracted term of each respective subscription agreement, commencing on the date the service is provisioned to the customer, provided all applicable revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. As part of the subscription contracts, our customers generally commit to a minimum level of paid users from which a minimum level of non-refundable subscription revenue is derived. As paid users in excess of the guaranteed minimum level access the platform, the customer is then required to pay additional usage fees calculated based upon a contracted per-paid-user fee. No refunds or credits are given if fewer paid users access the platform than the contracted minimum level. Usage-based revenue is recognized as earned, provided all applicable revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied.
Professional services and other revenues
We also receive revenues from professional services fees by providing customers with certain technology platform software development and implementation services. These revenues are recognized when completed, under a proportional-performance model utilizing an output-based approach or on a straight-line basis over the estimated life of the customer relationship. Our contracts generally have fixed prices and generally specify or quantify interim deliverables.
Expenses
The following is a description of our principal expense items:
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues primarily includes expenses related to our receipt of sub-advisory and clearing, custody and brokerage services from third parties. The largest component of cost of revenues is paid to third party investment managers. Clearing, custody and brokerage services are performed by third-party providers. These expenses are typically calculated based upon a contractual percentage of the market value of assets held in customer accounts measured as of the end of each fiscal quarter and are recognized ratably throughout the quarter based on the number of days in the quarter. Also included in cost of revenues are vendor specific expenses related to the direct support of revenues associated with the Envestnet Data & Analytics products.
Compensation and benefits
Compensation and benefits expenses primarily relate to employee compensation, including salaries, short-term incentive compensation, non-cash stock-based compensation, incentive compensation, benefits and employer-related taxes.
General and administration
General and administration expenses include costs and expenses related to occupancy, communications services, research and data services, website and system development, marketing, professional and legal services, travel and entertainment and acquisition/transaction related expenses.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses include depreciation and amortization related to:
•fixed assets, including land, building and building improvements, computer equipment and software, leasehold improvements, office furniture and fixtures and office equipment and other;
•internally developed software; and
•intangible assets, primarily related to customer lists, proprietary technology and trade names, the values of which are capitalized in connection with our acquisitions.
Building, furniture and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the depreciable assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated economic useful lives or the remaining lease term, whichever is shorter. Improvements are capitalized, while repairs and maintenance costs are recorded as expenses in the period they are incurred. Assets are tested for recoverability whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable.
Internally developed software is amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
Intangible assets are depreciated using an accelerated or straight-line basis over their estimated economic useful lives and are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
Interest income
Interest income primarily includes amounts earned on our bank accounts and money market funds.
Interest expense
As of January 1, 2021, we adopted FASB ASU 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity.” The adoption of this standard resulted in a decrease to our interest expense in 2021.
Interest expense includes coupon interest and issuance cost amortization related to our convertible note issuances, as well as interest and amortization of upfront fees and monthly fees related to our Amended Credit Agreement. The issuance costs and upfront fees are amortized over the term of the related agreements. Prior to the adoption of ASU 2020-06, interest expense related to our convertible note issuances also included amortization of the original issue discount. See Part II, Item 8, “Note 10-Debt” for additional details regarding our third-party debt.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net includes gains (losses) on our portion of our equity method investees' results and foreign exchange gains or losses as well as other miscellaneous income or expense items as appropriate.
Results of Operations
*Not meaningful
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Asset-based recurring revenues
Asset-based recurring revenues increased 31% from $540.9 million in 2020 to $709.4 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase in asset values applicable to our quarterly billing cycles as a result of the upswing in the equity markets relative to the comparable 2020 period. In 2021, revenues were also positively affected by new account growth and positive net flows of AUM/A. The revenue increase was partially offset by existing customers switching from an asset-based pricing model to a subscription-based pricing model.
The number of financial advisors with AUM or AUA on our technology platforms decreased from approximately 41,000 as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 40,000 as of December 31, 2021 and the number of AUM or AUA client accounts increased from approximately 2.4 million as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 2.6 million as of December 31, 2021.
Asset-based recurring revenue increased from 54% of total revenue in 2020 to 60% of total revenue in 2021, primarily due to a higher increase in asset-based recurring revenues as compared to subscription-based recurring revenues.
Subscription-based recurring revenues
Subscription-based recurring revenues increased 6% from $426.5 million in 2020 to $454.0 million in 2021. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $18.9 million in the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment and an increase of $8.6 million in the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment, which can be attributed to new and existing customer growth . Periodically, existing customers switch from an asset-based pricing model to a subscription-based pricing model.
Professional services and other revenues
Professional services and other revenues decreased 25% from $30.8 million in 2020 to $23.2 million in 2021. The decrease was due to timing of the completion of customer projects and deployments.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues increased 39% from $305.9 million in 2020 to $423.7 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase in asset-based cost of revenues of $115.1 million, which directly correlates with the increase to asset-based recurring revenues during the period. As a percentage of total revenues, cost of revenues increased from 31% to 36% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, primarily due to shifts in pricing and product mix for asset-based revenues.
Compensation and benefits
Compensation and benefits increased 8% from $399.0 million in 2020 to $432.8 million in 2021. The increase is comprised of increases in salaries, benefits and related payroll taxes of $19.8 million, incentive compensation of $19.3 million, non-cash compensation expense of $8.4 million and other immaterial increases within compensation and benefit accounts. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in severance expense of $13.8 million. The decrease in severance expense is primarily related to charges incurred during 2020 in connection with a voluntary early retirement program offered to eligible employees. Employees had until January 31, 2020 to voluntarily accept the program with separation of service no later than March 31, 2020. As a percentage of total revenues, compensation and benefits decreased from 40% in 2020 to 36% in 2021 due to a higher revenue increase compared to a lower compensation and benefits increase.
General and administration
General and administration expenses increased 7% from $160.2 million in 2020 to $171.7 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to increases in website and systems development costs of $11.9 million, marketing expense of $10.9 million and professional and legal fees of $6.0 million. These increases were partially offset by decreases in restructuring charges and transaction costs of $7.9 million, miscellaneous general and administration expense of $3.3 million, non-income tax expense of $1.8 million, research and data services of $1.7 million, travel and entertainment expense of $1.6 million, and other immaterial decreases within general and administration expense. As a percentage of total revenues, general and administration expenses decreased from 16% in 2020 to 14% and 2021.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased 4% from $113.7 million in 2020 to $117.8 million in 2021, primarily due to an increase in internally developed software amortization expense of $9.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense of $5.0 million. As a percentage of total revenues, depreciation and amortization expense decreased from 11% in 2020 to 10% in 2021.
Interest income
Interest income decreased from $1.1 million in 2020 to $0.8 million in 2021, primarily due to lower effective interest rates earned on our cash and money market funds.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased 46% from $31.5 million in 2020 to $16.9 million in 2021, primarily due to the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021 and no outstanding borrowings on our revolving credit facility during fiscal year 2021.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net decreased from other income of $2.9 million in 2020 to other expense of $4.1 million in 2021, primarily due to a one-time gain of $4.2 million recorded in 2020 related to the remeasurement of a previously held interest in an equity method investee that we acquired the remaining outstanding equity for, a one-time gain of $2.5 million recorded in 2020 related to a fair value adjustment upon the settlement of a former Chief Executive Officer's stock options, a gain recorded in 2020 on the sale of our interest held in a private company of $1.6 million and $0.9 million in additional losses recorded in 2021 related to equity investments. These drivers were partially offset by a one-time gain of $1.2 million in 2021 related to the settlement of a contingent liability and a one-time gain of $1.0 million in 2021 related to an insurance reimbursement.
Income tax provision
Our 2021 effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to the change in the valuation allowance we have placed on a portion of US deferred tax assets, the generation of research and development ("R&D") tax credits, executive compensation deduction limitations, income related to Indian partnerships, and state income taxes.
Our 2020 effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to state income taxes, the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation, executive compensation deduction limitations, the generation of R&D tax credits, income related to the Indian partnerships, the impact of the CARES Act related to NOL carryback, the change in the valuation allowance we have placed on a portion of US deferred tax assets and the settlement of ASC 740-10 amounts due to the settlement of the bilateral advance pricing agreement with India and the filing of voluntary disclosure agreement returns.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
For a discussion of the 2020 Results of Operations compared to 2019, see Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Business Segments
Business segments are generally organized around our service offerings. Financial information about each of our two business segments is contained in Part II, Item 8, “Note 19-Segment Information”. Our business segments are as follows:
Envestnet Wealth Solutions - a leading provider of unified wealth management software and services to empower financial advisors and institutions to enable them to deliver an Intelligent Financial Life to their clients.
Envestnet Data & Analytics - a leading data aggregation and data intelligence platform powering dynamic, cloud-based innovation for digital financial services.
We also incur expenses not directly attributable to the segments listed above. These nonsegment operating expenses include salary and benefits for certain corporate officers, certain types of professional service expenses and insurance, acquisition related transaction costs, certain restructuring charges and other non-recurring and/or non-operationally related expenses.
The following table reconciles income (loss) from operations by segment to consolidated net income (loss) attributable to Envestnet, Inc.:
Envestnet Wealth Solutions
The following table presents income from operations for the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020 for the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment
Revenues
Asset-based recurring revenues
Asset-based recurring revenues increased 31% from $540.9 million in 2020 to $709.4 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase in asset values applicable to our quarterly billing cycles due to the impact of new account growth and positive net flows of AUM/A relative to the comparable 2020 period. In 2021, revenues were also positively affected by new account growth and positive net flows of AUM/A. The revenue increase was partially offset by existing customers switching from an asset-based pricing model to a subscription-based pricing model.
The number of financial advisors with AUM or AUA on our technology platforms decreased from approximately 41,000 as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 40,000 as of December 31, 2021 and the number of AUM or AUA client increased from approximately 2.4 million as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 2.6 million as of December 31, 2021.
As a percentage of total revenues, asset-based recurring revenue increased from 67% of total revenue in 2020 to 72% in 2021, primarily due to a higher increase in asset-based recurring revenues as compared to subscription-based recurring revenues.
Subscription-based recurring revenues
Subscription-based recurring revenues increased 8% from $248.8 million in 2020 to $267.7 million in 2021, primarily due to new and existing customer growth along with additional revenue from existing customers switching from an asset-based pricing model to a subscription-based pricing model.
Professional services and other revenues
Professional services and other revenues decreased 14% from $16.3 million in 2020 to $14.1 million in 2021. The decrease was primarily due to timing of the completion of customer projects and deployments.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues increased 41% from $283.5 million in 2020 to $399.3 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase in asset-based cost of revenues of $115.1 million directly correlated with the increase in asset-based recurring revenues for the period. As a percentage of segment revenues, cost of revenues increased from 35% in 2020 to 40% in 2021, primarily due to shifts in pricing and product mix for asset-based revenues.
Compensation and benefits
Compensation and benefits increased 4% from $257.7 million in 2020 to $269.2 million in 2021, primarily due to increases in salaries, benefits and related payroll taxes of $12.3 million and increases in incentive compensation of $12.1 million. These increases are partially offset by a decrease in severance expense of $14.0 million. The decrease in severance expense is primarily related to charges incurred during 2020 in connection with a voluntary early retirement program offered to eligible employees. Employees had until January 31, 2020 to voluntarily accept the program with separation of service no later than March 31, 2020. As a percentage of segment revenues, compensation and benefits decreased from 32% in 2020 to 27% in 2021, primarily due to a higher revenue increase compared to a lower compensation and benefits increase.
General and administration
General and administration expenses increased 17% from $92.7 million in 2020 to $108.0 million in 2021, primarily due to increases in systems development costs of $10.0 million, marketing expense of $8.6 million, and professional and legal fees of $5.0 million. These increases were partially offset by decreases in miscellaneous general and administration expenses of $3.0 million, non-income tax expense of $2.0 million, communications, research and data services of $1.4 million, travel and entertainment expenses of $1.3 million and various other immaterial decreases. As a percentage of segment revenues, general and administration expenses remained consistent at 11% in 2020 and 2021.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased 12% from $80.7 million in 2020 to $90.1 million in 2021, primarily due to an increase in internally developed software amortization expense of $7.4 million and an increase in intangible asset amortization expense of $1.9 million. As a percentage of segment revenues, depreciation and amortization expense decreased from 10% in 2020 to 9% in 2021.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 for the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment
For a discussion of the 2020 Results of Operations compared to 2019 for the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment, see Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Envestnet Data & Analytics
The following table presents loss from operations for the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020 for the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment
Revenues
Subscription-based recurring revenues
Subscription-based recurring revenues increased 5% from $177.7 million in 2020 to $186.3 million in 2021, primarily due to broad increases in revenue from new and existing customers.
Professional services and other revenues
Professional services and other revenues decreased 37% from $14.4 million in 2020 to $9.1 million in 2021, primarily due to the timing of the completion of customer projects and deployments.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues increased 9% from $22.4 million in 2020 to $24.4 million in 2021, primarily due to an increase in outside services spend. As a percentage of segment revenues, cost of revenues remained consistent at 12% in 2020 and 2021.
Compensation and benefits
Compensation and benefits decreased 5% from $110.4 million in 2020 to $105.4 million in 2021, primarily due to decreases in salaries, benefits and related payroll taxes of $3.3 million, non-cash compensation expense of $2.3 million and miscellaneous employee expenses of $1.9 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in incentive compensation of $1.8 million and contract labor of $1.1 million. As a percentage of segment revenues, compensation and benefits decreased from 57% in 2020 to 54% in 2021. The decrease in compensation and benefits as a percentage of total revenues is primarily driven by a decrease in overall compensation and benefits costs as a result of lower headcount in the current year, partially offset by an increase in revenues in 2021 compared to 2020.
General and administration
General and administration expenses decreased 1% from $36.3 million in 2020 to $35.8 million in 2021, as decreases in occupancy costs of $1.9 million, bad debt expenses of $0.7 million, travel and entertainment expenses of $0.7 million and various other immaterial decreases within general and administration were primarily offset by increases in marketing expenses of $2.0 million and website and systems development costs of $1.7 million. As a percentage of segment revenues, general and administration expenses decreased from 19% in 2020 to 18% in 2021.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased 16% from $32.9 million in 2020 to $27.7 million in 2021, primarily due to a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense of $6.9 million, partially offset by an increase in internally developed software amortization expense of $2.5 million. As a percentage of segment revenues, depreciation and amortization expense decreased from 17% in 2020 to 14% in 2021. The decrease in depreciation and amortization as a percentage of segment revenues is primarily driven by a technology intangible asset becoming fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 for the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment
For a discussion of the 2020 Results of Operations compared to 2019 for the Envestnet Data & Analytics segment, see Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Nonsegment
The following table presents nonsegment operating expenses:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020 for Nonsegment
Compensation and benefits
Compensation and benefits increased 89% from $30.8 million in 2020 to $58.3 million in 2021, primarily due to increased headcount that resulted in increases in salaries, benefits and related payroll taxes of $10.8 million, non-cash compensation expense of $9.7 million and incentive compensation of $5.5 million.
General and administration
General and administration expenses decreased 11% from $31.3 million in 2020 to $27.9 million in 2021, primarily due to a decrease in restructuring charges and transaction costs of $5.7 million, primarily the result of various one-time 2020 corporate initiatives and acquisition related activities, partially offset by an increase in professional and legal fees of $1.3 million as well as other immaterial increases.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 for Nonsegment
For a discussion of the 2020 Results of Operations compared to 2019 for Nonsegment expenses, see Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to reporting results according to GAAP, we also disclose certain non-GAAP financial measures to enhance the understanding of our operating performance. Those measures include “adjusted revenues,” “adjusted EBITDA,” “adjusted net income” and “adjusted net income per diluted share”.
“Adjusted revenues” excludes the effect of purchase accounting on the fair value of acquired deferred revenue. Under GAAP, we record at fair value the acquired deferred revenue for contracts in effect at the time the entities were acquired. Consequently, revenue related to acquired entities for periods subsequent to the acquisition does not reflect the full amount of revenue that would have been recorded by these entities had they remained stand-alone entities. Adjusted revenues has limitations as a financial measure, should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant as a substitute for revenue prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“Adjusted EBITDA” represents net income (loss) before deferred revenue fair value adjustment, interest income, interest expense, accretion on contingent consideration and purchase liability, income tax provision (benefit), depreciation and amortization, non-cash compensation expense, restructuring charges and transaction costs, severance, fair market value adjustment on contingent consideration liability, fair market value adjustment on investment in private company, litigation and regulatory related expenses, foreign currency, gain on settlement of liability, gain on insurance reimbursement, non-income tax expense adjustment, gain on acquisition of equity method investment, gain on sale of interest in private company, income or loss allocations from equity method investments and (income) loss attributable to non-controlling interest.
“Adjusted net income” represents net income before deferred revenue fair value adjustment, accretion on contingent consideration and purchase liability, non-cash interest expense, cash interest on our Convertible Notes (subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021), non-cash compensation expense, restructuring charges and transaction costs, severance, amortization of acquired intangibles and fair value adjustment to property and equipment, net, fair market value adjustment on contingent consideration liability, fair market value adjustment to investment in private company, litigation and regulatory related expenses, foreign currency, gain on settlement of liability, gain on insurance reimbursement, non-income tax expense adjustment, gain on acquisition of equity method investment, gain on sale of interest in private company, income or loss allocations from equity method investments and (income) loss attributable to non-controlling interest. Reconciling items are presented gross of tax, and a normalized tax rate is applied to the total of all reconciling items to arrive at adjusted net income. The normalized tax rate is based solely on the estimated blended statutory income tax rates in the jurisdictions in which we operate. We monitor the normalized tax rate based on events or trends that could materially impact the rate, including tax legislation changes and changes in the geographic mix of our operations.
“Adjusted net income per diluted share” represents adjusted net income attributable to common stockholders divided by the diluted number of weighted-average shares outstanding. Beginning January 1, 2021, the dilutive effect of our Convertible Notes are calculated using the if-converted method in accordance with the adoption of ASU 2020-06 (See “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”). As a result, 9.9 million potential shares to be issued in connection with our Convertible Notes are considered to be dilutive for purposes of the adjusted net income per share calculation beginning January 1, 2021.
Our Board and management use these non-GAAP financial measures:
•As measures of operating performance;
•For planning purposes, including the preparation of annual budgets;
•To allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business;
•To evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies; and
•In communications with our Board concerning our financial performance.
Our Compensation Committee, Board of Directors and our management may also consider adjusted EBITDA, among other factors, when determining management’s incentive compensation.
We also present adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share as supplemental performance measures because we believe that they provide our Board, management and investors with additional information to assess our performance. Adjusted revenues provide comparisons from period to period by excluding the effect of purchase accounting on the fair value of acquired deferred revenue. Adjusted EBITDA provides comparisons from period to period by excluding potential differences caused by variations in the age and book depreciation of fixed assets affecting relative depreciation expense and amortization of internally developed software, amortization of acquired intangible assets, income tax provision (benefit), non-income tax expense, restructuring charges and transaction costs, accretion on contingent consideration and purchase liability, severance, fair market value adjustment on contingent consideration liability, income or loss allocations from equity method investments, litigation and regulatory related expenses, foreign currency, gain on settlement of liability, gain on insurance reimbursement, gain on acquisition of equity method investment, fair market value adjustment to investment in private company, income or loss allocations from equity method investments, pre-tax loss attributable to non-controlling interest and changes in interest expense and interest income that are influenced by capital structure decisions and capital market conditions. Our management also believes it is useful to exclude non-cash stock-based compensation expense from adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income because non-cash equity grants made at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily reflect how our business is performing at any particular time.
We believe adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance because securities analysts use adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share as supplemental measures to evaluate the overall performance of companies, and we anticipate that our investors and analyst presentations will include adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share.
Adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to revenues, net income, operating income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of our profitability or liquidity.
We understand that, although adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share are frequently used by securities analysts and others in their evaluation of companies, these measures have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. In particular you should consider:
•Adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share do not reflect non-cash components of employee compensation;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized often will have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•Due to either net losses before income tax expense or the use of federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, we paid net cash of $7.9 million, $8.3 million, and $8.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the event that we begin to generate taxable income and our existing net operating loss
carryforwards for federal and state income taxes have been fully utilized or have expired, income tax payments will be higher; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure.
Management compensates for the inherent limitations associated with using adjusted revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share through disclosure of such limitations, presentation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP and reconciliation of adjusted revenues to revenues, the most directly comparable GAAP measure and adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share to net income and net income per share, the most directly comparable GAAP measures. Further, our management also reviews GAAP measures and evaluates individual measures that are not included in some or all of our non-GAAP financial measures, such as our level of capital expenditures and interest income, among other measures.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of total revenues to adjusted revenues based on our historical results:
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA based on our historical results:
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share based on our historical results:
__________________________________________________________
(1)For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the effective tax rate computed in accordance with GAAP equaled 37.7%, 67.1% and 64.2%, respectively.
(2)Cash interest on the Company's Convertible Notes included only for the for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021 (See Part II, Item 8, "Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”).
(3)Estimated normalized effective tax rate of 25.5% has been used to compute adjusted net income for all years presented.
Note on Income Taxes: As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $195 million and $233 million for federal and state income tax purposes, respectively, available to reduce future income subject to income taxes. As a result, the amount of actual cash taxes we pay for federal, state and foreign income taxes differs significantly from the effective income tax rate computed in accordance with GAAP, and from the normalized rate shown above.
The following tables set forth a reconciliation of revenues to adjusted revenues and income (loss) from operations to adjusted EBITDA based on our historical results for each segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had total cash and cash equivalents of $429.3 million compared to $384.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
We plan to use existing cash as of December 31, 2021, cash generated in the ongoing operations of our business and amounts under our revolving credit facility to fund our current operations, capital expenditures and possible acquisitions or other strategic activity, and to meet our debt service obligations. If the cash generated in the ongoing operations of our business is insufficient to fund these requirements we may be required to borrow under our revolving credit facility or incur additional debt to fund our ongoing operations or to fund potential acquisitions or other strategic activities.
Third Credit Agreement
On February 4, 2022, we entered into the Third Credit Agreement. The Third Credit Agreement amends and restates, in its entirety, the Prior Credit Agreement.
The Third Credit Agreement amended certain provisions under the Prior Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) extend the maturity of loans and the revolving credit commitments, (ii) reduce the interest payable on the loans, and (iii) increase capacity and flexibility under certain of the negative covenants.
The Third Credit Agreement provides, subject to certain customary conditions, for the Credit Facility, in an aggregate amount of $500.0 million, with a $20.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit.
Proceeds under the Third Credit Agreement may be used to finance capital expenditures, working capital, permitted acquisitions and for general corporate purposes.
Outstanding loans under the Credit Facility accrue interest, at our option, a rate equal to either (i) a base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.75% per annum or (ii) an adjusted Term SOFR rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.75% per annum, based upon our total net leverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to the Third Credit Agreement. The undrawn portion of the commitments under the Credit Facility is subject to a commitment fee at a rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.30% per annum, based upon our total net leverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to the Third Credit Agreement. Borrowings made under the Third Credit Agreement are scheduled to mature on February 4, 2027.
There are no amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility and we have $500.0 million available to borrow under the Credit Facility, subject to covenant compliance.
Convertible Notes
In May 2018, we issued $345.0 million of convertible notes that mature on June 1, 2023 (the “Convertible Notes due 2023”). The Convertible Notes due 2023 bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
In August 2020, we issued $517.5 million of convertible notes that mature on August 15, 2025 (the “Convertible Notes due 2025”). The Convertible Notes due 2025 bear interest at a rate of 0.75% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year.
See Part II, Item 8, “Note 10-Debt” for further information regarding the terms of our Convertible Notes.
Issuance and sale of Common Shares to BlackRock
On December 20, 2018, we issued and sold to BlackRock, Inc. (“BlackRock”) warrants to purchase approximately 470,000 common shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $65.16 per share, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. The warrants are exercisable at BlackRock’s option for four years from the date of issuance. The warrants may be exercisable through cash exercise or net issue exercise with cash settlement at the sole discretion of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, BlackRock has not exercised any of the warrants.
Impact of Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
Beginning in 2022, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("TCJA") eliminates the option to deduct R&D expenditures currently and requires taxpayers to amortize them over five years pursuant to IRC Section 174. Although Congress is considering legislation that would defer the amortization requirement to later years, we have no assurance that the provision will be repealed or otherwise modified. If the requirement is not modified, we could expect to pay material cash taxes beginning in 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table presents information regarding our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $250.6 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $169.8 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to:
•An increase in pre-tax income period over period of $28.4 million;
•An increase period over period for noncash addbacks for depreciation and amortization expense of $4.1 million;
•An increase in the change in operating assets and liabilities of $55.4 million which is primarily timing related.
These increases were partially offset by additional contingent consideration payments of approximately $2.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $176.1 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $100.0 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in cash disbursements of $25.5 million for an acquisition of proprietary technology and the related redemption of our equity interest in a privately held company, $22.8 million of increased disbursements related to various acquisitions and investments in privately held companies, $11.6 million of increased purchases of property and equipment, an additional $10.3 million of internally developed software costs capitalized in 2021 as compared to 2020 and a $3.0 million advance towards the acquisition of technology solutions being developed for us by an outside company in 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.2 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $233.0 million for the same period in 2020. In August 2020, we received net proceeds of approximately $503.0 million from the issuance of convertible debt. With these proceeds, we paid off the outstanding balance of our revolving credit facility. These transactions contributed to a net cash inflow related to our third party debt agreements of $243.0 million in 2020. Increased deferred payments related to prior acquisition activity of $9.3 million, lower proceeds from stock option exercises of $8.7 million and share repurchases of $4.0 million in 2021 also contributed to the year-over-year decrease. These decreases were partially offset by $2.6 million of additional capital contributions made by non-controlling shareholders of one of our subsidiaries.
Commitments
We enter into unconditional purchase obligations arrangements for certain of our services that we receive in the normal course of business. As of December 31, 2021, the Company estimated future minimum unconditional purchase obligations of approximately $38.0 million.
As of December 31, 2021, future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable leases were $149.6 million. These leases expire at various dates prior to 2032.
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we have entered into contingent consideration arrangements whereby we have agreed to pay additional amounts based upon the achievement of certain performance targets. As of December 31, 2021, these liabilities are valued at $0.7 million. We also have additional direct purchase obligations of $6.2 million related to our acquisitions. We granted membership interests in certain of the Company's equity method investments to two legacy PIEtech executives, from the PIEtech acquisition, with an estimated grant date fair market value of $8.9 million. These membership interests vested on May 1, 2020 and become exercisable on May 1, 2022, with the option to put the membership interests to the Company.
We have also committed $3.0 million in future funding to certain of our equity method investees.
We expect to increase our capital expenditures to approximately $40 million in 2022 compared to approximately $24 million in 2021. Subsequent to 2022, we expect to spend approximately $10 - $11 million per year on capital expenditures.
We have entered into a purchase agreement with a privately held company to acquire the technology solutions being developed by this privately held company for a purchase price of $18.0 million, including an advance of $3.0 million. We closed the transaction on February 1, 2022 and paid the remaining $15.0 million on February 2, 2022. In addition, the agreement includes an earn-out payment of $10.0 million based upon the achievement of certain target metrics within five years after the date of our launch of the technology solutions.
We include various types of indemnification and guarantee clauses in certain arrangements. These indemnifications and guarantees may include, but are not limited to, infringement claims related to intellectual property, direct or consequential damages and guarantees to certain service providers and service level requirements with certain customers. The type and amount of any potential indemnification or guarantee varies substantially based on the nature of each arrangement. We have experienced no previous claims and cannot determine the maximum amount of potential future payments, if any, related to these indemnification and guarantee provisions. We believe that it is unlikely that we will have to make material payments under these arrangements and therefore we have not recorded a contingent liability in the consolidated balance sheets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The accounting policies described below require management to apply significant judgment in connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. In particular, judgment is applied to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in calculating estimates that affect certain reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. If different estimates or assumptions were used, our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows could have been materially different than those reflected in our consolidated financial statements. For additional information regarding our critical accounting policies, see Part II, Item 8, “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are derived from asset-based and subscription-based services and professional services and other sources. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. All revenue recognized in the consolidated statements of operations is considered to be revenue from contracts with customers. Sales and usage-based taxes are excluded from revenues.
Asset-based recurring revenues- Asset-based recurring revenues primarily consist of fees for providing customers continuous access to platform services through our uniquely customized platforms. These platform services include investment manager research, portfolio diagnostics, proposal generation, investment model management, rebalancing and trading, portfolio performance reporting and monitoring solutions, billing and back office and middle-office operations and administration and are made available to customers throughout the contractual term from the date the customized platform is launched.
The asset-based fees we earn are generally based upon variable percentages of assets managed or administered on our platforms. The fee percentage varies based on the level and type of services we provide to our customers, as well as the values of existing customer accounts. The values of the customer accounts are affected by inflows or outflows of customer funds and market fluctuations.
The platform services are substantially the same over each quarter and performed in a similar manner over the contract period, and are considered stand-ready promises. The platform services that are delivered to the customer over the quarter are considered distinct, as the customer benefits distinctly from each increment of our services and each quarter is separately identified in the contract, and are considered to be a single performance obligation under ASC 606.
The pricing generally resets each quarter and the pricing structure is consistent throughout the term of the contract. The variable fees are generally calculated and billed quarterly in advance based on preceding quarter-end values and the variable amounts earned from the platform services relate specifically to the benefits transferred to the customer during that quarter. Accordingly, revenue is allocated to the specific quarter in which services are performed.
The asset-based contracts generally contain one performance obligation and revenue is recognized on a ratable basis over the quarter beginning on the date that the platform services are made available to the customer as the customer simultaneously consumes and receives the benefits of the services. All asset-based fees are recognized in the Envestnet Wealth Solutions segment.
For certain services provided by third parties, we evaluate whether we are the principal (revenues reported on a gross basis) or agent (revenues reported on a net basis). Generally, we report customer fees including charges for third party service providers where we have a direct contract with such third party service providers on a gross basis, whereas the amounts billed to our customers are recorded as revenues, and amounts paid to third party service providers are recorded as cost of revenues. We are the principal in the transaction because we control the services before they are transferred to our customers. Control is evidenced by being primarily responsible to our customers and having discretion in establishing pricing.
Subscription-based recurring revenues- Subscription-based recurring revenues primarily consist of fees for providing customers continuous access to our platform for wealth management and financial wellness. The subscription-based fees generally include fixed fees and or usage-based fees.
Generally, the subscription services are substantially the same over each quarter and performed in a similar manner over the contract period, and are considered stand-ready promises. Quarterly subscription services are considered distinct as the customer can benefit from each increment of services on its own and each quarter is separately identified in the contract, and services are considered to be a single performance obligation under the ASC 606.
The usage-based pricing generally resets each quarter and the pricing structure is generally consistent throughout the term of the contract. The fixed fees are generally calculated and billed quarterly in advance. The usage-based fees are generally calculated and are billed either monthly or quarterly based on the actual usage and relate specifically to the benefits transferred to the customer during that month or quarter. Accordingly, revenue is allocated to the specific quarter in which services are performed.
Certain subscription-based contracts contain multiple performance obligations (i.e. platform services performance obligation and professional services performance obligation). Fixed fees are generally recognized on a ratable basis over the quarter beginning when the subscription services are made available to the customer, as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the subscription services. Usage-based revenue is recognized on a monthly basis as the customer receives and consumes the benefit as we provide the services. Subscription-based fees are recognized in both the Envestnet Wealth Solutions and Envestnet Data & Analytics segments.
Professional services and other revenues- We earn professional services fees by providing contractual customized services and platform software development as well as initial implementation fees. Professional services contracts generally have fixed prices, and generally specify the deliverables in the contract. Certain professional services contracts are billed on a
time and materials basis and revenue is recognized over time as the services are performed. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion of services performed. Initial implementation fees are fixed and are generally recognized ratably over the contract term.
Other revenue primarily includes revenue related to the Advisor Summit. Other revenue is recognized when the events are held. Other revenue is not significant.
The majority of the professional services and other contracts contain one performance obligation. Professional services and other revenues are recognized in both the Envestnet Wealth Solutions and Envestnet Data & Analytics segments.
Reviews for impairment of goodwill and acquired intangible assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis and more often if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Based on the relevant GAAP authoritative guidance, we aggregate components of a single operating segment into a reporting unit, if appropriate. For purposes of performing the impairment tests, we identify reporting units in accordance with GAAP. The identification of reporting units and consideration of aggregation criteria requires management judgment.
If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is performed. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then a quantitative evaluation must be performed. If the carrying value of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss equal to the difference will be recorded. In accordance with applicable accounting guidance, prior to performing the quantitative evaluation, an assessment of qualitative factors may be performed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying value. If it is determined that it is unlikely that the carrying value exceeds the fair value, we are not required to complete the quantitative goodwill impairment evaluation. The selection and assessment of qualitative factors used to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying value involves management judgment.
We completed our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 31, 2021 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. At that date, we determined it was appropriate to aggregate certain components of the same operating segment into a single reporting unit. We concluded that we have two reporting units. We also determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units exceeded the carrying value and concluded that goodwill was not impaired. As a result, we did not perform the quantitative goodwill impairment evaluation.
As part of the our ongoing monitoring efforts to assess goodwill for possible indications of impairment, we will continue to consider a wide variety of factors, including but not limited to the global economic environment and its potential impact on our business. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding forecasted cash flows of certain reporting units, the current economic environment, or the other inputs used in forecasting the present value of forecasted cash flows will prove to be accurate projections of future performance.
Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances may affect the recoverability of the net assets. Such reviews include an analysis of current results and take into consideration the undiscounted value of projected operating cash flows. No intangible asset impairment charges have been recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, Australia, Canada, India, and the United Kingdom. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes.
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and for net operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in our income tax provision in the period that includes the enactment date. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that we determine is more-likely-than-not to be realized in the future.
In our ordinary course of business, we may enter into transactions for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. In such cases, we establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on our estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. The reserves are established when we believe that certain positions are likely to be challenged and may not be fully sustained on review by tax authorities. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or refinement of an estimate. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will be reflected in our provision for income taxes. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate.
The amount of income tax we pay is subject to audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. Our estimate of the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. We believe that we have adequately provided for the foreseeable outcome related to these matters. However, our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities in the period the assessments are made or resolved, audits are closed or when statutes of limitations on potential assessments expire. Additionally, the jurisdictions in which our earnings or deductions are realized may differ from our current estimates. As a result, our effective tax rate may fluctuate significantly on a quarterly basis.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Our effective tax rates differ from the statutory rates primarily due to the change in the valuation allowance the Company has placed on a portion of its US deferred tax assets, the generation of R&D tax credits, the executive compensation deduction limitation, income related to the India partnerships and state taxes. Our provision for income taxes varies based on, among other things, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, the tax effects of non-cash stock-based compensation or changes in applicable tax laws, regulations and accounting principles or interpretations thereof.
We are subject to examination of our income tax returns by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. We assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these examinations will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Our Indian subsidiaries are currently under examination by the India Tax Authority for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2012, 2011 and 2010. Based on the outcome of examinations of our subsidiary or the result of the expiration of statutes of limitations it is reasonably possible that the related unrecognized tax benefits could change from those recorded in the consolidated balance sheets. It is possible that one or more of these audits may be finalized within the next twelve months.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8, “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for a detailed description of Recent Accounting Pronouncements.