Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provide information that the management of Enovix Corporation (referred to as the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our” and “Enovix”) believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of Enovix’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition as of January 2, 2022 and for the fiscal years 2021 and 2020 and should be read together with the consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon our current expectations, estimates and projections that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We design, develop, and plan to commercially manufacture an advanced silicon-anode lithium-ion battery using our proprietary 3D cell architecture that increases energy density and maintains high cycle life. This enables us to use silicon as the only active lithium cycling material in the anode. We have applied an equally innovative approach to develop proprietary roll-to-stack production tools that ‘drop-in’ to existing lithium-ion battery manufacturing lines and increase megawatt hour capacity. Our silicon anode battery architecture allows lithium-ion batteries to be produced smaller, cheaper, and more efficiently than current alternatives.
To date, we have concentrated our operational effort on researching and developing the cutting-edge technology behind our silicon-anode lithium-ion battery. Over the past several years, we have signed agreements to provide engineering and proof of concept samples to blue-chip companies in the consumer electronic industry (smartwatches, augmented reality/virtual reality, smartphones, fire/life/safety radios, laptops). In addition to those industries, we are pursuing the deployment of our technology with leading international automobile manufacturers to develop patented battery technology for the electric vehicle (“EV”) market.
We currently lease our headquarters, engineering and manufacturing space in Fremont, California. In 2020, we started procuring equipment for our Fab-1. The first of this equipment began arriving in early 2021. Fab-1 is now operational with first production revenue forecasted in the second quarter of 2022.
Impact of Coronavirus (“COVID-19”)
We closely monitor the impact of the pandemic of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our operations. We have considered potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our critical and significant accounting estimates and have not incurred any impairment losses in the carrying value of our assets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. For information on our operations and risks related to health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, please see the other risks and uncertainties set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Change in Fiscal Year
On September 28, 2021, the audit committee of the Board of Directors of the Company approved a change in the fiscal year end from a year ending on December 31 to a fiscal year calendar typically consisting of four 13-week quarters, with the change to be effective for our third quarter beginning on July 1, 2021 and ending on October 3, 2021. We made the fiscal year change on a prospective basis and would not adjust operating results for prior periods. Our current fiscal year was ended on January 2, 2022 and our 2022 fiscal year will be comprised of four fiscal quarters ending on April 3, 2022, July 3, 2022, October 2, 2022 and January 1, 2023, respectively.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On July 14, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Legacy Enovix, RSVAC, and RSVAC Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware Corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of RSVAC (“Merger Sub”), consummated the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated February 22, 2021 (the “Merger” or the “Business Combination”), by and among RSVAC, Merger Sub and Legacy Enovix (the “Merger Agreement”), following the approval at a special meeting of the stockholders of RSVAC held on July 12, 2021 (the “Special Meeting”). Following the consummation of the Merger on the Closing Date, Legacy Enovix changed its name to Enovix Operations Inc., and RSVAC changed its name from Rodgers Silicon Valley Acquisition Corp. to Enovix Corporation (“ Enovix”). Enovix raised approximately $373.7 million of net proceeds, after deducting transaction costs and estimated offering related expenses.
Legacy Enovix is the accounting predecessor and Enovix is the successor SEC registrant, which means that Legacy Enovix’s consolidated financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in Envoix’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC.
While the legal acquirer in the merger agreement is RSVAC, for financial accounting and reporting purposes under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), Legacy Enovix is the accounting acquirer and the merger has been
accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization.” A reverse recapitalization did not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of Enovix represents the continuation of the consolidated financial statements of Legacy Enovix. Under this method of accounting, RSVAC was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations of Legacy Enovix become the historical financial statements of Enovix, and RSVAC’s assets, liabilities and results of operations were consolidated with Legacy Enovix beginning on the acquisition date. Operations prior to the closing of the merger were presented as those of Enovix in future reports. The net assets of RSVAC were recognized at historical cost (consistent with carrying value), with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded related to the Business Combination. The most significant changes in Enovix’s reported financial position as a result of the merger are an increase in cash and cash equivalents and a net impact in total stockholders' deficit (as compared to Legacy Enovix’s Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet as of June 30, 2021). Please refer to Note 3 “Business Combination” of Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details of the Business Combination.
Upon consummation of the Merger, Enovix became the successor to RSVAC, an SEC-registered and listed company, which requires us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Comparability of Financial Information
Our future results of operations and financial position may not be comparable to historical results as a result of the Merger.
Key Trends, Opportunities and Uncertainties
We generate revenue from payments received from our customers based on executed engineering revenue contracts (the “Service Revenue”) for the development of silicon-anode lithium-ion battery technology. We have not commenced commercial manufacturing of our batteries, and thus, no product revenue has been generated to date. Our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities, but also pose risks and challenges as described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, our revenue funnel increased to $1.5 billion. Our revenue funnel is defined as the potential value of a full production year for all of the customer projects for which we have been engaged. The components of the revenue funnel are:
•Engaged Opportunities: Consists of engaged customers that have determined that our battery is applicable to their product and are evaluating our technology.
•Active Designs: Consists of customers that have completed evaluation of our technology, identified the end-product and started design work.
•Design Win: Consists of customers that have funded a custom battery design or are qualifying one of our standard batteries for a formally approved product that will use an Enovix cell.
The speed by which we capture these indications of demand will ultimately be governed by how fast we qualify customers, improve our manufacturing processes and bring on additional capacity.
Product Development
We have developed and delivered standardized sample (i.e., prototype) batteries to multiple, industry leading consumer electronics manufacturers. External validation of the performance of these samples has led to several Service Revenue contracts between us and these customers. Pursuant to each of these agreements, we are developing custom 3D silicon lithium-ion batteries for specific wearable, mobile computing and communication device applications. The design and development phases and the manufacturing of these custom samples are performed at our headquarters in Fremont, California. In January 2022, we began shipping 3D silicon lithium-ion batteries for qualification to customers. We continue to expect recognizing first product revenue in the second quarter of 2022. Additionally, in 2022, we plan to order a new pilot line based on this design to respond to increasing customer engagement and a desire to shorten custom-cell qualification timelines. Shortly thereafter, we plan to order the first next-generation production line, which is currently scheduled for commercial production by mid-2023.
Commercialization
Currently, we are building out our Fab-1 at our headquarters in Fremont, California. We have commenced deliveries of qualification cells from Fab-1. Challenges associated with building out Fab-1 include extended shipping times, supply chain constraints and
intermittent vendor support during equipment bring-up resulting from COVID travel restrictions imposed on certain countries in Asia. Fab-1 features a first-of-its-kind line for battery production. As a result, every day we solve problems needed to improve yield and output. Simultaneously, this work is providing valuable learning, improving our processes and equipment for future lines. In 2022, we plan to incrementally scale up output from Fremont to produce batteries for the wearables market while also making larger cells for customer qualification in the mobile communications and laptop markets.
The net proceeds from the Merger enables us to complete and further expand Fab-1, pursue Fab-2, accelerate research and development, and undertake additional initiatives.
Market Focus and Market Expansion
Our near-term focus is on the following market applications: wearables (smartwatches, AR/VR, headsets, etc.), computing and mobile communications. We estimate the total addressable market for Lithium-ion batteries in these markets to be $13 billion in 2025. We are actively sampling to potential customers across all three of these markets and have design wins in each. We believe this strategy will allow us to deliver energy densities years ahead of the competition and provide a meaningful head start to reach scale and benefit from manufacturing learning curves.
We believe our focus on these initial categories will prepare us to address the EV battery opportunity. Entering the EV market requires billions of dollars of capital to build Gigafactories, lower costs than conventional cells and long qualification cycles. We believe the best approach for our shareholders is to start in premium markets where we can prove out our technology and manufacturing process while driving toward profitability. At the same time, we are seeding our entry into the EV market by sampling batteries to EV OEMs and continuing work on our three-year grant with the U.S. Department of Energy to demonstrate batteries featuring our silicon anode paired with EV-class cathode materials. Our goal is to translate this work into partnerships (joint ventures or licensing) with EV OEMs or battery OEMs in order to commercialize our technology in this end market.
Access to Capital
Assuming we experience no significant delays in the research and development of our battery, we believe that our cash resources, including the net proceeds from the completion of the Merger, are sufficient to fund the continued build out and production ramp of our Fab-1 manufacturing facility in Fremont, California and lease or purchase and retrofit an existing facility elsewhere as our Fab-2 for growth.
Regulatory Landscape
We operate in an industry that is subject to many established environmental regulations, which have generally become more stringent over time, particularly in hazardous waste generation and disposal and pollution control. While we expect certain regulations under President Biden's administration could, if adopted, facilitate market demand and revenue growth, other potential regulations, if adopted, could result in additional operating costs.
Components of Results of Operations
Service Revenue
Service Revenue contracts generally include the design and development efforts to conform our existing battery technology with the customer’s required specifications. Consideration for Service Revenue contracts generally becomes payable when we meet specific contractual milestones, which include the design and approval of custom cells, procurement of fabrication tooling to meet the customer’s specifications, and fabrication and delivery of custom cells from our pilot production line. Within the existing Service Revenue contracts, the amount of consideration is fixed, the contracts contain a single performance obligation, and revenue is recognized at the point in time the final milestone is met (i.e., a final working prototype meeting all required specifications) and the customer obtains control of the deliverable. During all periods presented, we did not recognize any Service Revenue as final milestones were not yet met.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes materials, labor, allocated depreciation expense, and other direct costs related to Service Revenue contracts. Labor consists of personnel-related expenses such as salaries and benefits, and stock-based compensation.
Capitalization of certain costs are recognized as an asset if they relate directly to a customer contract, generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying future performance obligations, and are expected to be recovered. If these three criteria are
not met, the costs are expensed in the period incurred. Deferred costs are recognized as cost of revenue in the period when the related revenue is recognized.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of engineering services, allocated facilities costs, depreciation, development expenses, materials, labor and stock-based compensation related primarily to our (i) technology development, (ii) design, construction, and testing of preproduction prototypes and models, and (iii) certain costs related to the design, construction, and operation of our pilot plant that is not of a scale economically feasible to us for commercial production. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
To date, research and development expenses have consisted primarily of personnel-related expenses for scientists, experienced engineers and technicians as well as costs associated with the expansion and ramp up of our engineering and manufacturing facility in Fremont, California, including the material and supplies to support the product development and process engineering efforts. As we ramp up our engineering operations to complete the development of batteries and required process engineering to meet customer specifications, we anticipate that research and development expenses will increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we expand hiring of scientists, engineers, and technicians and continue to invest in additional plant and equipment for product development, building prototypes, and testing of batteries. We are establishing a research and development center in India that will initially focus on developing machine learning algorithms.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, marketing expenses, allocated facilities expenses, depreciation expenses, executive management travel, and professional services expenses, including legal, human resources, audit, accounting and tax-related services. Personnel related costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Facilities costs consist of rent and maintenance of facilities.
We are expanding our personnel headcount to support the ramping up of commercial manufacturing and being a public company. Accordingly, in addition to non-recurring costs associated with the Business Combination and anticipated costs of being a public company, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase significantly in the near term and for the foreseeable future.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income and expenses, net primarily consist of interest expense, fair value adjustments for outstanding convertible preferred stock warrants, fair value adjustments for outstanding common stock warrants, and fair value adjustments for convertible promissory notes, the issuance of convertible preferred stock warrants, and loss on early debt extinguishment.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate for U.S. federal and state income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in the tax law. We maintain a valuation allowance against the full value of our U.S. and state net deferred tax assets because we believe the recoverability of the tax assets is not more likely than not.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2022 to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated operating results for the periods presented below (in thousands, except percentages):
N/M - Not meaningful
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the fiscal year 2021 was $2.0 million, compared to $3.4 million for fiscal year 2020. From time to time, we enter into Service Revenue customer contracts. Service Revenue from these customer contracts was deferred as of January 2, 2022 because we had not delivered the final working prototype (the single performance obligation) nor had the customer taken control of the deliverable. The estimated delivery date of these Service Revenue contracts is within the next twelve to twenty-four months.
In the execution of satisfying the single performance obligation per the existing Service Revenue contracts, certain costs are recognized as an asset if they relate directly to a customer contract, generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying future performance obligations, and are expected to be recovered. If these three criteria are not met, the costs are expensed in the period incurred. Deferred contract costs are recognized as cost of revenue in the period when the related revenue is recognized.
The decrease in cost of revenue of $1.4 million, or 42% was due to the timing of when costs attributable to a specific contract with a customer were incurred. As of January 2, 2022 and December 31, 2020, we had $4.6 million and $3.5 million, respectively, of deferred contract costs and $7.9 million and $5.5 million, respectively, of deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the fiscal year 2021 were $37.9 million, compared to $14.4 million for the fiscal year 2020. The increase of $23.4 million, or 162% was primarily attributable to an increase in our research and development employee headcount resulting in a $10.9 million increase in salaries and employee benefits, and a $5.7 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses. The remaining increase of $6.9 million was primarily due to the increased facility, tooling costs, research and development materials, telecommunication and IT costs, and other miscellaneous research and development expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year 2021 were $29.7 million, compared to $5.7 million during the fiscal year 2020. The increase of $24.0 million, or 420% was primarily attributable to an increase in our selling, general and administrative employee headcount resulting in a $6.4 million increase in salaries and employee benefits, and a $4.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses. The remaining increase of $13.4 million is primarily comprised of a $6.3 million increase in professional fees,
training and recruiting expenses, a $2.3 million increase in legal fees, which partially was incurred in connection with the Business Combination, a $1.2 million increase in marketing expenses, and a $1.2 million increase in insurance expenses.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Preferred Stock Warrants and Common Stock Warrants
The change in fair value of convertible preferred stock warrants and common stock warrants of $56.1 million for the fiscal year 2021 was comprised of a change in fair value of $51.4 million of Private Placement Warrants assumed in the Business Combination during the second half of fiscal year 2021 and a change in fair value of $4.8 million of Legacy Enovix's convertible preferred stock warrants. The increase in fair value of Private Placement Warrants was primarily due to an increase in Enovix's common stock price during the second half of fiscal 2021.
For fiscal year 2020, there was an increase in fair value of $13.8 million of the Legacy Enovix's convertible preferred stock warrants resulting from an increase in Legacy Enovix’s enterprise value in the fiscal year 2020. On February 22, 2021, all 10,160,936 Legacy Enovix's Series D convertible preferred stock warrants were exercised at $0.01 per share for a total of $0.1 million. The change in fair value of Legacy Enovix's convertible preferred stock warrants and common stock warrants was recorded as other income (expense), net.
Issuance of Convertible Preferred Stock Warrants
On March 25, 2020, 7,000,000 Legacy Enovix's Series D convertible preferred stock warrants were issued at $0.01 per share for a total of $0.1 million. The fair value of the convertible preferred stock warrants of $1.5 million was recorded as other expense for the fiscal year 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Promissory Notes
The change in fair value of the convertible promissory notes of $2.4 million for the fiscal year 2020 was due to the fair value adjustment of the convertible promissory note in connection with the note conversion into 19,001,815 shares of Legacy Enovix Series P-2 convertible preferred stock in March 2020. No such event occurred during the fiscal year 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
While we prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, we also utilize and present certain financial measures that are not based on GAAP. We refer to these financial measures as “Non-GAAP” financial measures. In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe that EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA, and Free Cash Flow (each as defined below), are useful measures in evaluating our financial and operational performance distinct and apart from financing costs, certain non-cash expenses and non-operational expenses.
These Non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP but should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP. We endeavor to compensate for the limitation of the Non-GAAP financial measures presented by also providing the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
We use Non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning, budgeting and forecasting purposes. We believe that Non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance and comparing our performance with competitors and other comparable companies. You should review the reconciliations below but not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as earnings (net loss) adjusted for interest expense; income taxes; depreciation expense, and amortization expense. “Adjusted EBITDA” includes additional adjustments to EBITDA such as stock-based compensation expense; change in fair value of convertible preferred stock warrants, common stock warrants and convertible promissory notes; loss on early debt extinguishment and other non-recurring items as determined by management which it does not believe to be indicative of its underlying business trends. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are intended as supplemental financial measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results, trends, and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar Non-GAAP financial measures to investors.
However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, the presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. Our computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may
not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Below is an unaudited reconciliation of net loss on a GAAP basis to the Non-GAAP EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA financial measures for the periods presented below (in thousands):
Free Cash Flow
Below is an unaudited reconciliation of Net cash used in operating activities to the Free Cash Flow financial measures for the periods presented below (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred recurring operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception through January 2, 2022 and expect to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future. As of January 2, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $385.3 million, a working capital of $377.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $333.2 million. Prior to the Business Combination, we had financed our operations primarily from the sales of convertible preferred stock, borrowing from convertible promissory notes, and borrowing from a secured promissory note (the “Secured Promissory Note”). In connection with the Business Combination in July 2021, we raised approximately $373.7 million of net proceeds, after deducting transaction costs and estimated offering related expenses. Please refer to Note 3 “Business Combination” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details of the Business Combination. In December 2021, we received $77.2 million of gross proceeds from the exercises of the Public Warrants, which were being traded in the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC. We received additional $52.8 million of gross proceeds from the exercise of the Public Warrants in the January 2022. We plan to use the proceeds from the exercises of the Public Warrants for general corporate purposes.
For the fiscal year 2021, we purchased $43.6 million for property and equipment. We will continue to increase our property and equipment purchases in the near future for supporting the build-out of our manufacturing facility and our battery manufacturing production.
Based on the anticipated spending, cash received from the Business Combination and gross proceeds from the exercises of the Public Warrants, and timing of expenditure assumptions, we currently expect that our cash will be sufficient to meet our funding requirements over the next twelve months. We believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of available cash, cash equivalents and future debt financings, and access to other public or private equity
offerings. We have made our estimates on historical experience and various other relevant factors and we believe that they are reasonable. Actual results may be differ from our estimates, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for the periods presented below (in thousands):
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2022 to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
Our cash flows used in operating activities to date have been primarily comprised of operating expenses. We continue to increase hiring for employees in supporting the ramping up of commercial manufacturing and being a public company. We expect our cash used in operating activities to increase significantly before we start to generate any material cash inflows from commercially manufacturing and selling our batteries.
Net cash used in operating activities was $51.3 million for the fiscal year 2021. Net cash used in operating activities consists of net loss of $125.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments primarily include stock-based compensation expense of $10.7 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $1.5 million and the change in fair value of convertible preferred stock warrants and common stock warrants of $56.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $20.1 million for the fiscal year 2020. Net cash used in operating activities consists of net loss of $39.7 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments primarily include the change in the fair value of convertible preferred stock warrants of $13.8 million, change in the fair value of the convertible promissory notes of $2.4 million, gain on extinguishment of the paycheck protection program loan of $1.6 million, the non-cash issuance of convertible preferred stock warrants of $1.5 million, stock-based compensation expense of $0.7 million, depreciation expense of $0.6 million, and non-cash interest expense of $0.1 million.
Investing Activities
Our cash flows used in investing activities to date have been primarily comprised of purchases of property and equipment. We expect the costs to acquire property and equipment to increase substantially in the near future as we complete the build-out of our manufacturing facility for our battery manufacturing production. Net cash used in investing activities, which were primarily related to equipment purchases, was $43.6 million and $27.0 million for the fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Financing Activities
Prior to the Business Combination, we had financed our operations primarily through the sale of convertible preferred stock, borrowing from convertible promissory notes, and borrowing from the Secured Promissory Note with a member of the board of directors. There were no sales of convertible preferred stock for the fiscal year 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $451.1 million for the fiscal year 2021, which primarily consisted of $405.2 million of proceeds from the Business Combination and the PIPE financing, $77.2 million of proceeds from the exercises of common stock warrants, $15.0 million of proceed from the borrowing of the Secured Promissory Note and $0.3 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and proceeds from the exercise of the convertible preferred stock warrants, which were offset by $31.4 million related to the transaction costs incurred in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE financing, $15.0 million repayment of Secured Promissory Note, and $0.1 million of debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $65.9 million for fiscal year 2020, which was primarily related to $63.9 million of proceeds from the issuance of Series P-2 convertible preferred stock, $1.6 million of proceeds from borrowing of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan and proceeds of $0.4 million from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We lease our headquarters, engineering, and manufacturing space in Fremont, California under a single non-cancelable operating lease with an expiration date of August 31, 2030. We also lease a small office in Fremont, California under a noncancelable operating
lease that expires in April 2026 with an option to extend the lease for five years. For the lease payment schedule, please see Note 6 “Leases,” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
In addition, we enter into agreements in the normal course of business with various vendors, which are generally cancelable upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of service providers, up to the date of cancellation. As of January 2, 2022, our commitments included an estimated amount of approximately $17.4 million relating to our open purchase orders and contractual obligations that occurred in the ordinary course of business. For contractual obligations, please See Note 8 “Commitments and Contingencies” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
On May 24, 2021, Legacy Enovix issued to a member of the board of directors the Secured Promissory Note with an aggregate principal balance of $15.0 million. The Secured Promissory Note bore interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum, payable monthly and on the maturity date. All unpaid interest and principal was due and payable upon request by the holders on or after the earlier of (i) the closing of the Merger Agreement and (ii) October 25, 2021. On July 14, 2021, we paid off the Secured Promissory Note and its accrued interest by using $15.2 million of proceeds from the Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 2, 2022 and December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company (“EGC”), as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). Under the JOBS Act, an EGC can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduce reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an EGC, we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an EGC under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the first sale of our Common Stock in our initial public offering, (ii) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, or (iv) the date on which have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.
Other than the adoption of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842, Leases, and ASC Topic, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an EGC or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. We elected to continue to utilize the extended transition period. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. The JOBS Act does not preclude an EGC from adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time that such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base these estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not
readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. These estimates and assumptions include but are not limited to: depreciable lives for property and equipment, the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, assumptions used in stock-based compensation and estimates to fair value preferred and common stock warrants.
Certain accounting policies have a more significant impact on our financial statements due to the size of the financial statement elements and prevalence of their application. The following is a summary of some of the more critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information, see Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition -
We determine revenue recognition through the following five-step framework:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Service Revenue contracts generally include the design and development efforts to conform our existing battery technology with the customer’s required specifications. Consideration for Service Revenue contracts generally becomes payable when we meet specific contractual milestones, which include the design and approval of custom cells, procurement of fabrication tooling to meet the customer’s specifications, and fabrication and delivery of custom cells from our pilot production line. Within the existing Service Revenue contracts, the amount of consideration is fixed, the contracts contain a single performance obligation, and revenue is recognized at the point in time the final milestone is met (i.e., a final working prototype meeting all required specifications) and the customer obtains control of the deliverable.
Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liabilities
Convertible preferred stock warrants issued by Legacy Enovix for the purchase of shares of its convertible preferred stock are classified as liabilities on its Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. The fair value of the convertible preferred stock warrants was determined as of December 31, 2020 using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which incorporate assumptions and estimates, to value the convertible preferred stock warrants. Estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement include the fair value per share of the underlying shares of Legacy Enovix’s Series C and D convertible preferred stock, risk free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected volatility of the price of the underlying preferred stock and a probability weighted expected term of the warrants. The most significant assumption impacting the fair value of the convertible preferred stock warrants is the fair value of Legacy Enovix’s Series D convertible preferred stock as of each re-measurement date. Legacy Enovix determined the fair value per share of the underlying preferred stock by taking into consideration the most recent sales of its convertible preferred stock, results obtained from third-party valuations and additional factors that were deemed relevant.
The initial liability recorded is adjusted for changes in the fair value at each reporting date and recorded in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. The convertible preferred stock warrants are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until they were expired or exercised during fiscal years 2021 and 2020. For further information, see Note 4 “Fair Value Measurement and Fair Value of Financial Instruments” to Enovix’s consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
In connection with the Business Combination on July 14, 2021, we assumed outstanding warrants of 17.5 million to purchase Common Stock at a price of $11.50 per share. The warrants expire five years from the completion of the Business Combination and are exercisable starting December 5, 2021. A portion of the outstanding warrants are held by the sponsor and members of Rodgers Capital LLC (the “Private Placement Warrants”) and the Public Warrants. The Public Warrants met the criteria for equity classification and the Private Placement Warrants are classified as liability.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants as of January 2, 2022 with assumptions and estimates. Estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement include the fair value per share of the underlying shares of our Common Stock, risk free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected volatility of the price of the underlying
Common Stock and a probability weighted expected term of the warrants. The most significant assumptions impacting the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants are the fair value of our common stock warrants as of each re-measurement date and expected price volatility of our Common Stock, which included consideration the most recent sales of the Public Warrants and expected price volatility of our Common Stock, results obtained from third-party valuations and additional factors that were deemed relevant. The initial liability recorded is adjusted for changes in the fair value at each reporting date and recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The Private Placement Warrants are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until they are exercised or expired. For further information, see Note 4 “Fair Value Measurement and Fair Value of Financial Instruments” to Enovix’s consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
Accounting for stock-based compensation is a critical accounting policy due to the broad-based equity awards provided to our employees at all levels and the use of equity awards as part of the strategy to retain employees as a result of change of control events. We issue stock-based compensation to employees and nonemployees generally in the form of stock options or restricted stock units (“RSUs”). Starting in the fourth quarter of 2021, we also offer employee stock purchase plan (the “2021 ESPP”) to our employees. For further information, see Note 10 “Stock-based Compensation” to Enovix’s consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date for all stock-based awards made to employees, consultants and directors based on the fair value of the award. We generally recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur. We determine the grant date fair value of the equity awards as follows:
•The grant date fair value of RSUs is the last reported sales price of our Common Stock on the grant date.
•The fair value of shares to be purchased under the ESPP is based on the grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with several assumptions and estimates, including our stock price volatility, projected employee stock purchase contributions, and others.
•The fair value of stock options is based on the grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with several significant assumptions and estimates, including the grant date fair value of Legacy Enovix common stock prior to the Business Combination, our stock price volatility, expected life and others.
Common Stock Valuations
The fair value of Legacy Enovix common stock underlying stock options was determined by the board of directors. Given the absence of a public trading market, the board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of Legacy Enovix’s common stock at each board of directors meeting in which stock awards were approved. These factors included, but were not limited to: (i) contemporaneous third-party valuations of common stock; (ii) the rights, preferences and privileges of convertible preferred stock relative to common stock; (iii) the lack of marketability of common stock; (iv) stage and development of Legacy Enovix’s business; (v) general economic conditions; and (vi) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of Legacy Enovix, given prevailing market conditions. Legacy Enovix determined the fair value per share of the underlying common stock by taking into consideration results obtained from third-party valuations and additional factors that were deemed relevant.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See section “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” of Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.