Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Information and Factors That May Affect Future Results
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements within the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements contained in the following discussion, other than statements that are purely historical, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “potential,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” “plans,” “would,” or “intends” or the negative thereof, or other variations thereof, or comparable terminology, or by discussions of strategy. Forward-looking statements are based upon management’s present expectations, objectives, anticipations, plans, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results, events or developments to be materially different from those indicated in such forward-looking statements, including the risks and uncertainties set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors. These risks and uncertainties should be considered carefully and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. As such, we cannot assure you that the future results covered by the forward-looking statements will be achieved.
The percentage changes throughout the following discussion are based on amounts stated in thousands of dollars.
Overview
During 2020, the Company adopted a Section 382 rights plan and completed a Rights Offering, each as further described below. As a result of the successful completion of the Rights Offering, we are positioned as a public company acquisition vehicle, where we can become an acquisition platform and more fully utilize our NOLs and enhance stockholder value. We intend to acquire profitable businesses, entities or revenue streams that will generate sufficient income so that we can utilize our approximately $103.4 million NOLs. To date, we have not identified any actionable acquisition candidates and, while we expect that, ultimately, we will be successful in realizing the value of our NOLs, we cannot assure you that we will be able to do so.
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was reported in Wuhan, China. Despite recent progress in the administration of vaccines, both the outbreak of recent variants, including Delta and Omicron, and the related containment measures that have been put in place across the globe, have had and are likely to continue to have a serious adverse impact on the global economy and may adversely affect our business operations. The ongoing global health crisis (including resurgences) resulting from the pandemic have disrupted, and continue to disrupt, the normal operations of many businesses, including restrictions such as the temporary closure or scale-back of business operations and/or the imposition of either quarantine or remote work requirements for employees, either by government order or on a voluntary basis. It is impossible to predict the effect and ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as the situation is continually evolving. The COVID-19 pandemic may continue to disrupt the global supply chain and may cause disruptions to our operations, financial condition and prospects. At the present time, the Company’s business activities have been largely unaffected by COVID-19 restrictions as the Company’s workforce is comprised solely of independent contractors who are able to perform their duties remotely. However, these restrictions may impact the third parties who are responsible for obtaining final approval of and manufacturing product candidates for which the Company shares the right to receive licensing fees, milestone payments and royalty revenues. If those third parties are required to curtail their business activities for a significant time, or if global supply chain disruptions impact their ability to procure needed resources, raw materials or components, the Company’s right to receive licensing fees, milestone payments or royalties could be materially and adversely affected. Additionally, the development timeline for product candidates being developed by third parties that are pending FDA or other regulatory approval could be delayed if the agency is required to shift resources to the review and approval of candidates for treatment of COVID-19. In addition, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our search for a target company, as well as the business and/or results of operations of any target business that we acquire or in which we invest.
Prior to 2017, the primary source of our royalty revenues was derived from sales of PegIntron, which is marketed by Merck. We currently have no clinical operations and limited corporate operations. We have no intention of resuming
any clinical development activities. Royalty revenues from sales of PegIntron accounted for (4)% and 42% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net of the effects of Merck’s adjustments for recoupment of previously overpaid royalties.
We have a marketing agreement with Micromet AG, now part of Amgen, Inc. (the “Micromet Agreement”), pursuant to which we may be entitled to certain milestone and royalty payments if Vicineum, a drug being developed by Sesen, Inc., is approved for the treatment of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. In a press release dated February 16, 2021, Sesen announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) had accepted for filing Sesen’s Biologic License Application (“BLA”) for Vicineum. The FDA further granted Priority Review, with a target Prescription Drug User Fee Act (“PDUFA”) date for a decision on the BLA of August 18, 2021 Accordingly, we earned a milestone of $409,430 in the first quarter of 2021, all of which was received by June 30, 2021. However, on August 13, 2021, Sesen announced that it had received a Complete Response Letter (“CRL”) from the FDA and that the FDA had determined that it cannot approve the BLA for Vicineum in its present form and had provided recommendations specific to additional clinical/statistical data and analyses in addition to Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMA”) issues pertaining to a recent preapproval inspection and product quality. In a press release that Sesen issued on December 9, 2021, it noted that on December 8, 2021 it had a Clinical Type A meeting with the FDA and received greater clarity regarding the requirements for resubmission of the BLA and trial design, which may include a randomized clinical trial assessing the safety and efficacy of Vicineum compared to investigators’ choice of intravesical chemotherapy. In a filing with the U. S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) in March 2021, Sesen noted that it had received notice from the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) that its Marketing Authorization Application (“MMA”) for Vicineum was found to be valid and the review procedure had officially started. Accordingly, we earned and received an additional milestone of $292,284 in the second quarter of 2021. Subsequently, on August 25, 2021, Sesen announced that it had withdrawn its application to market Vicineum in Europe.
Due to the challenges associated with developing and obtaining approval for drug products, and the lack of our involvement in the development and approval process, there is substantial uncertainty as to whether we will receive any milestone or royalty payments under the Micromet Agreement. We will not recognize revenue until all revenue recognition requirements are met.
We may be entitled to certain potential future milestone payments contingent upon the achievement of certain regulatory approval-related milestones by third-party licensees. We cannot assure you that we will receive any milestone payments resulting from our agreements with any of our third-party licensees or that any sales of related products will be made. We will not recognize revenue from any of our third-party licensees until all revenue recognition requirements are met.
Results of Operations (in thousands of dollars):
For the
Year Ended December 31,
Revenues:
Royalties and milestones, net
$
$
Total revenues
Operating expenses:
General and administrative
1,170
1,357
Operating loss
(469)
(1,305)
Other income
Income tax expense
(7)
(7)
Net loss
$
(469)
$
(1,311)
Overview
The following table summarizes our royalties earned in 2021 and 2020:
Royalties and Milestones Revenues (in thousands of dollars):
For the Year Ended December 31,
%
Change
Royalties and milestones revenues
1,248
In 2021 and 2020, we earned total net royalties and milestones revenues of approximately $729,000 and $0, respectively, in milestone revenue from Sesen. Separately, in 2021, we were notified by Merck of an approximate $28,000 repayment they believe they are owed of previously-paid royalties on PegIntron. The revenues in 2021 and 2020 were $28,000 and $30,000, respectively, from license fees from Amgen, Inc. in payment of a worldwide, royalty-free non-exclusive right to license Vicineum. In 2020, we also earned $22,000 from royalty revenues from Merck related to sales of PegIntron. Our right to receive royalties on U.S. and European sales of PegIntron expired in 2016 and 2018, respectively, expired in Malaysia in 2020, expired in Japan in 2021 and will expire in Chile in 2024.
At December 31, 2020, we recorded a liability to Merck of approximately $302,000 based primarily on Merck’s assertions regarding recoupments related to prior returns and rebates. During the year ended December 31, 2021, additional recoupments claimed by Merck related to PegIntron were approximately $29,000. As such, as asserted by Merck, the Company’s liability to Merck was $331,000 at December 31, 2021, as discussed in Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net royalties from PegIntron were approximately $22,000.
We believe that we will receive little or no additional royalties from Merck and may incur additional chargebacks from returns and rebates in amounts that, based on current estimates, are not believed to be material. As reported by Merck, in recent years, sales declines were driven by lower volumes in nearly all regions, as the availability of new therapeutic options resulted in continued loss of market share.
General and Administrative Expenses (in thousands of dollars):
For the Year Ended December 31,
%
Change
General and administrative expenses
$
1,170
(14)
$
1,357
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses were approximately $1,170,000, a decrease of approximately $187,000 (14%) from $1,357,000 in the prior year. The change in 2021 from 2020 was primarily from a decrease in legal, consulting, and contracted services fees, as partially offset by an increase in insurance expenses. In particular, legal and other fees associated with the Section 382 rights plan and issues surrounding proxy filings and the annual meeting contributed significantly to the 2020 general and administrative expenses.
In 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses consisted primarily of insurance expenses, consulting fees for executive services, outside professional services for accounting, audit, tax and legal services.
Income Taxes
As a result of our expenses exceeding our royalty and milestone income for the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $468,000 in taxable loss before utilization of NOLs. We utilized none of our NOLs due to the taxable loss position. Due to the valuation allowance placed on our deferred tax assets, the deferred tax expense resulting from the usage and/or expiration of deferred tax assets was offset by a corresponding deferred tax benefit from a reduction in valuation allowance, and we recorded no deferred tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2021. We are projecting future tax losses and have recorded a full valuation allowance against our remaining deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021, as we currently believe it is more likely than not that these assets will not be realized. However, we intend to acquire profitable businesses, entities or revenue streams that will generate sufficient income so that we can utilize our approximately $103.4 million NOLs. While we anticipate that, ultimately, we will be successful in realizing the value of our NOLs, we cannot assure you that we will be able to do so.
Our management will continue to assess the need for this valuation allowance and will make adjustments when appropriate. Additionally, our management believes that our NOLs will not be limited by any changes in the Company’s ownership as a result of the successful completion of the Rights Offering. (See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.)
These projections and beliefs are based upon a variety of estimates and numerous assumptions made by our management with respect to, among other things, forecasted sales of the drug products for which we have the right to receive royalties, our ability to acquire profitable businesses, entities or revenue streams that will generate sufficient income so that we can utilize our NOLs and other matters, many of which are difficult to predict, are subject to significant uncertainties and are beyond our control. As a result, we cannot assure you that the estimates and assumptions upon which these projections and beliefs are based will prove accurate, that the projected results will be realized or that the actual results will not be substantially higher or lower than projected.
Section 382 Rights Plan
On August 14, 2020, in an effort to protect stockholder value by attempting to protect against a possible limitation on our ability to use our NOLs, our Board of Directors adopted a Section 382 rights plan and declared a dividend distribution of one right for each outstanding share of the Company’s common stock to stockholders of record at the close of business on August 24, 2020. Accordingly, holders of the Company’s common stock own one preferred stock purchase right for each share of common stock owned by such holder. The rights are not immediately exercisable and will become exercisable only upon the occurrence of certain events as set forth in the Section 382 rights plan. If the rights become exercisable, each right would initially represent the right to purchase from us one one-thousandth of a share of our Series A-1 Junior Participating Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, for a purchase price of $1.20 per right. If issued, each fractional share of Series A-1 Junior Participating Preferred Stock would give the stockholder approximately the same dividend, voting and liquidation rights as does one share of the Company’s common stock. However, prior to exercise, a right does not give its holder any rights as a stockholder of the Company, including any dividend, voting or liquidation rights. The rights will expire on the earliest of (i) the close of business on June 2. 2024 (unless that date is advanced or extended by the Board of Directors), (ii) the time at which the rights are redeemed or exchanged under the Section 382 rights plan, (iii) the close of business on the day of repeal of Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code or any successor statute and (iv) the close of business on the first day of a taxable year of the Company to which our Board of Directors determines that no NOLs may be carried forward.
Rights Offering
On September 1, 2020, our Board of Directors approved the Rights Offering consisting of shares of Series C Preferred Stock and shares of the Company’s common stock. On October 9, 2020, the Rights Offering was completed and, as a result, we realized gross proceeds of approximately $43.6 million, issued 40,000 shares of Series C Preferred Stock and 30,000,000 shares of common stock such that there is currently an aggregate of 40,000 shares of Series C Preferred Stock and 74,214,603 shares of common stock outstanding. (See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.)
With regard to the Series C Preferred Stock, on an annual basis, the Company’s Board of Directors may, at its sole discretion, cause a dividend with respect to the Series C Preferred Stock to be paid in cash to the holders in an amount
equal to 3% of the liquidation preference as in effect at such time (initially $1,000 per share). If the dividend is not so paid in cash, the liquidation preference is adjusted and increased annually by an amount equal to 5% of the liquidation preference per share as in effect at such time, that is not paid in cash to the holders on such date. Holders of Series C Preferred Stock do not have any voting rights and the Series C Preferred Stock is not convertible into shares of our common stock. The initial liquidation value of the Series C Preferred Stock was $1,000 per share. No dividends have been declared or paid on the Series C Preferred Stock. On or after November 1, 2022, we may redeem the Series C Preferred Stock at any time, in whole or in part, for an amount based on the liquidation preference per share as in effect at such time. Holders of Series C Preferred Stock have the right to demand that we redeem their shares in the event that we undergo a change of control.
We believe that the completion of the Rights Offering will not limit the use of our NOLs due to any Section 382 limitations.
The Company’s Board of Directors did not declare a dividend on the Series C Preferred Stock as of December 31, 2021 or 2020. Accordingly, the liquidation value at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1,062 and $1,012 per share, respectively. (See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our current source of liquidity is our existing cash on hand, which includes the approximately $43.6 million of gross proceeds from our Rights Offering. (See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.) While we no longer have any research and development activities, we continue to retain rights to receive royalties and milestone payments from existing licensing arrangements with other companies and, accordingly, we may be entitled to a share of milestone and royalty payments from the approval and sale of Vicineum, We believe that our existing cash on hand will be sufficient to fund our operations, at least, through February 2023. Our future royalty revenues are expected to be de minimis over the next several years and we cannot assure you that we will receive any royalty, milestone or other revenues.
While we are positioned as a public company acquisition vehicle, where we can become an acquisition platform and more fully utilize our NOLs and enhance stockholder value, we cannot assure you that we will succeed in making acquisitions that are profitable and that will enable us to utilize our NOLs.
Cash provided by operating activities represents net loss, as adjusted for certain non-cash items including the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities. Cash used in operating activities during 2021 was $501,000, as compared to cash used in operating activities of $380,000 in 2020. The decrease of approximately $121,000 was primarily attributable to our collection of a $970,000 tax refund receivable during 2020, offset by an approximately $843,000 decrease in our net loss.
No cash was provided by financing activities in 2021, as compared to approximately $43.1 million provided by financing activities in 2020, attributable entirely to the net proceeds from the Rights Offering in October 2020, offset by the payment of $0.5 million of offering-related costs.
The net effect of the foregoing was a decrease of cash of approximately $0.5 million, from $48.1 million at December 31, 2020 to $47.6 million at December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow limited purposes. As of December 31, 2021, we were not involved in any off-balance sheet special purpose entity transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Our consolidated financial statements are presented in accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”). All applicable U.S. GAAP accounting standards effective as of December 31, 2021 have been taken into consideration in preparing the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Some of those estimates are subjective and complex, and, consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. The following accounting policies and estimates have been highlighted as significant because changes to certain judgments and assumptions inherent in these policies could affect our consolidated financial statements.
We base our estimates, to the extent possible, on historical experience. Historical information is modified as appropriate based on current business factors and various assumptions that we believe are necessary to form a basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis and make changes when necessary. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Revenues
Royalties under our agreements with third parties and pursuant to the sale of our former specialty pharmaceutical business are recognized when reasonably determinable and earned through the sale of the product by the third party and collection is reasonably assured. Notification from the third-party licensee of the royalties earned under the license agreement is the basis for royalty revenue recognition. This information generally is received from the licensees in the quarter subsequent to the period in which the sales occur.
Contingent payments due under the Asset Purchase Agreement for the sale of our former specialty pharmaceutical business are recognized as income when the milestone has been achieved and collection is assured, such payments are non-refundable and no further effort is required on our part or the other party to complete the earning process.
Income Taxes
Under the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. A valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets is provided for when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. As of December 31, 2021, we believe, based on our projections, that at this time it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets, including our net operating losses from operating activities, will not be realized. We are positioned as a public company acquisition vehicle, where we can become an acquisition platform and more fully utilize our NOLs. We intend to acquire profitable businesses, entities or revenue streams that will generate sufficient income so that we can utilize our approximately $103.4 million NOLs. At this time, however, we cannot assure you that we will be successful in doing so. Accordingly, our management will continue to assess the need for this valuation allowance and will make adjustments when appropriate. Additionally, our management believes that our NOLs will not be limited by any changes in our ownership as a result of the successful completion of the Rights Offering (See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
We recognize the benefit of an uncertain tax position that we have taken or expect to take on the income tax returns we file if it is more likely than not that we will be able to sustain our position.