ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Elliott Opportunity II Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Elliott Opportunity II Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the interim financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward- looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated on February 1, 2021 as a Cayman Islands exempted company with a business purpose to effect a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or assets (the “Business Combination”).
Our sponsor is Elliott Opportunity Sponsor II L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on June 28, 2021. On July 1, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) of 60,950,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 7,950,000 Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $609,500,000. Transaction costs of the Initial Public Offering amounted to $34,844,966, comprised of $12,190,000 of underwriting discount, $21,332,500 of deferred underwriting discount, and $1,322,466 of other offering costs, and of which $1,053,837 were allocated to expenses associated with the warrant liability.
Substantially concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of 10,793,333 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to our Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $16,190,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $609,500,000 ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a U.S.-based trust account (the “Trust Account”) at UBS Financial Services Inc., maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee, and was invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated
under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or July 1, 2023, to complete the initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price,
payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay the income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining shareholders and the Company’s board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. Our Sponsor, officers and directors have agreed to (i) waive their redemption rights with respect to their Founder Shares and Public Shares they hold in connection with the completion of the initial Business Combination, (ii) waive their redemption rights with respect to any Founder Shares and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in connection with a shareholder vote to approve an amendment to the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association (A) that would modify the substance or timing of our obligation to provide holders of the Public Shares the right to have their shares redeemed in connection with our initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of our Public Shares if we do not complete our initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, (B) with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of holders of our Public Shares
or pre-initial business
combination activity and, (iii) waive their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Founder Shares or Private Placement Warrants they hold if we fail to consummate the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period (although they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Public Shares they hold if we fail to complete our initial Business Combination within the Combination Period). In the event of any such liquidating distribution from the Trust Account, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the Initial Public Offering price per Unit in the Initial Public Offering.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 we had approximately $0.7 million in cash, and working capital of approximately $0.3 million. Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through receipt of $25,000, or approximately $0.002 per share, from the initial shareholders to cover certain offering costs in consideration for the Founder Shares, and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of up to $300,000. The promissory note from the Sponsor was paid in full on July 23, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds to pay existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and
has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
All activity for the period from February 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the Initial Public Offering and, since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination candidate. Except as set forth in the immediately preceding sentence, we have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the
form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 1, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,897,675, which consisted of formation and operating expenses of $2,026,369, offering costs related to warrants of $1,053,836, fair value in excess of proceeds from private warrants of $188,584 offset by interest income of $112,192 and gain from change in fair market value of warrant liabilities of $6,054,272
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
We pay the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our founding team. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying such monthly fees. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, $30,000 has been accrued as due to related party.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the Private Placement Warrants and Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
On July 1, 2021, we paid an underwriting discount of 2% of the per Unit offering price, or approximately $12,190,000 million in the aggregate at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, and the underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $21,332,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the Class A Ordinary Shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s charter. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption
provisions not solely within the control of the Company require ordinary shares subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, all of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are initially recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each
reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on
whether or not net-cash settlement or
conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Warrant Liability
The Company evaluated the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (collectively, “Warrants”, which are discussed in Note 3, Note 4 and Note 7) in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and
Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Net Income per Ordinary Share
The Company has two classes of shares, Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The Company has not considered the effect of the outstanding warrants to purchase 26,030,833 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net income per ordinary share is the same as basic net income per ordinary share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
from the Company’s inception on February 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet
arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging
growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.