Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Executive Summary
We are a leading global provider of digital platform engineering and software development services to many of the world’s leading organizations.
Our customers depend on us to solve their complex technical challenges and rely on our expertise in core engineering, advanced technology, digital design and intelligent enterprise development. We continuously explore opportunities in new industries to expand our core industry client base in software and technology, financial services, business information and media, travel and consumer, and life sciences and healthcare. Our teams of developers, architects, consultants, strategists, engineers, designers, and product experts have the capabilities and skill sets to deliver business results.
Our global delivery model and centralized support functions, combined with the benefits of scale from the shared use of fixed-cost resources, enhance our productivity levels and enable us to better manage the efficiency of our global operations. As a result, we have created a delivery base whereby our applications, tools, methodologies and infrastructure allow us to seamlessly deliver services and solutions from our delivery centers to global customers across all geographies, further strengthening our relationships with them.
Through increased specialization in focused verticals and a continued emphasis on strategic partnerships, we are leveraging our roots in software engineering to grow as a recognized brand in software development and end-to-end digital transformation services for our customers. In 2021, we have become a member of the S&P 500 and a Forbes Global 2000 company.
Business Update Regarding Military Action in Ukraine
On February 24, 2022, Russian forces launched significant military action against Ukraine, and sustained conflict and disruption in the region is likely. The impact to Ukraine as well as actions taken by other countries, including new and stricter sanctions by Canada, the United Kingdom, the European Union, the U.S. and other companies and organizations against officials, individuals, regions, and industries in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, and each country’s potential response to such sanctions, tensions, and military actions could have a material adverse effect on our operations. Any such material adverse effect from the conflict and enhanced sanctions activity may disrupt our delivery of services, cause us to shift all or portions of our work occurring in the region to other countries, and may restrict our ability to engage in certain projects in the region or involving certain customers in the region.
The information contained in this section is accurate as of the date hereof, but may become outdated due to changing circumstances beyond our present awareness or control.
Our Response to the Military Action in Ukraine
As noted in “Item 1. Business - Global Delivery Model” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, Ukraine is our largest delivery location by number of personnel and Belarus and Russia are our second and third largest delivery locations by number of personnel, respectively. We are actively monitoring the security of our personnel and the stability of our infrastructure, including communications and internet availability. We are also executing our business continuity plan and adapting to developments as they occur to protect the safety of our people and handle potential impacts to our delivery infrastructure, including reallocating work to other geographies within our global footprint. We are actively working with our personnel and with our customers to meet their needs and to mitigate delivery challenges.
Moving Forward
We have no way to predict the progress or outcome of the situation, as the conflict and government reactions are rapidly developing and beyond our control. Prolonged unrest, military activities, or broad-based sanctions, should they be implemented, could have a material adverse effect on our operations and business outlook. We have accelerated hiring in locations outside of the region as part of our business continuity planning and in order to support client demand. In addition, we have implemented plans to move some of our existing personnel to other countries in order to keep them safe and mitigate impacts on our delivery of services to our customers.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the military action in Ukraine and the impact in the region, please read “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continued its substantial and varying influence on global public health, economies, business operations, and financial markets. Numerous evolving factors prevent us from accurately predicting the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to directly and indirectly impact our employees, customers, communities, business, results of operations and financial condition.
To the extent that the remainder of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) refers to a financial or performance metric that has been affected by a trend or activity, that reference is in addition to any impact of the COVID-19 pandemic disclosed in and supplemented by this section. The information contained in this section is accurate as of the date hereof, but may become outdated due to changing circumstances beyond our present awareness or control.
Our COVID-19 Pandemic Response
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the vast majority of our employees have been able to productively and securely work from a remote location, so we do not expect that COVID-19 will have a material adverse effect on our ability to operate our business or productively deliver services to our customers, nor on our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, or disclosure controls and procedures. Extended or expanded restrictions on travel and immigration from other countries may continue to impact our operations. However, we do not believe that the current travel and immigration restrictions will have a material adverse effect on our business or financial condition.
Our adaptive global delivery model enables us to deliver our services and solutions to our customers from remote locations, so we continue to effectively provide our customers with the products, services, and solutions they seek. Economic conditions resulting from the pandemic, including supply chain disruptions, persistent inflation for both goods and services, and worker shortages could negatively affect our operations and the operations of our customers and their customers and could adversely impact our revenues and our results of operations.
Moving Forward
We expect continued uncertainty regarding the impacts the pandemic will have on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We actively monitor our business and the needs of our employees, customers and communities to determine the appropriate actions to take to ensure the safety of our employees and our ongoing operations. Our business continuity plans and adherence to the recommendations of public health authorities are intended to protect the health and safety of approximately 58,000 EPAM professionals and the customers they serve. Economic and demand uncertainty in the current environment may impact our future results. We continue to monitor the demand for our services and our ability to deliver them, while continuing to assess how the economic effects of COVID-19 may impact our human capital allocation, revenues, operating expenses and profitability.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read “Part II.