ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations and related information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including applicable year-to-year comparisons, should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States (“U.S.”).
Discussion and analysis of matters pertaining to the year ended December 31, 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K, but can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 that was filed on March 1, 2021.
Key References Used in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “we,” “us” or “our” within this annual report are intended to mean the business and operations of Enterprise Products Partners L.P. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
References to the “Partnership” or “Enterprise” mean Enterprise Products Partners L.P. on a standalone basis.
References to “EPO” mean Enterprise Products Operating LLC, which is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Partnership, and its consolidated subsidiaries, through which the Partnership conducts its business. We are managed by our general partner, Enterprise Products Holdings LLC (“Enterprise GP”), which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Dan Duncan LLC, a privately held Texas limited liability company.
The membership interests of Dan Duncan LLC are owned by a voting trust, the current trustees (“DD LLC Trustees”) of which are: (i) Randa Duncan Williams, who is also a director and Chairman of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of Enterprise GP; (ii) Richard H. Bachmann, who is also a director and Vice Chairman of the Board of Enterprise GP; and (iii) W. Randall Fowler, who is also a director and the Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of Enterprise GP. Ms. Duncan Williams and Messrs. Bachmann and Fowler also currently serve as managers of Dan Duncan LLC.
References to “EPCO” mean Enterprise Products Company, a privately held Texas corporation, and its privately held affiliates. The outstanding voting capital stock of EPCO is owned by a voting trust, the current trustees (“EPCO Trustees”) of which are: (i) Ms. Duncan Williams, who serves as Chairman of EPCO; (ii) Mr. Bachmann, who serves as the President and Chief Executive Officer of EPCO; and (iii) Mr. Fowler, who serves as an Executive Vice President and the Chief Financial Officer of EPCO. Ms. Duncan Williams and Messrs. Bachmann and Fowler also currently serve as directors of EPCO.
We, Enterprise GP, EPCO and Dan Duncan LLC are affiliates under the collective common control of the DD LLC Trustees and the EPCO Trustees. EPCO, together with its privately held affiliates, owned approximately 32.3% of the Partnership’s common units outstanding at December 31, 2021. In March 2021, a privately held affiliate of EPCO sold its entire ownership interest in the Partnership’s Series A Cumulative Convertible Preferred Units (“preferred units”) to third parties.
As generally used in the energy industry and in this annual report, the acronyms below have the following meanings:
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 (our “annual report”) contains various forward-looking statements and information that are based on our beliefs and those of our general partner, as well as assumptions made by us and information currently available to us. When used in this document, words such as “anticipate,” “project,” “expect,” “plan,” “seek,” “goal,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “intend,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “believe,” “may,” “scheduled,” “potential” and similar expressions and statements regarding our plans and objectives for future operations are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although we and our general partner believe that our expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements (including any forward-looking statements/expectations of third parties referenced in this annual report) are reasonable, neither we nor our general partner can give any assurances that such expectations will prove to be correct.
Forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks, uncertainties and assumptions as described in more detail under Part I, Item 1A of this annual report. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or if underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, estimated, projected or expected. You should not put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this annual report speak only as of the date hereof. Except as required by federal and state securities laws, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or any other reason.
Overview of Business
We are a publicly traded Delaware limited partnership, the common units of which are listed on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “EPD.” Our preferred units are not publicly traded. We were formed in April 1998 to own and operate certain natural gas liquids (“NGLs”) related businesses of EPCO and are a leading North American provider of midstream energy services to producers and consumers of natural gas, NGLs, crude oil, petrochemicals and refined products. We are owned by our limited partners (preferred and common unitholders) from an economic perspective. Enterprise GP, which owns a non-economic general partner interest in us, manages our Partnership. We conduct substantially all of our business operations through EPO and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Our fully integrated, midstream energy asset network (or “value chain”) links producers of natural gas, NGLs and crude oil from some of the largest supply basins in the United States (“U.S.”), Canada and the Gulf of Mexico with domestic consumers and international markets. Our midstream energy operations include:
• natural gas gathering, treating, processing, transportation and storage;
• NGL transportation, fractionation, storage, and marine terminals (including those used to export liquefied petroleum gases, or “LPG,” and ethane);
• crude oil gathering, transportation, storage, and marine terminals;
• propylene production facilities (including propane dehydrogenation (“PDH”) facilities), butane isomerization, octane enhancement, isobutane dehydrogenation (“iBDH”) and high purity isobutylene (“HPIB”) production facilities;
• petrochemical and refined products transportation, storage, and marine terminals (including those used to export ethylene and polymer grade propylene (“PGP”)); and
• a marine transportation business that operates on key U.S. inland and intracoastal waterway systems.
The safe operation of our assets is a top priority. We are committed to protecting the environment and the health and safety of the public and those working on our behalf by conducting our business activities in a safe and environmentally responsible manner. For additional information, see “Environmental, Safety and Conservation” within the Regulatory Matters section of Part I, Items 1 and 2 of this annual report.
Like many publicly traded partnerships, we have no employees. All of our management, administrative and operating functions are performed by employees of EPCO pursuant to an administrative services agreement (the “ASA”) or by other service providers.
Each of our business segments benefits from the supporting role of our marketing activities. The main purpose of our marketing activities is to support the utilization and expansion of assets across our midstream energy asset network by increasing the volumes handled by such assets, which results in additional fee-based earnings for each business segment. In performing these support roles, our marketing activities also seek to participate in supply and demand opportunities as a supplemental source of segment gross operating margin for us. The financial results of our marketing efforts fluctuate due to changes in volumes handled and overall market conditions, which are influenced by current and forward market prices for the products bought and sold.
Our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are subject to certain risks. For information regarding such risks, see “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A of this annual report.
Current Outlook
As noted previously, this annual report on Form 10-K, including this update to our outlook on business conditions, contains forward-looking statements that are based on our beliefs and those of Enterprise GP. In addition, it reflects assumptions made by us and information currently available to us, which includes forecast information published by third parties. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information” within this Part II, Item 7 and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A, for additional information. The following information presents our current views on key midstream energy supply and demand fundamentals. All references to U.S. Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) forecasts and expectations are derived from its February 2022 Short-Term Energy Outlook (“February 2022 STEO”), which was published on February 8, 2022.
The level of services we provide and the amount of volumes we purchase and sell are directly affected by changes in supply and demand for hydrocarbon products, which impacts our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, supply and demand for hydrocarbon products were significantly reduced by the global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the consequences of containment measures including quarantines, travel restrictions, temporary business closures and similar protective actions.
During late 2020 and early 2021, most countries began to gradually reduce mobility restrictions to less stringent methods of COVID-19 containment (e.g., vaccines, mask requirements and social distancing) allowing for the resumption of travel and business activities. These changes, coupled with strong fiscal and economic stimulus worldwide, helped bolster an economic recovery in most industrial economies. According to the EIA, U.S. gross domestic product increased 5.7% in 2021 compared to a decrease of 3.4% in 2020.
This strong economic recovery has increased the demand for hydrocarbon products necessary to produce energy, transportation fuels and raw materials. Preliminary EIA estimates showed that the global consumption of petroleum and other liquid fuels grew by 5.2 MMBPD in 2021 while at the same time global liquid fuels inventories fell by an average of 1.6 MMBPD. Crude oil and other liquids production from a combination of members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and non-OPEC members increased by only 1.7 MMBPD during this period. The growth in global crude oil consumption relative to production has led to a significant increase in crude oil prices as demonstrated by the average price of Brent crude oil, which increased from an average of $44 per barrel in the fourth quarter of 2020 to $79 per barrel in the fourth quarter of 2021.
The EIA forecasts a reversal of this trend with a prediction that global crude oil and other liquids production will outpace consumption in 2022 and 2023, leading to a rise in global liquid fuels inventories. Their forecast shows global crude oil and other liquids consumption growing by a cumulative 5.4 MMBPD through 2023, while production is expected to grow by a cumulative 8.0 MMBPD through 2023. This is expected to cause a rise in global liquid fuels inventories by an average of 0.8 MMBPD in 2022 and 1.0 MMBPD in 2023, which is forecast to put downward pressure on crude oil prices. According to the EIA, Brent crude oil prices are forecasted to average $83 per barrel in 2022 before decreasing to $68 per barrel in 2023.
We acknowledge some uncertainties exist with respect to the forecasted increases in liquid fuels consumption levels due to the potential for continued supply chain disruptions, labor shortages, inflationary pressures and the potential for additional restrictions associated with COVID-19 containment measures should more contagious variants emerge. However, we are optimistic that these risks remain outweighed by the strength in the global economy, a seemingly widespread fatigue from COVID-19 related mobility and activity restrictions and the desire by the entire global population to improve their living conditions through the use of hydrocarbons for energy and materials.
We believe that these additional production and consumption trends, along with the associated increases in inventory levels, will create additional opportunities to provide midstream services to our customers while leveraging the strengths of our portfolio, which include:
• Our Assets - Our people find creative ways to optimize our large, integrated and diversified asset base to provide incremental services to customers and to respond to market opportunities. Additional production volumes could lead to higher demand for processing, transportation, fractionation and terminaling services. Storage services provide valuable flexibility for customers seeking to balance supply and demand while also allowing us to capture valuable contango and other marketing opportunities should they arise.
• Our Customers - We have contracted with a large number of quality customers in order to achieve revenue diversification. In 2021, our top 200 largest customers represented 98.6% of consolidated revenues. Based on their respective year-end 2021 debt ratings, 87.0% of revenues from our top 200 customers were either investment grade rated or backed by letters of credit. Additionally, less than 3% of our top 200 customer revenues were attributable to sub-investment grade or non-rated upstream producers.
• Our Liquidity - At December 31, 2021, we had $7.32 billion of consolidated liquidity, which was comprised of $4.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under EPO’s revolving credit facilities and $2.82 billion of unrestricted cash on hand. Our liquidity is supported by investment grade credit ratings on EPO’s long-term senior unsecured debt of BBB+, Baa1 and BBB+ from Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch, respectively.
• Our Access to Capital Markets - EPO successfully issued $1.0 billion in principal amount of senior notes in 2021. Based on current conditions, we believe that we will have sufficient liquidity and/or access to debt capital markets to fund our operations, capital investments and the remaining principal amount of senior notes maturing through 2022.
Recent Developments
Enterprise Announces Acquisition of Navitas Midstream
In January 2022, we announced that an affiliate of Enterprise entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Navitas Midstream Partners, LLC (“Navitas Midstream”) from an affiliate of Warburg Pincus LLC in a debt-free transaction for $3.25 billion in cash consideration. Navitas Midstream’s assets include approximately 1,750 miles of pipelines and over 1.0 Bcf/d of cryogenic natural gas processing capacity. The purchase price was paid in cash at closing on February 17, 2022. We funded the cash consideration for this acquisition using proceeds from the issuance of short-term notes under our commercial paper program and cash on hand.
Enterprise Completes Expansion of Acadian Natural Gas Pipeline System in Louisiana
In December 2021, we announced recently starting commercial service on our new Gillis Lateral pipeline and the associated expansion of our existing Acadian Haynesville Extension system to serve the growing liquefied natural gas (“LNG”) market on the Gulf Coast. The 83-mile Gillis Lateral pipeline originates near Alexandria, Louisiana on our Acadian Haynesville Extension system and extends to third party pipeline interconnects near Gillis, Louisiana, including multiple pipelines serving regional LNG export facilities. The recently completed Gillis Lateral pipeline has the capability to transport approximately 1.0 Bcf/d of natural gas.
To accommodate the additional volumes, we increased capacity on our Acadian Haynesville Extension pipeline from 1.8 Bcf/d to 2.1 Bcf/d by adding horsepower at our Mansfield Compressor Station located in Mansfield, Louisiana. The Legacy Acadian and Haynesville Extension pipelines are part of the Acadian Gas System, which is comprised of approximately 1,300 miles of natural gas pipelines and leased underground storage. It links natural gas supplies in Louisiana and offshore Gulf of Mexico to distribution companies, electric utility plants and industrial customers located primarily in the Baton Rouge/New Orleans/Mississippi River corridor. Our 378-mile Haynesville Gathering System has a capacity of approximately 1.3 Bcf/d, can treat up to 810 MMcf/d of natural gas and provides a significant and reliable source of supply for the Acadian Gas System.
Enterprise and Chevron Explore Carbon Storage Business Opportunities
In September 2021, we and Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (“Chevron”) jointly announced a framework to study and evaluate opportunities for carbon dioxide capture, utilization and storage from our respective business operations in the U.S. Midcontinent and Gulf Coast. Projects resulting from this evaluation would seek to combine our extensive midstream pipeline and storage network with Chevron’s sub-surface expertise to create opportunities to capture, aggregate, transport and sequester carbon dioxide in support of the evolving energy landscape. The initial phase of the study in which we will evaluate specific business opportunities is expected to last about six months.
Issuance of $1.0 Billion of Senior Notes in September 2021
In September 2021, EPO issued $1.0 billion principal amount of senior notes due February 2053 (“Senior Notes EEE”). Net proceeds from this offering were used for general company purposes, including for growth capital investments, and the repayment of debt (including the repayment of a portion of our $750.0 million in principal amount of 3.50% Senior Notes VV and a portion of our $650.0 million in principal amount of 4.05% Senior Notes CC, in each case at their maturity in February 2022).
Senior Notes EEE were issued at 99.170% of their principal amount and have a fixed rate of interest of 3.30% per year. The Partnership guaranteed these senior notes through an unconditional guarantee on an unsecured and unsubordinated basis.
Enterprise and Magellan Team Up With Intercontinental Exchange for New Houston Crude Oil Futures Contract
In June 2021, we, Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P (“Magellan”) and Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. (“ICE”) announced the establishment of a new futures contract for the physical delivery of crude oil in the Houston, Texas area in response to market interest for a Houston-based index with greater scale, flow assurance and price transparency.
On January 24, 2022, the ICE Midland WTI American Gulf Coast futures contract went live for trading with the March 2022 contract being the first contract month for deliveries. The quality specifications of the new futures contract are consistent with West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) originating from the Permian Basin with common delivery options at either our ECHO terminal in Houston or Magellan’s East Houston terminal. In support of this new futures contract, we and Magellan have discontinued provisions for delivery services under legacy futures contracts that are deliverable at each terminal.
Selected Energy Commodity Price Data
The following table presents selected average index prices for natural gas and selected NGL and petrochemical products for the periods indicated:
(1)
Natural gas prices are based on Henry-Hub Inside FERC commercial index prices as reported by Platts, which is a division of S&P Global, Inc.
(2)
NGL prices for ethane, propane, normal butane, isobutane and natural gasoline are based on Mont Belvieu, Texas Non-TET commercial index prices as reported by Oil Price Information Service by IHS Markit (“IHS”).
(3)
Polymer grade propylene prices represent average contract pricing for such product as reported by IHS. Refinery grade propylene (“RGP”) prices represent weighted-average spot prices for such product as reported by IHS.
(4)
The “Indicative Gas Processing Gross Spread” represents our generic estimate of the gross economic benefit from extracting NGLs from natural gas production based on certain pricing assumptions. Specifically, it is the amount by which the assumed economic value of a composite gallon of NGLs in Chambers County, Texas exceeds the value of the equivalent amount of energy in natural gas at Henry Hub, Louisiana. Our estimate of the indicative spread does not consider the operating costs incurred by a natural gas processing facility to extract the NGLs nor the transportation and fractionation costs to deliver the NGLs to market. In addition, the actual gas processing spread earned at each plant is further influenced by regional pricing and extraction dynamics.
The weighted-average indicative market price for NGLs was $0.75 per gallon in 2021 versus $0.38 per gallon for 2020.
The following table presents selected average index prices for crude oil for the periods indicated:
(1)
WTI prices are based on commercial index prices at Cushing, Oklahoma as measured by the NYMEX.
(2)
Midland and Houston crude oil prices are based on commercial index prices as reported by Argus.
(3)
Light Louisiana Sweet (“LLS”) prices are based on commercial index prices as reported by Platts.
Fluctuations in our consolidated revenues and cost of sales amounts are explained in large part by changes in energy commodity prices. An increase in our consolidated marketing revenues due to higher energy commodity sales prices may not result in an increase in gross operating margin or cash available for distribution, since our consolidated cost of sales amounts would also be expected to increase due to comparable increases in the purchase prices of the underlying energy commodities. The same type of relationship would be true in the case of lower energy commodity sales prices and purchase costs.
We attempt to mitigate commodity price exposure through our hedging activities and the use of fee-based arrangements. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” under Part II,