Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Epiphany Technology Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 28, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the concurrent private placement, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, as described below, and, subsequent to our initial public offering, searching and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in trust account after our initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $7,207,291, which consists of a change in the fair value warrant liabilities of $9,315,334 and interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $113,586, offset by transaction cost related to warrant liability of $1,029,081 and formation and operational costs of $1,192,548.
For the period from September 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,465, which consisted of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 12, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 40,250,000 units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 5,250,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $402,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 800,000 units to our sponsor and Cantor at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000.
Following our initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the placement units, a total of $402,500,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $21,598,082 in transaction costs, including $6,000,000 of underwriting fees, net of $1,000,000 reimbursed from the underwriters, $15,137,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $460,582 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,212,324. Net income of $7,207,291 was affected by changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,315,334, interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $113,586 and transaction costs allocated to warrants of $1,029,081. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $19,776 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from September 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we do not have cash used in operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments held in the trust account of $402,613,586. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw interest earned on the trust account to pay for our franchise tax obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete an initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $353,094 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the placement units.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until January 12, 2023 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 12, 2023.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on January 12, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial 35,000,000 units sold in our initial public offering, or $12,250,000, and (ii) 5.5% of the gross proceeds from the units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $2,887,500. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). We account for our warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-4
under which the warrants that do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify our warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject tore-measurement at each balance sheets date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of our private placement warrants was determined using a binomial lattice model incorporating the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein
methodology. The public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice model incorporating the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein
methodology. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption, if any, are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheets. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-
Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of adoption of ASU 2020-06.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.