Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Results of Operations
Critical Accounting Policies
Executive Overview
General
Evolution Petroleum Corporation is an independent energy company focused on maximizing total returns to its shareholders through the ownership of and investment in onshore oil and natural gas properties in the United States. In support of that objective, our long-term goal is to maximize total shareholder return from a diversified portfolio of long-life oil and natural gas properties built through acquisitions and through selective development opportunities, production enhancements, and other exploitation efforts on our oil and natural gas properties.
Our oil and natural gas properties consist of non-operated interests in the Delhi Holt-Bryant Unit in the Delhi Field in Northeast Louisiana, a CO2 enhanced oil recovery (“EOR”) project; non-operated interests in the Hamilton Dome Field located in Hot Springs County, Wyoming, a secondary recovery field utilizing water injection wells to pressurize the reservoir; non-operated interests in the Barnett Shale located in North Texas, a natural gas producing property; non-operated interests in the Williston Basin in North Dakota, a producing oil and natural gas property; non-operated interests in the Jonah Field in Sublette County, Wyoming, a natural gas producing field; and small overriding royalty interests in four onshore central Texas wells.
Our non-operated interests in the Delhi Field, a CO2-EOR project, consist of approximately 24% average net working interest, with an associated 19% revenue interest and separate overriding royalty and mineral interests of approximately 7% yielding a total average net revenue interest of approximately 26%. The field is operated by Denbury Onshore LLC (“Denbury”). The Delhi Field is located in northeast Louisiana in Franklin, Madison, and Richland Parishes and encompasses approximately 14,000 gross unitized acres, or approximately 3,200 net acres.
Our non-operated interests in the Hamilton Dome Field, a secondary recovery field utilizing water injection wells to pressurize the reservoir, consists of approximately 24% average net working interest, with an associated 20% average net revenue interest (inclusive of a small overriding royalty interest). The approximately 5,900 gross acre unitized field, of which we hold approximately 1,400 net acres, is operated by Merit Energy Company (“Merit”), who owns the vast majority of the remaining working interest in the Hamilton Dome Field. The Hamilton Dome Field is located in the southwest region of the Big Horn Basin in northwest Wyoming.
Our non-operated interests in the Barnett Shale, a natural gas producing shale reservoir, consists of approximately 17% average net working interest with an associated 14% average net revenue interest (inclusive of small overriding royalty interests). The approximately 21,000 net acres are held by production across nine North Texas counties. The oil and natural gas properties are primarily operated by Diversified Energy Company with approximately 10% of wells operated by seven other operators.
On January 14, 2022, we acquired non-operated working interests in 73 producing wells in the Williston Basin with an average net working interest of approximately 39% and average net revenue interest of approximately 33% located on approximately 45,000 net acres (approximately 90% held by production) across Billings, Golden Valley, and McKenzie Counties in North Dakota (the “Williston Basin Acquisition”). After taking into account customary closing adjustments and an effective date of June 1, 2021, cash consideration was $25.2 million which includes $0.3 million of transaction costs related to the acquisition. The properties are operated by Foundation Energy Management (“Foundation”), an established operator in the geographic region.
On April 1, 2022, we acquired non-operated working interests in the Jonah Field in Sublette County, Wyoming (the “Jonah Field Acquisition”). After taking into account the deposit on the acquisition, customary closing adjustments and an effective date of February 1, 2022, cash consideration at closing was $26.4 million (including $0.2 million of transaction costs). The acquired properties include an average net working interest of approximately 20% and an average net revenue interest of approximately 15% in 595 producing wells and 950 net acres. The properties are operated by Jonah (“Jonah”), an established operator in the geographic region.
Recent Developments
Dividend Declaration and Share Repurchase Program
On September 12, 2022, Evolution’s Board of Directors approved and declared a quarterly dividend of $0.12 per common share payable September 30, 2022. This represents a 20% increase over the $0.10 per common share dividend paid in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022. Also, on September 8, 2022, the Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, under which we are approved to repurchase up to $25 million of our common stock through December 31, 2024. We intend to fund repurchases from available working capital and cash provided by operating activities. As we continue to focus on our goal of maximizing total shareholder return, the Board of Directors along with the management team believe that a share repurchase program is complimentary to the existing dividend policy and is a tax efficient means to further improve shareholder return. The shares may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions, through privately negotiated transactions or by other means in accordance with federal securities laws. The timing, as well as the number and value of shares repurchased under the program, will depend on a variety of factors, including management’s assessment of the intrinsic value of our shares, the market price of our common stock, general market and economic conditions, and applicable legal requirements. The value of shares authorized for repurchase by our Board of Directors does not require us to repurchase such shares or guarantee that such shares will be repurchased, and the program may be suspended, modified, or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
Highlights for our Fiscal Year 2022 and Operations Update
● Generated revenue of $108.9 million and net income of $32.6 million.
● Production averaged 5,953 net BOEPD.
● Returned to shareholders $11.8 million in cash dividends. We have paid out to shareholders more than $86.3 million in cash dividends since inception of the dividend program in December 2013.
● Funded all operations, development capital expenditures, and dividends out of operating cash flow.
● Closed the Jonah Field Acquisition on April 1, 2022 and the Williston Basin Acquisition on January 14, 2022, which included total proved reserves of 7.1 MMBOE and 6.1 MMBOE, respectively, as of June 30, 2022 as estimated by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (“NSAI”) an independent reservoir engineering firm.
● Increased proved reserves 55% since prior year-end primarily due to the acquisitions of the Jonah Field properties in April 2022 and Williston Basin properties in January 2022.
● Maintained a strong financial position with low leverage.
Proved Reserves
Proved oil equivalent reserves as of June 30, 2022 were 36.2 MMBOE, a 55% increase from the previous year primarily due to the acquisitions of properties in the Williston Basin and Jonah Field in January 2022 and April 2022, respectively. The Standardized Measure for proved reserves increased 259% to $314.8 million, primarily due to the acquisitions of
properties in the Williston Basin and Jonah Field and an increase in the SEC mandated trailing 12-month average first day of the month prices for oil and natural gas. Prices increased from $49.72 per barrel of oil, $2.46 per MMBtu of natural gas and $19.81 per barrel of NGLs at June 30, 2021 to $85.82 per barrel of oil, $5.19 per MMBtu of natural gas and $44.24 per barrel of NGLs at June 30, 2022. Our proved reserves consist of 32% oil, 49% natural gas, and 19% NGLs; 90% are classified as proved developed producing and 10% are proved undeveloped.
The following table is a summary of our proved reserves as of June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Additional property and project information is included under Item 1. Business and in Note 5, “Property and Equipment” and our Supplemental Disclosure about Oil and Natural Gas Properties (unaudited) to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, and in Exhibit 99.1 and 99.2 of this Form 10-K.
At June 30, 2022, we had total net proved reserves of 36.2 MMBOE, a 12.8 MMBOE increase from the previous year of 23.4 MMBOE. The net increase in total proved reserves was the result of acquisitions of 9.3 MMBOE, additions and extensions of 3.6 MMBOE and net positive revisions of 2.1 MMBOE, partially offset by production of 2.2 MMBOE. Net positive revisions of 2.1 MMBOE increased primarily due to improvement in SEC trailing 12-month pricing partially offset by the removal of 1.8 MMBOE of PUDs related to Test Site V and 0.7 MMBOE of PDP at our Delhi Field property.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Geopolitical factors
The global economy has been deeply impacted by the effects of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic and related efforts to mitigate the spread of the disease. These events led to crude oil prices falling to historic lows during the second quarter of 2020 and remaining depressed through much of 2020.
In 2021, the demand for oil and natural gas began to recover primarily as a result of the roll-out of the COVID-19 vaccine and lessening of pandemic related government restrictions on individuals and businesses. In addition, the recent special military operation of Russia into Ukraine and the subsequent sanctions imposed on Russia and other actions have created significant market uncertainties, including uncertainties around potential supply disruptions for oil and natural gas, which has further enhanced volatility in global commodity prices in the first half of 2022. Given the dynamic nature of these events, we cannot reasonably estimate the period of time that these market conditions will persist.
Currently, none of our oil and natural gas properties are operated by us. As a result, in the past we have had limited ability to influence or control the operation or future development of such properties. Despite these uncertainties, we remain focused on our long-term objectives and continue to be proactive with our third-party operators to review capital expenditures and alter plans as appropriate to increase shareholder value.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2022, we had $8.3 million in cash and cash equivalents compared to $5.3 million at June 30, 2021. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources during the year ended June 30, 2022 were cash provided by operations as well as net borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. Our primary uses of liquidity and capital resources for the year ended June 30, 2022 were acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties and cash dividend payments to our common stockholders. As of June 30, 2022, working capital was $6.1 million, a decrease of $5.4 million from working capital of $11.5 million as of June 30, 2021.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility has a maximum capacity of $50.0 million subject to a borrowing base determined by the lender based on the value of our oil and natural gas properties. The Senior Secured Credit Facility has a current borrowing base of $50.0 million, with $21.3 million drawn as of June 30, 2022. Since year-end, we have paid down another $9.0 million under our Senior Secured Credit Facility and as of August 31, 2022, we have $12.3 million outstanding. The Senior Secured Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our reserves associated with our oil and natural gas properties and matures on April 9, 2024.
Any future borrowings bear interest, at our option, at either the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 2.75% or the Prime Rate, as defined under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, plus 1.0%. The Senior Secured Credit Facility contains covenants requiring the maintenance of (i) a total leverage ratio of not more than 3.00 to 1.00, (ii) a current ratio of not less than 1.00 to 1.00, and (iii) a consolidated tangible net worth of not less than $40.0 million, each as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility. It also contains other customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default. As of June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
We are currently working on our annual redetermination with MidFirst Bank. We expect that our borrowing base will remain at $50.0 million and the Margined Collateral Value, as defined in the Ninth Amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Facility, will be set at $125.0 million. We are required to enter into hedges on a rolling 12-month basis when the borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility exceed 25% of the Margined Collateral Value. Based on the current amount outstanding, the utilization percentage under the required hedging covenant is below the minimum utilization threshold of 25% and as a result we are not required to enter into additional hedges at this time. At each redetermination, our Margined Collateral Value takes into account the estimated value of our oil and natural gas properties, proved developed reserves, total indebtedness, and other relevant factors consistent with customary oil and natural gas lending criteria.
On February 7, 2022, we entered into the Ninth Amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. This amendment, among other things, modified the definition of utilization percentage related to the required hedging covenant such that for the purposes of determining the amount of future production to hedge, the utilization of the Senior Secured Credit Facility will be based on the Margined Collateral Value, as defined in the agreement, to the extent it exceeds the borrowing base then in effect. This amendment also required us to enter into hedges for the next 12-month period ending February 2023, covering 25% of expected oil and natural gas production over that period.
On November 9, 2021, we entered into the Eighth Amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. This amendment, among other things, increased the borrowing base to $50.0 million and added a hedging covenant whereby we must hedge a certain amount of our future production on a rolling 12-month basis when 25% or more of the borrowing base is utilized. The hedging covenant was amended in the Ninth Amendment, as discussed above.
On August 5, 2021, we entered into the Seventh Amendment of our Senior Secured Credit Facility which, among other things, added definitions for the terms “Acquired Entity or Mineral Interests” and “Acquired Entity or Mineral Interests EBITDA Adjustment.” Additionally, the consolidated tangible net worth covenant level was reduced to $40.0 million from $50.0 million.
We have historically funded operations through cash from operations and working capital. The primary source of cash is the sale of produced crude oil, natural gas, and NGLs. A portion of these cash flows is used to fund capital expenditures and pay cash dividends to shareholders. We expect to manage near-future development activities for our properties with cash flows from operating activities and existing working capital.
We are pursuing new growth opportunities through acquisitions and other transactions. In addition to cash on hand, we have access to the undrawn portion of the borrowing base available under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. We also have an effective shelf registration statement with the SEC under which we may issue up to $500.0 million of new debt or equity securities.
The Board of Directors instituted a cash dividend on common stock in December 2013. We have since paid 35 consecutive quarterly dividends. Distribution of a substantial portion of free cash flow in excess of operating and capital requirements through cash dividends remains a priority of our financial strategy, and it is our long-term goal to increase
dividends over time, as appropriate. During the industry downturn primarily due to COVID-19, effective in the quarter ended June 30, 2020, the Board of Directors adjusted the quarterly dividend rate from $0.10 per share to $0.025 per share. The reduction in the dividend rate at that time allowed us to conserve cash for additional financial flexibility while continuing to reward shareholders with a yield of approximately 3% at the then current stock price levels. In light of our improving financial performance and industry outlook, the Board of Directors has since increased the dividend rate, with the most recent increase occurring on September 12, 2022, when the Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.12 per share payable on September 30, 2022.
Also, on September 8, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, under which we are approved to repurchase up to $25 million of our common stock through December 31, 2024. We intend to fund any repurchases from working capital and cash provided by operating activities. As we continue to focus on our goal of maximizing total shareholder return, the Board of Directors along with the management team believe that a share repurchase program is complimentary to the existing dividend policy and is a tax efficient means to further improve shareholder return. Refer to Note 15, “Subsequent Events,” for a further discussion of our share repurchase program.
Capital Expenditures
For the year ended June 30, 2022, we incurred $2.6 million on development capital expenditures, $26.4 million for the Jonah Field Acquisition (net of customary purchase price adjustments, excluding $3.0 million in non-cash asset retirement obligations), and $25.2 million for the Williston Basin Acquisition (net of customary purchase price adjustments, excluding $2.4 million in non-cash asset retirement obligations) and less than $0.1 million at the Delhi Field and Hamilton Dome Field, for plugging and abandoning costs.
Based on discussions with our operators, we expect capital workover projects to continue in all the fields. At Delhi Field, we anticipate capital costs for a NGL plant heat exchanger project which is currently underway. Overall, for fiscal year 2023, we expect budgeted capital expenditures to be in the range of $6.5 million to $9.5 million, which excludes any potential acquisitions. Our expected capital expenditures for the next 12 months include Foundation, the operator of our Williston Basin properties, drilling two sidetrack locations targeting the Birdbear formation. Our fiscal year 2023 budget does not include any capital expenditures for drilling at our Pronghorn and Three Forks locations.
As of June 30, 2022, our PUD reserves included 3.6 MMBOE of reserves and approximately $61.7 million of future development costs associated with the Williston Basin properties.
Funding for our anticipated capital expenditures over the near-term is expected to be met from cash flows from operations and current working capital, as well as borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility as needed for future acquisitions or development of PUD reserves at our Pronghorn and Three Forks locations.
Full Cost Pool Ceiling Test
As of June 30, 2022, our capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties were below the full cost valuation ceiling; however, we could experience an impairment if commodity price levels were to substantially decline. Lower commodity prices would reduce the excess, or cushion, of our valuation ceiling over our capitalized costs and may adversely impact our ceiling tests in future quarters. We cannot give assurance that a write-down of capitalized oil and natural gas properties will not be required in the future. Under the full cost method of accounting, capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated depletion, depreciation, and amortization and related deferred taxes, are limited to the estimated future net cash flows from proved oil and natural gas reserves, discounted at 10%, plus the lower of cost or fair value of unproved properties, as adjusted for related income tax effects (the valuation “ceiling”). If capitalized costs exceed the full cost ceiling, the excess would be charged to expense as a write-down of oil and natural gas properties in the quarter in which the excess occurred. The quarterly ceiling test calculation requires that we use the average first day of the month price for our petroleum products during the 12-month period ending with the balance sheet date. The prices used in calculating our ceiling test as of June 30, 2022 were $85.82 per barrel of oil, $5.19 per MMBtu of natural gas and $44.24 per barrel of NGLs. At December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, we recorded ceiling test impairment charges of $15.2 million and $9.6 million, respectively. The ceiling test impairments were driven by decreases in the first-day-of-the-month average price for oil used in the ceiling test calculation. At June 30, 2022, a 10% decrease in commodity
prices used to determine our proved reserves would not have resulted in an impairment of our oil and natural gas properties.
Overview of Cash Flow Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased $47.7 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to an increased average daily production and an approximate $13.26 per BOE average realized price increase which both contributed to higher revenues in fiscal year 2022.
Cash used in investing activities increased $36.1 million primarily due to the acquisition of the Jonah Field properties in April 2022 totaling $26.4 million (net of customary purchase price adjustments) and Williston Basin properties in January 2022 totaling $25.8 million (net of customary purchase price adjustments), compared to the acquisition of the Barnett Shale properties in May 2021 for $18.3 million (net of customary purchase price adjustments). In addition, capital expenditures increased $1.0 million in fiscal year 2022 due to increased capital workovers for certain return-to-production projects now viable with the increase in commodity prices.
Net cash flows provided by financing activities were $5.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to $0.3 million of net cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, we had borrowings of $4.0 million outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. During the year ended June 30, 2022, we increased these borrowings by a net $17.3 million, ending the year with $21.3 million outstanding under the Senior Secured Credit Facility. In fiscal year 2022, we used cash of $11.8 million for dividends paid to our common stockholders compared to $4.3 million in fiscal year 2021.
Results of Operations
Years Ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
We reported net income of $32.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to a net loss of $16.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The following table summarizes the comparison of financial information for the periods presented:
(1) Equivalent oil reserves are defined as six MCF of natural gas and 42 gallons of NGLs to one barrel of oil conversion ratio which reflects energy equivalence and not price equivalence. Natural gas prices per MCF and NGL prices per barrel often differ significantly from the equivalent amount of oil.
(2) Amounts exclude the impact of cash paid or received on the settlement of derivative contracts since we did not elect to apply hedge accounting.
Revenues
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 revenues increased 233.1% to $108.9 million compared to $32.7 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in revenue is primarily due to a 145% increase in average daily equivalent production from 2,430 BOEPD to 5,953 BOEPD due the addition of the Jonah Field Acquisition in April 2022, Williston Basin Acquisition in January 2022, and Barnett Shale Acquisition in May 2021, which increased current fiscal year production by approximately 518 BOEPD, 241 BOEPD, and 2,847 BOEPD, respectively. In addition, our average realized commodity prices (excluding the impact of derivative contracts) increased approximately $13.26 per BOE, or 36%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to June 30, 2021. Oil and natural gas prices are inherently volatile and began to stabilize in 2021 and continuing into 2022. Our average realized oil price was higher primarily due to the recovery of WTI pricing in 2022, as the demand for oil has begun to recover primarily as a result of the roll-out of the COVID -19 vaccines, lessening of pandemic related government restrictions on individuals and businesses, and sanctions affecting Russian oil and natural gas supplies.
Lease Operating Costs
The following table summarizes CO2 costs per Mcf and CO2 volumes for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. CO2 purchase costs are for the Delhi Field. Under our contract with the Delhi Field operator, purchased CO2 is priced at 1% of the realized oil price in the field per Mcf, plus sales taxes and transportation costs as per contract terms.
The $4.6 million increase in CO2 costs for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily due to a 68.2% increase in purchased CO2 volumes combined with a 50.7% increase in CO2 costs per MCF, which was driven by a 78.8% increase in our average realized oil price. The increase in purchased CO2 volumes is due to the completion of preventative maintenance on the pipeline that supplies newly purchased CO2 to the Delhi Field which resulted in temporary suspension of CO2 purchases for the three months ended September 30, 2021. Additionally, CO2 purchase nominations increased throughout fiscal year 2022 to compensate for reduced reservoir pressure. CO2 purchases provide approximately 20% of the injected volumes in the field and the field’s recycle facilities provide the other 80%. The pipeline is owned and operated by Denbury and we do not have any ownership in the pipeline. On a per unit basis, CO2 costs were $3.55 per BOE and $3.45 per BOE for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Ad valorem and production taxes were $7.0 million and $1.3 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. On a per unit basis, ad valorem and production taxes were $3.20 per BOE and $1.44 per BOE for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in ad valorem and production taxes is primarily due to increases in oil and natural gas prices and increased production volumes described above as production taxes are based on sales at the wellhead.
Compared to fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, other lease operating costs increased 177.6% primarily due to the Jonah Field Acquisition in April 2022, Williston Basin Acquisition in January 2022 and Barnett Shale Acquisition in May 2021. Other lease operating costs per BOE for our Jonah Field, Williston Basin and Barnett Shale properties were approximately $10.69 per BOE, $21.86 per BOE and $14.70 per BOE, respectively, for the years ended June 30, 2022. Other lease operating costs for the Delhi and Hamilton Dome fields increased $0.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively, due to higher labor, electricity and chemical expenses during the year ended June 30, 2022.
Depletion expense increased $2.6 million or 53.3% from $4.9 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 to $7.5 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 primarily due to an increase in production. On a per unit basis, depletion expense was $3.46 per BOE and $5.53 per BOE for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The integration of the Jonah Field properties in April 2022, Williston Basin properties in January 2022, and Barnett Shale properties in May 2021 together with the ceiling test impairments recorded during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 contributed to the overall lower composite depletion per BOE rate for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Impairment of Proved Property
We utilize the full cost method of accounting for our oil and natural gas properties under the full cost method of accounting, capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated depletion, depreciation, and amortization and related deferred taxes, are limited to the estimated future net cash flows from proved oil and natural gas reserves, discounted at 10%, plus the lower of cost or fair value of unproved properties included in the amortization base, plus the cost of unproved properties excluded from amortization, as adjusted for related income tax effects (the valuation “ceiling”). As of June 30, 2022, our net book value of oil and natural gas properties did not exceed the current ceiling. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded a proved property impairment of $24.8 million primarily as a result of the decline in the price of oil over the historical 12-month period.
Impairment of Well Lift Inc. - Related Expenses
Our royalty rights and investment in Well Lift, Inc. (“WLI”) resulted from the separation of our artificial lift technology operations in December 2015. We conveyed our patents and other intellectual property to WLI and retained a 5% royalty on future gross revenues associated with the technology. We own approximately 18% of the common stock and 100% of the preferred stock of WLI and account for our investment in this private company at cost less impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer, if such were to occur. We evaluate the investment for impairment when we identify any events or changes in circumstances that might have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment. As of March 31, 2021, we reviewed our investment in WLI for potential impairment and, as a result, recorded an impairment expense of $0.1 million. This impairment charge was recorded based on a variety of factors including the level of activity associated with this technology.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 increased $1.2 million, or 22.1%, to $6.7 million compared to $5.5 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to approximately $0.2 million for salary and employee benefits due to additional personnel, $0.3 million in severance, $0.2 million for professional fees related to increased accounting services as a result of the Jonah Field Acquisition, the Williston Basin Acquisition and the Barnett Shale Acquisition, and $0.3 million for increased business development activity. On a per unit basis, general and administrative expenses decreased $3.11 per BOE to $3.09 per BOE for the year ended June 30, 2022 from $6.20 per BOE for the prior year. The decrease in general and administrative expenses on a per unit basis are due to the increased production volumes described above.
Stock-based Compensation Expenses
Stock-based compensation decreased $1.1 million, or 90%, to $0.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $1.3 million the prior period due to a $1.2 million reduction in current period expense related to the forfeiture of unvested shares in connection with severance.
Net Gain (Loss) on Derivative Contracts
Periodically, we utilize commodity derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to fluctuations in oil and natural gas prices. We have elected not to designate our open derivative contracts for hedge accounting, and accordingly, we recorded the net change in the mark-to-market valuation of the derivative contracts in the consolidated statements of operations. The amounts recorded on the consolidated statements of operations related to derivative contracts represent the (i) gains (losses) related to fair value adjustments on our open, or unrealized, derivative contracts, and (ii) gains (losses) on settlements of derivative contracts for positions that have settled or been realized. The table below summarizes our net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on derivative contracts as well as the impact of net realized (gains) losses on our average realized prices for the periods presented. As a result of the Williston Basin Acquisition in January 2022 and Jonah Field Acquisition in April 2022, we were required by the terms of our Senior Secured Credit Facility to hedge a portion of our production. The increase in commodity prices since entering into the hedges resulted in a realized loss on hedges for the year ended June 30, 2022 and an unrealized loss due to the mark-to-market value of
remaining hedges. Certain of our hedges begin to expire in October 2022 with our final hedges expiring March 2023. As of June 30, 2022, we had a $0.2 million derivative asset all of which was classified as current, and a $2.2 million derivative liability, all of which was classified as current.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $0.5 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021 primarily due to the increased borrowings outstanding on our Senior Secured Credit Facility due to our acquisitions throughout the year.
Income tax (expense) provision
For the year ended June 30, 2022, we recognized income tax expense of $8.5 million on net income before income taxes of $41.1 million compared to an income tax benefit of $5.0 million on net loss before income taxes of $21.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires that we select certain accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of the assets, liabilities, and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These policies, together with our estimates, have a significant effect on our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are included in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Events and Accounting Policies” to our consolidated statements in Item 8. Following is a discussion of our most critical accounting estimates, judgments, and uncertainties that are inherent in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties. Companies engaged in the production of oil and natural gas are required to follow accounting rules that are unique to the oil and natural gas industry. We apply the full cost accounting method for our oil and natural gas properties as prescribed by SEC Regulation S-X Rule 4-10. Under this method of accounting, the costs of unsuccessful and successful, exploration and development activities are capitalized as properties and equipment. This includes any internal costs that are directly related to property acquisition, exploration, and development activities but does not include any costs related to production, general corporate overhead, or similar activities. Gain or loss on the sale or other disposition of oil and natural gas properties is not recognized unless the gain or loss would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves. Oil and natural gas properties include costs that are excluded from costs being depleted or amortized. Oil and natural gas property costs excluded represent investments in unevaluated properties. We exclude these costs until the property has been evaluated. Costs are transferred to the full cost pool as the properties are evaluated. As of June 30, 2022, we had no unevaluated property costs. Oil and natural gas properties include costs that are excluded from depletion and amortization, which represent investments in unproved and unevaluated properties and include non-producing leasehold, geologic and geophysical costs associated with leasehold or drilling interests, and exploration drilling costs.
Estimates of Proved Reserves. The estimated quantities of proved oil and natural gas reserves have a significant impact on the underlying financial statements. The estimated quantities of proved reserves are used to calculate depletion expense and the estimated future net cash flows associated with those proved reserves is the basis for determining impairment under the quarterly ceiling test calculation. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is very complex and requires significant decisions in the evaluation of all available geologic, geophysical, engineering, and economic data. Estimated reserves are often subject to future revisions, which could be substantial, based on the availability of additional information; this includes reservoir performance, additional development activity, new geologic and geophysical data, additional drilling, technological advancements, price changes, and other economic factors. As a result, material revisions to existing reserve estimates may occur from time to time. Although every reasonable effort is made to ensure that the reported reserve estimates prepared by our third-party independent engineers represent the most accurate assessments possible, the subjective decisions and variances in available data for the properties make these estimates generally less precise than other estimates included in our financial statements. Material revisions to reserve estimates and/or significant changes in commodity prices could substantially affect our estimated future net cash flows of our proved reserves. These changes could affect our quarterly ceiling test calculation and could significantly affect our depletion rate. A 10% decrease in commodity prices used to determine our proved reserves as of June 30, 2022 would not have resulted in an impairment of our oil and natural gas properties. Holding all other factors constant, a reduction our proved reserve estimates at June 30, 2022 of 10% would affect depletion, depreciation, and amortization expense by approximately $0.4 million.
On December 31, 2008, the SEC issued its final rule on the modernization of reporting oil and natural gas reserves. The rule allows consideration of new technologies in evaluating reserves, generally limits the designation of proved reserves to those projects forecasted to be drilled five years from the initial recognition date of such reserves, allows companies to disclose their probable and possible reserves to investors, requires reporting of oil and natural gas reserves using an average price based on the previous 12-month unweighted arithmetic average first-day-of-the-month price rather than year-end prices, revises the disclosure requirements for oil and natural gas operations, and revises accounting for the limitation on capitalized costs for full cost companies.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets. We make certain estimates and judgments in determining our income tax expense for financial reporting purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities that arise from differences in the timing and recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial reporting purposes. Our federal and state income tax returns are generally not prepared or filed before the consolidated financial statements are prepared or filed; therefore, we estimate the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at the end of each period as well as the effects of tax rate changes, tax credits, and net operating loss carry backs and carry forwards. Adjustments related to these estimates are recorded in our tax provision in the period in which we file our income tax returns. Further, we must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover or utilize our deferred tax assets. If recovery is not likely, we must record a valuation allowance against such deferred tax assets for the amount we would not expect to recover; this would result in an increase to our income tax expense. The deferred tax asset and valuation allowance of $0.1 million related to the portion of the NOLs that are limited by IRC Section 382 were written off during the year ended June 30, 2022.
Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in making the assessment of the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets. The Company has historically established a valuation allowance against net operating losses and other deferred tax assets to the extent it believes the future benefit from these assets will not be realized in the statutory carryforward periods, based upon the level of historical taxable income and projections for future taxable income over the periods for which the deferred tax assets are deductible. At the time of this report, we have not recorded a valuation allowance for our expected inability to realize the future benefits of certain federal and state deferred tax assets as further discussed in Note 7, “Income Taxes”.
Stock-based Compensation. The fair value, and for certain awards the expected vesting period, of our performance-based awards were determined using a Monte Carlo simulation. This technique uses a geometric Brownian motion model with defined variables and randomly generates values for each variable through multiple trials. Variables include stock price volatility, expected term of the award, the expected risk-free interest rate, and the expected dividend yield of our stock. The risk-free interest rate used is the U.S. Treasury yield for bonds matching the expected term of the award on the date of grant. Vesting of performance-based awards is based on our total common stock return compared to a peer
group of other companies in our industry with comparable market capitalizations and, for certain awards, our share price attaining a set target.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. Refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Events and Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for discussion of the recent accounting pronouncements issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board.