Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section entitled “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company leveraging a deep understanding of immunobiology to develop novel therapeutics to treat severe autoimmune and inflammatory, or immuno-inflammatory, disorders with high unmet medical need. Our initial product candidate, itolizumab (EQ001), is a clinical-stage, first-in-class monoclonal antibody that selectively targets the novel immune checkpoint receptor CD6. CD6 plays a central role in the modulation of effector T cell, or Teff cell, activity and trafficking, which drives a number of immuno-inflammatory diseases across multiple therapeutic areas. Therefore, we believe itolizumab (EQ001) may have broad therapeutic utility in treating a large and diverse set of severe immuno-inflammatory diseases.
In February 2022, we expanded our pipeline of novel immunomodulatory drug candidates, adding two first-in-class clinical stage assets, EQ101 and EQ102, and a proprietary product discovery platform, through the acquisition of Bioniz Therapeutics, Inc., or Bioniz, a privately held, clinical stage biotechnology company. Lead assets acquired are specific multi-cytokine inhibitors of key disease-driving, clinically validated cytokine targets aimed at addressing unmet needs across a range of immune-inflammatory indications.
This novel and differentiated pipeline of first-in-class immunology assets has the potential to address unmet medical needs in numerous areas, including transplant science, hematology, dermatology, gastroenterology, rheumatology, oncology and pulmonology.
Our pipeline is focused on developing itolizumab (EQ001), EQ101 and EQ102 as potential best-in-class, disease modifying treatments for multiple severe immuno-inflammatory disorders. We currently have active clinical development programs for itolizumab (EQ001) for the treatment of acute graft-versus-host disease, or aGVHD and lupus/lupus nephritis. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed a Phase 1b study of itolizumab (EQ001) in patients with uncontrolled asthma and met our primary objective of safety and tolerability. However, as a result of the ongoing pandemic and associated challenges conducting asthma trials, we decided to prioritize our clinical development efforts of itolizumab (EQ001) in our ongoing programs in aGVHD and lupus/lupus nephritis and will be reassessing our potential future development strategy in asthma. We are in the process of planning for the clinical development of EQ101 and EQ102 and currently expect to initiate a Phase 2 study of EQ101 in alopecia areata and a Phase 1 study of EQ102 in celiac disease, both in the second half of 2022.
We have ongoing translational biology programs to assess the therapeutic utility of itolizumab (EQ001) in additional indications where CD6 and its ligand, activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM), play an important role in the pathogenesis of T cell mediated diseases. In addition, through the acquisition of Bioniz, we now also have a proprietary product discovery platform that we can leverage to design novel peptides to target and inhibit multiple cytokines that are involved in validated biological and disease pathways. Our selection of current and future indications is driven by our analysis of the scientific, translational, clinical and commercial rationale for advancing our product candidates into further development.
Since our inception, substantially all of our efforts have been focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing rights to itolizumab (EQ001), conducting non-clinical research, filing three INDs, conducting clinical development of itolizumab (EQ001), acquiring new assets, and the general and administrative activities associated with operating a public company. Furthermore, in connection with the acquisition of Bioniz, we have expanded our pipeline from one product candidate to three product candidates, all at various stages of development. This expansion may accelerate the rate at which our operating losses increase as we incur costs to further the development and seek regulatory approval for these product candidates. We have not generated any revenue from product sales or otherwise. Since inception, we have primarily financed our operations through our initial public offering, or IPO, a follow-on public offering, a registered direct offering, private placements of convertible promissory notes, term loans and sales of our common stock through “at-the-market” sales agreements, or ATM offerings, with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies. We have incurred losses since our inception. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net losses were $39.1 million and $29.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $110.0 million. Substantially all of our operating
losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development activities, non-clinical and clinical activities and general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing losses into the foreseeable future. We anticipate our expenses will increase substantially as we advance our research and development activities, including the ongoing and future clinical development of itolizumab (EQ001), potentially expand the indications in which we conduct clinical development of itolizumab (EQ001), potentially acquire additional products and/or product candidates, seek regulatory approval for and potentially commercialize any approved product candidates, hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property, incur increasing expense associated with our outstanding debt, and incur general corporate costs. We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our currently planned operations for at least the next 12 months.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for itolizumab (EQ001) or any future product candidate, which is unlikely to happen within the next 12 months, if ever. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, and collaboration and license agreements. However, we may not be able to secure additional financing or enter into such other arrangements in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. In addition, subject to limited exceptions, our loan and security agreement with Oxford Finance LLC and Silicon Valley Bank also prohibits us from incurring indebtedness without the prior written consent of the lenders, which consent may be withheld at their sole and absolute discretion. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, reduce or terminate our research and development programs or other operations, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We currently have no products approved for sale, and we have not generated any revenues to date. In the future, we may generate revenue from collaboration or license agreements we may enter into with respect to our product candidates, as well as product sales from any approved product, which approval is unlikely to happen within the next 12 months, if ever. Our ability to generate product revenues will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of itolizumab (EQ001) and any future product candidates. If we fail to complete the development of itolizumab (EQ001) or any future product candidates in a timely manner, or to obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates, our ability to generate future revenue and our results of operations and financial position would be materially adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with our non-clinical research and clinical development of itolizumab (EQ001). Our research and development expenses include:
 salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation and benefits, for personnel in research and development functions;
 external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as consultants and advisors for research and development;
 costs of services performed by third parties, such as contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
 costs related to preparing and filing three INDs with the FDA and other regulatory interactions and submissions;
 pharmacovigilance costs related to global drug safety monitoring and reporting;
 external expenses related to chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) and supply of drug product; and
 costs related to general overhead expenses such as travel, insurance, rent expenses, lab supplies and equipment associated with our research and development activities.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to CROs and consultants in connection with our non-clinical research and clinical development.
We recognize the Australian Research and Development Tax Incentive, or the Tax Incentive, as a reduction of research and development expense. The amounts are determined based on our eligible research and development expenditures and are non-refundable, provided that in order to qualify for the Tax Incentive the filing entity must have revenue of less than AUD $20.0 million during the tax year for which a reimbursement claim is made and cannot be controlled by an income tax exempt entity. The Tax Incentive is recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the Tax Incentive will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred, and the amount can be reliably measured or reliably estimated.
We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we advance the development of itolizumab (EQ001), potentially expand the number of indications for which we are developing itolizumab (EQ001), and as we conduct research and development related to the recently acquired product candidates EQ101 and EQ102. The successful development of any of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of pre-clinical and clinical development, which has been further exacerbated by the uncertain magnitude, extent and duration of impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of itolizumab (EQ001) or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from itolizumab (EQ001) or from any of our other product candidates may commence. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
Completion of clinical trials may take several years or more, and the length of time generally varies according to the type, complexity, novelty, and intended use of a product candidate. The cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during clinical development, including, among others:
•managing the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and related precautions on the operation of our clinical trials;
•per patient clinical trial costs;
•the number of clinical trials required for approval;
•the number of sites and the number of countries included in our clinical trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the inefficiencies and additional costs related to any delays and potential restarts of clinical trials;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the number of patients that participate in our clinical trials;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients in our clinical trials;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•the number and complexity of procedures, analyses and tests performed during our clinical trials;
•the costs of procuring drug product for our clinical trials;
•the phase of development of the product candidate; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation and benefits, and consulting fees for executive, human resources, investor relations, finance, and accounting functions. Other significant costs include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, insurance, travel, board expenses, facility costs and taxes.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting an expanding infrastructure, increased legal, audit, tax and other professional fees associated with being a public company and maintaining compliance with stock exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company, and accounting and investor relations costs. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any product candidate, we expect to incur expenses associated with building the infrastructure and capabilities to commercialize such product. However, the timing of any such approval is highly uncertain, and it may be several years, if ever, that we receive any such regulatory approval.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest and amortization of discounts on our outstanding term loans payable.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and is recognized when earned.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net consists primarily of net foreign currency transaction losses and gains related to our Australian subsidiary.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expense primarily includes the following changes:
•$3.4 million increase in employee compensation and benefits, primarily related to increased headcount;
•$3.4 million increase in clinical development expenses, primarily driven by start-up expenses related to our EQUATOR study, a lower Tax Incentive benefit from the Australian Taxation Office, higher costs associated with our EQUATE, EQUIP, and EQUALISE studies, partially offset by lower costs related to a Phase 3 COVID-19 clinical trial that we decided in 2020 not to commence;
•$0.4 million increase in overhead expenses primarily driven by higher recruiting expenses and the expansion of our laboratory operations; offset by
•$0.2 million decrease in consulting expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense primarily includes the following changes:
•$1.8 million increase in employee compensation and benefits, primarily related to increased headcount;
•$0.1 million increase in overhead expenses; offset by
•$0.5 million decrease in corporate consulting expenses; and
•$0.2 million decrease in legal and professional expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Interest expense consists of interest on our term notes payable which had a consistent interest rate for 2021 and 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower interest rates on our short-term investments during 2021 compared to 2020.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other expense, net was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million of other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change during 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by increases in net foreign currency transaction losses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2021, we raised an aggregate of approximately $178.1 million in gross proceeds pursuant to our IPO, follow-on public offering, private placements of convertible promissory notes, proceeds from term loans and proceeds from equity issuances under our ATM facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had $50.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and $30.3 million in short-term investments.
Sources of Liquidity
Registered Direct Offering
In February 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with two institutional investors relating to the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 4,285,710 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,285,713 shares of common stock for aggregate gross proceeds to us from this offering of approximately $30.0 million, excluding any proceeds we may receive upon exercise of the warrants. No underwriter or placement agent participated in the offering. The warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance at an initial exercise price of $14.00 per share and are exercisable on a cashless basis. The warrants expire on the earlier of (i) the fifth anniversary of issuance or (ii) the 15th calendar date following the date on which we close upon an equity financing that results in not less than $25 million in gross proceeds to us at a price per share of common stock equal to or greater than $25.00, at which time, all remaining warrants will automatically exercise on a cashless basis.
Follow-on Public Offering
In August 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,461,169 shares of common stock at $7.00 per share, which included 461,169 shares sold pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We received gross proceeds from this offering totaling $38.2 million. Net proceeds from this offering, net of underwriting discounts and related issuance costs, were $35.7 million.
2020 Purchase Agreement
In March 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC, or Lincoln Park, which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, we may sell
to Lincoln Park up to $15.0 million of shares of our common stock from time to time over the 36-month term of the Purchase Agreement. Upon execution of the Purchase Agreement, we issued 65,374 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park as commitment shares in accordance with the closing conditions contained within the Purchase Agreement. We have not sold any shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement through the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
At-the-Market Offering Program
In November 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sales AgreementSM with Jefferies to sell shares of our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $8.45 million, from time to time, through an ATM equity offering program under which Jefferies acts as sales agent, or the 2019 ATM Facility. Under the 2019 ATM Facility, we set certain parameters for the sale of shares, which may include but are not limited to the number of shares to be issued, the time period during which sales are requested to be made, and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. Jefferies was entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold plus reimbursement of certain expenses. As of December 31, 2020, the 2019 ATM Facility had been fully utilized. We sold an aggregate of 943,739 shares of our common stock under the 2019 ATM Facility for gross proceeds of $8.45 million.
On July 14, 2020, we entered into another Open Market Sales Agreement with Jefferies for a new ATM equity offering to sell shares of our common stock, from time to time, having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $150 million under which Jefferies would act as sales agent, or the 2020 ATM Facility. The 2020 ATM Facility provides that Jefferies is entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold. We are not obligated to make any sales under the 2020 ATM Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 788,685 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Facility, for gross proceeds of $10.4 million. We paid cash commissions on the gross proceeds, plus reimbursement expenses to Jefferies, legal fees and other issuance costs in the aggregate amount of $0.4 million, resulting in net proceeds of $10.0 million. There have been no further sales of shares under the 2020 ATM Facility through the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
September 2019 Loan Agreement
In September 2019, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or Loan Agreement, with Oxford Finance LLC and Silicon Valley Bank, or together, the Lenders, pursuant to which we can borrow up to $20.0 million in a series of term loans. Upon entering into the Loan Agreement, we borrowed $10.0 million, or the Term Loan. As of December 31, 2020, we were no longer eligible to receive the additional funding up to $10.0 million under the Loan Agreement.
The Term Loan matures on June 1, 2024, or the Maturity Date, and is repaid through interest-only payments through June 30, 2021, followed by 36 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. The Term Loan bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.25% and (ii) the sum of (a) the prime rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue, plus (b) 3.00%.
On December 18, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Loan Agreement, or the First Amendment, with the Lenders whereby if we achieved positive topline data in either our (a) Phase 1b aGVHD trial of itolizumab (EQ001) or (b) Phase 1b asthma trial of itolizumab (EQ001), supporting a formal decision to advance into Phase 2 development, and as confirmed by our Board of Directors, on or prior to June 30, 2021, the interest-only payments would be automatically extended through December 31, 2021.
On April 23, 2021, we entered into the Second Amendment to the Loan Agreement, or the Second Amendment, which added two new milestones: (i) we achieve positive data in our Phase 1b aGVHD trial of itolizumab (EQ001) supporting a formal decision to advance into Phase 2 or Phase 3 development, and as confirmed by our Board of Directors in written board minutes, or the Interest-Only Extension Milestone, and (ii) we initiate a pivotal Phase 3 aGVHD trial, or the Interest-Only Extension II Milestone. If we achieve the Interest-Only Extension Milestone on or prior to June 30, 2021, then interest-only payments will be automatically extended through June 30, 2022. If we achieve the Interest-Only Extension II Milestone on or prior to June 30, 2022, then interest-only payments will be automatically extended through September 30, 2022. The Second Amendment also amended the final payment percentage from 4.5% to 5.0%.
In February 2022, we entered into the Third Amendment to the Loan Agreement (the Third Amendment) which added Bioniz Therapeutics, Inc. as a secured party to the loan.
In May 2021, we achieved the Interest-Only Extension Milestone. Due to the achievement of the Interest-Only Extension Milestone, the interest-only payments were extended through June 30, 2022, followed by 24 equal monthly principal payments and interest. In March 2022, we obtained confirmation from Lenders that the Interest-Only Extension II milestone had been achieved, which further extends the interest-only payments through September 30, 2022.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and future activities, particularly as we advance and expand our clinical development of itolizumab (EQ001), including potential new indications, and as we conduct research and development activities related to the Bioniz assets. We expect that our primary uses of capital will be for clinical research and development services, preclinical research, manufacturing, legal and other regulatory compliance expenses, compensation and related expenses, risk management, and general overhead costs.
We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our currently planned operations for at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Furthermore, our operating plans may change, and we may need additional funds sooner than planned. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain. Because the outcome of these efforts is uncertain, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of itolizumab (EQ001) or any of our other product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of our ongoing and future clinical trials of itolizumab (EQ001) and other product candidates, including as such activities may be adversely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and evolving conflict in Ukraine;
•the number and scope of indications we decide to pursue for the development of itolizumab (EQ001) and our other product candidates;
•the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of any Biologics License Application, or BLA, we may submit for our product candidates;
•the costs and timing of manufacturing itolizumab (EQ001) and other product candidates, if approved;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our product candidates;
•the costs associated with being a public company;
•the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and
•the cost associated with commercializing itolizumab (EQ001) or any of our other product candidates, if approved for commercial sale.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, and collaboration and license agreements. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt could result in additional dilution to our stockholders and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the governing documents would likely include operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, and more recently with the conflict in Ukraine, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. If we raise additional funds through collaboration or license agreements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or that may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or other operations. Any of these actions could have a material effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We have experienced net losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since our inception and expect to continue to incur net losses into the foreseeable future. We had an accumulated deficit of $110.0 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect operating losses and negative cash flows to continue for at least the next several years as we continue to incur costs related to the development of itolizumab (EQ001) and our other product candidates.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of a net loss of $39.1 million adjusted for net non-cash expenses of $5.3 million and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. The primary non-cash expense adjustment to net loss was stock-based compensation. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the increase in operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the ramp up in our research and clinical development activities and increased headcount to support the growth of the company.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of a net loss of $29.8 million adjusted for net non-cash expenses of $3.9 million and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.3 million. The primary non-cash expense adjustment to net loss was stock-based compensation. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the increase in operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the ramp up in our research and clinical development activities and increased headcount to support the growth of the company.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $27.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We purchased $33.0 million of short-term investments and $60.5 million of our short-term investments matured during the period. Purchases of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $0.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $18.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We purchased $55.5 million of short-term investments and $37.1 million of our short-term investments matured during the period. Purchases of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $0.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $31.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We received net proceeds from the sale of shares related to our registered direct offering totaling $29.9 million and proceeds from both the issuance of shares under our employee stock purchase plan and proceeds from the exercise of stock options totaling $1.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $53.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We received net proceeds from the sale of shares related to our follow-on public offering totaling $35.7 million, net proceeds from the sale of shares under our ATM facilities totaling $18.1 million and proceeds from both the issuance of shares under our employee stock purchase plan and proceeds from the exercise of stock options totaling $0.2 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules, and similarly did not and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities. We do have certain contingent consideration liabilities in the form of potential milestone payments that are included in our Biocon License and in
our merger agreement with Bioniz which are not reflected in our balance sheet. However, based on our current operating plans and our assessment of the probability and potential timing of such payments, we believe those payments, if any, are remote and highly unlikely to come due within the next 12 months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expense
We are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants and contract research organizations, in connection with conducting research and development activities. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. We reflect research and development expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the preclinical or clinical study as measured by the timing of various aspects of the study or related activities. We determine accrual estimates through review of the underlying contracts along with preparation of financial models taking into account discussions with research and other key personnel as to the progress of studies, or other services being conducted. During the course of a study, we adjust our rate of expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
We measure employee and non-employee stock-based awards, including stock options and stock purchase rights, at grant-date fair value and record compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards. Estimating the fair value of stock option awards requires management to apply judgment and make estimates of certain assumptions, including the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options and the expected dividend yield on the measurement date. As a result, if factors change and management uses different assumptions, stock-based compensation expense could be materially different for future awards.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We record a full valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets unless, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process whereby (i) management determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (ii) for those tax positions that meet the more likely-than-not recognition threshold, management recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. We will recognize interest and penalties in income tax expense if and when incurred.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information concerning recent accounting pronouncements.