ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Throughout this section, unless otherwise noted, “we,” “us,” “EQRx” and the “Company” refer to EQRx, Inc. (formerly known as CM Life Sciences III Inc.) and its consolidated subsidiaries following the Business Combination with Legacy EQRx; references to “Legacy EQRx” refer to EQRx International, Inc. (formerly known as EQRx, Inc.) prior to the Business Combination; and references to “CMLS III” refer to CM Life Sciences III Inc. prior to the Business Combination.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed below and as set forth under “Risk Factors.” Please also refer to the section under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a new type of pharmaceutical company committed to developing and delivering innovative medicines to patients at radically lower prices. Our mission is to improve health for all with great, innovative, affordable medicines so that people with life-changing or chronic conditions can gain access to the medicines they need, physicians can treat patients without barriers to prescribing, and health systems can afford to make those medicines available, without restrictions, to the populations they serve in a financially sustainable manner. Launched in January 2020, our “New Pharma” solution starts with assembling a catalog of medicines at significant scale, targeting some of the most innovative clinical opportunities and highest drug cost categories of today and tomorrow, with an initial focus on oncology and immune-inflammatory diseases. We are focused on developing programs that are innovative, branded, and patent-protected that, if approved, have potential to be equivalent or superior to other therapies in their class. However, there is no guarantee our product candidates will be equivalent or superior to such other therapies. We do not currently have, and may never have, any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue to date, and may never become profitable. In addition, our business and pricing model is untested and may never be successful or generate sufficient revenue to lead to profitability.
Our team of leading drug hunters is building our catalog through:
● In-licensing clinical and preclinical stage programs to accelerate our business model;
● Building alliances with cutting-edge drug engineering platforms to build an earlier-stage pipeline of programs; and
● Establishing partnerships with other biopharma companies to develop combination therapies.
Assuming we are successful in obtaining regulatory approval, we plan to offer our catalog of innovative medicines to payers and health systems at radically lower prices, through a simple and transparent pricing model without surprise price increases. We are also assembling a Global Buyers’ Club by entering into long-term, trusted strategic partnerships with private and public payers, providers and health systems so they and the patients they serve can gain access to our, if approved, equally as good or better medicines at radically lower prices. We will offer simple and transparent pricing models to provide an opportunity for dramatic savings in these high-cost drug areas. Our current pipeline of product candidates includes two late-stage programs each acquired in 2020: aumolertinib (EQ143), a third-generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, in-licensed from (Shanghai) Healthtech Co., LTD and Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Group Company LTD (collectively, Hansoh), and sugemalimab (EQ165, also known as CS1001), an anti-programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) antibody, in-licensed from CStone Pharmaceuticals (CStone).
On December 17, 2021 (the Closing Date), we consummated the Business Combination pursuant to a definitive merger agreement dated August 5, 2021 (the Merger Agreement), by and among Legacy EQRx, CMLS III and Clover III Merger Sub, Inc. (Merger Sub). As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy EQRx, with Legacy EQRx surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of CMLS III. As a result of the Business Combination, CMLS III was renamed EQRx, Inc. and Legacy EQRx was renamed EQRx International, Inc. The post combination company received net proceeds of approximately $1.3 billion upon the closing of the Business Combination and is eligible to receive up to an additional 50,000,000 shares of CMLS III Class A common stock pursuant to the Merger Agreement. The newly combined business now operates under the current EQRx management team.
Since our inception, we have focused primarily on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring product candidates, securing related intellectual property, establishing strategic collaborations with payers, integrated delivery networks and health systems, and conducting research and development activities for our programs. Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through private equity financings. To date, we have raised an aggregate of approximately $2.2 billion of gross proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred shares, convertible preferred notes that were issued in 2019 and subsequently converted into shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock (Series A), and our merger with CMLS III and associated PIPE financing
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $100.0 million and $250.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $358.5 million and $258.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future, as we seek regulatory approvals for our pipeline candidates, manufacture drug product and drug supply, maintain and expand our intellectual property portfolio, as well as hire additional personnel, pay for accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and consulting services, and pay costs associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and the requirements of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), director and officer liability insurance, investor and public relations activities and other expenses associated with operating as a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our preclinical studies, our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities and the expansion of our pipeline.
We do not currently have, and may never have, any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue to date. We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates, if ever, and as appropriate, complete clinical development. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capabilities to support product sales, manufacturing and distribution activities. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings or other sources, such as potential collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when needed, could have a negative effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Response to COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the novel COVID-19 virus as a global pandemic. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including expenses, clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. These situations, or others associated with COVID-19, could cause delays in our clinical trial plans, our ability to obtain regulatory approvals, and could
increase expected costs, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition. We implemented work-from-home and other policies, and are adapting to evolving federal, state and local health regulations as they evolve. Because of the nature of our current operations, COVID-19 has not had a significant impact on our operations or financial results to date.
Business Combination Transaction
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, on the Closing Date, each outstanding share of issued and outstanding common stock and preferred stock of Legacy EQRx was converted into the right to receive 0.627 shares (the Exchange Ratio) of the combined entity’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (Common Stock), resulting in the issuance of a total of 343,060,309 shares of Common Stock. Additionally, on the Closing Date, each option to purchase common stock of Legacy EQRx became an option to purchase shares of Common Stock of the combined company, subject to adjustment in accordance with the Exchange Ratio.
As of the Closing Date, each of the issued and outstanding shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock of CMLS III was reclassified as Common Stock, and each of the issued and outstanding 8,693,333 private warrants and 11,039,957 public warrants became exercisable for shares of Common Stock.
In connection with the Business Combination, CMLS III entered into agreements with existing and new investors to subscribe for and purchase an aggregate of 120.0 million shares of Common Stock (the PIPE Financing) that resulted in gross proceeds of $1.2 billion upon the closing of the PIPE Financing. The closing of the Business Combination was a precondition to the PIPE Financing.
Following the Closing Date, former holders of Legacy EQRx common stock, preferred stock and options (Earn-Out Service Providers) may receive a pro rata share of up to 35,000,000 additional shares of Common Stock if at any time between the 12-month anniversary of the Closing Date and the 36-month anniversary of the Closing Date (the Earn-Out Period), the Common Stock price is greater than or equal to $12.50 for a period of at least 20 out of 30 consecutive trading days, and up to 15,000,000 additional share of common stock if at any time during the Earn-Out Period the Common Stock price is greater than or equal to $16.50 for a period of at least 20 out of 30 consecutive trading days (the Earn-Out Shares).
The Business Combination has been accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization” in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under the reverse recapitalization model, the Business Combination was treated as Legacy EQRx issuing equity for the net assets of CMLS III, with no goodwill or intangible assets recorded. Under this method of accounting, CMLS III is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. This determination is primarily based on the fact that subsequent to the merger, Legacy EQRx stockholders have a majority of the voting power of the combined company, Legacy EQRx operations comprise all of the ongoing operations of the combined entity, Legacy EQRx governing body comprises a majority of the governing body of the combined company, and Legacy EQRx senior management comprises all of the senior management of the combined company.
Financial Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not recognized any revenue, including from product sales. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, or we out-license our products through license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future. However, there can be no assurance as to when we will generate such revenue, if at all.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates, salaries and benefits, and third-party license fees. We expense research and development costs as incurred, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, and other related costs for those employees involved in research and development efforts;
● external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations (CROs) as well as consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and development services;
● costs incurred under collaboration agreements;
● costs related to manufacturing material for our preclinical and clinical studies;
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
● facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, utilities and insurance.
We expense research and development costs as they are incurred. We estimate preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions, CROs, and clinical manufacturing organizations (CMOs), that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf based on actual time and expenses incurred by them. Further, we accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and adjust estimates accordingly.
We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the services have been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
We track external research and development costs on a program-by-program basis once we have identified a product candidate. We do not allocate employee costs, facilities costs, including depreciation, or other indirect costs, to specific programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research activities as well as for managing our preclinical development, clinical development and manufacturing activities.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses (in thousands):
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates and manufacturing processes, conduct discovery and research activities for our preclinical programs and expand our pipeline. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. Our clinical development costs are expected to increase significantly as we commence additional clinical trials. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially, particularly due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
● the scope, rate of progress, and expenses of our ongoing research activities as well as any preclinical studies, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND enabling studies;
● successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
● whether our product candidates show safety and efficacy in our clinical trials;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● the progress of our discovery collaborations with strategic partners;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
● commercializing product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● continued acceptable safety profile of products following any regulatory approval.
Any changes in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates in preclinical and clinical development could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of these product candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or focus on other product candidates. For example, if the FDA, EMA, MHRA or another regulatory authority were to delay our planned start of clinical trials or require us to conduct clinical trials or other testing beyond those that we currently expect or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our planned clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development of that product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related costs for our executive and administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes professional services, including legal, accounting and audit services and other consulting fees, costs associated with the partnership contracts we have in place with certain payers, integrated delivery networks and health systems, as well as facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, insurance and other general administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur significantly increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company. In addition, if and when we obtain regulatory approval for our pre-registrational programs, or any of our other product candidates, we expect to incur additional expenses related to the building of our team to support product sales and distribution activities.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Earn-Out Liability
Change in fair value of contingent earn-out liability includes the changes in fair value of the Earn-Out Shares, which were classified as liabilities as part of the Business Combination consideration.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities includes the changes in fair value of the Private Warrants and the Public Warrants, which are classified as liabilities, and were assumed as part of the Business Combination.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net primarily consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense) consists of miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense was $118.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $224.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $106.3 million was primarily driven by a decrease of $194.0 million in license and milestone fees associated with new compounds added to our pipeline during 2021 and 2020, partially offset by a $40.3 million increase in preclinical and clinical development costs, a $22.4 million increase in employee related expenses driven by significant growth in our research and development headcount to support the development of our pipeline, a $12.8 million increase in information technology, facilities and other allocated expenses that support our overall research and development activities, a $6.1 million increase in consulting and professional fees, and a $6.1 million increase in expense associated with our discovery collaboration agreements.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense was $78.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $25.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $52.6 million was primarily driven by a $39.4 million increase in employee related expenses driven by an increase in headcount to support the overall growth of the organization, a $9.5 million increase in consulting and professional fees, a $3.4 million increase in costs associated with the partnership contracts we have in place with certain payers, integrated delivery networks and health systems, and a $0.3 million increase in information technology, facilities, overhead allocations and other expenses.
Other Income, Net
Total other income, net was $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $96.3 million was primarily due to $87.1 million and $8.9 million of non-cash income related to the remeasurement of the contingent earn-out liability and warrant liabilities, respectively, as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have generated recurring net losses. We have not yet commercialized any product and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products until 2023, if at all. Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and common stock.
To date, we have raised an aggregate of approximately $2.2 billion of gross proceeds from the sale of convertible preferred shares, convertible preferred notes that were issued in 2019 and subsequently converted into shares of Legacy EQRx Series A convertible preferred stock, the Business Combination and the concurrent PIPE Financing. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $1.7 billion.
Funding Requirements
We believe that, prior to the consideration of revenue and associated costs from the potential future sales of any of our investigational products that may receive regulatory approval, our existing cash and cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021 of $1.7 billion will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2025, based on certain assumptions regarding our development programs and business development plans. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong and may change, and we could expend our capital resources sooner than we expect or slow our spend such that it will last longer than into 2025.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we seek regulatory approval, advance our product candidates, pursue commercialization of any approved product candidates and advance other candidates in our pipeline through preclinical and clinical development. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with our planned research and development and commercialization activities. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the FDA, EMA, MHRA and other regulatory authorities;
● the progress of our efforts to acquire, in-licence or sub-license rights to additional product candidates;
● the timing and amount of milestone and royalty payments that we are required to make or eligible to receive under our current or future collaboration and license agreements;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the cost and timing of completion of commercial-scale manufacturing activities;
● the extent to which we partner our programs, acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies or enter into additional collaborations;
● efforts to establish and develop our Global Buyer’s Club through which payers can access our future product candidates;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of our research programs and development of any additional product candidates that we may pursue;
● our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development and establish our commercial infrastructure;
● the cost of expanding, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio, including filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the cost of defending potential intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us or any of our product candidates;
● the effect of competing technological and market developments;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of aumolertinib and sugemalimab and any future product candidates for which we receive marketing approval; and
● the costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and other similar arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our intellectual property, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common shares. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities represent the cash receipts and disbursements related to all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. Operating cash flow is derived by adjusting our net loss for non-cash operating items such as depreciation, and stock-based compensation, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities, which reflect timing differences between the receipt and payment of cash associated with transactions and when they are recognized in our results of operations.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $183.2 million, which was primarily attributable to a net loss of $100.0 million, a change in the fair value of the contingent earn-out liability of $87.1 million, a change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities of $8.9 million, and cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $15.1 million, partially offset by $26.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, $1.2 million of depreciation expense, and $0.5 million of non-cash lease expense. The net cash used of $15.1 million as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $37.8 million
increase in prepaid expense and other current assets, partially offset by a $16.6 million increase in accrued expenses and a $6.1 million increase in accounts payable.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $241.5 million, which was primarily attributable to a net loss of $250.0 million and was partially offset by net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $7.6 million, $0.3 million of stock-based compensation expense, $0.3 million of depreciation expense, and $0.2 million of non-cash lease expense. The net cash provided of $7.6 million as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $9.9 million increase in accrued expenses and $0.3 million increase in accounts payable, partially offset by a $2.6 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.4 million, and consisted of $4.0 million of purchases of investments and $0.4 million of purchases of property and equipment.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.0 million, and consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.4 billion, and consisted of $1.3 billion in net proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, $71.3 million of net proceeds from the sale and issuance of shares of Series B convertible preferred stock, and $0.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of shares of restricted common stock to our employees and advisors and from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $715.5 million, and consisted of $714.5 million of net proceeds from the sale and issuance of shares of Series A and Series B convertible preferred stock, and $0.9 million from issuance of shares of restricted common stock to our employees and advisors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts, and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in note 2 to our audited annual consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Contingent Earn-Out Liability
In connection with the Business Combination, the Earn-Out Service Providers, are entitled to receive as additional merger consideration up to 50,000,000 additional shares of common stock if certain stock price triggers are achieved during the Earn-Out Period.
Earn-Out Shares allocated to Earn-Out Service Providers who held equity securities not subject to any vesting conditions or restrictions as of the Closing Date of the Business Combination are accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (ASC 815), as the Earn-Out Shares are not indexed to the Company’s common stock. Pursuant to ASC 815, these Earn-Out Shares were accounted for as a liability at the Closing Date of the Business Combination and subsequently remeasured at each reporting date with changes in fair value recorded as a component of other (expense) income, net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair value of the Earn-Out Shares accounted for under ASC 815 was $240.1 million at the Closing Date and was recognized as a liability in our consolidated balance sheet.
Earn-Out Shares allocated to Earn-Out Service Providers who held shares of common stock or options or purchase common stock that are subject to service-based vesting conditions or restrictions as of the Closing Date of the Business Combination are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Share-Based Compensation (ASC 718), as the Earn-Out Shares are subject to forfeiture based on the satisfaction of certain service conditions. Pursuant to ASC 718, these Earn-Out Shares were measured at fair value at the grant date (the Closing Date) and will be recognized as expense over the time-based vesting period with a credit to additional paid-in-capital. The fair value of the Earn-Out Shares accounted for under ASC 718 was $43.4 million at the Closing Date.
The fair value of the Earn-Out Shares is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model that utilizes a distribution of potential outcomes on a monthly basis over the Earn-Out Period using the most reliable information available. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock prices milestones, including our common stock price, expected volatility, risk-free rate, expected term and expected dividend yield.
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We have 11,039,957 public warrants and 8,693,333 private warrants that were issued by CMLS III. Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Common Stock, at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The public warrants are publicly traded and are exercisable for cash unless certain conditions occur, such as the failure to have an effective registration statement related to the shares issuable upon exercise, or redemption by us under certain conditions, at which time the warrants may be eligible for a cashless exercise. The private warrants are redeemable for cash under certain conditions so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the private warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the private warrants are redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the public warrants.
The warrants contain provisions that require them to be classified as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, at the end of each reporting period, changes in fair value during the period are recognized as a change in fair value of warrant liabilities within our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We adjust the warrant liability for changes in the fair value until the earlier of (a) the
exercise or expiration of the warrants or (b) the redemption of the warrants, at which time the warrants will be reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
The fair value of the public warrants is based on observable listed prices for such warrants at the end of each reporting period, and the fair value of the private warrants is determined using Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development and manufacturing expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. At each period end, we corroborate the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● CROs in connection with performing research and development activities on our behalf, including preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● Investigative sites or other service providers in connection with preclinical or clinical trials; and
● CMOs and other vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts from CROs that conduct and manage studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract, which may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions. For awards with performance-based vesting conditions, we assess the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved at each reporting period. We use the accelerated attribution method to expense the awards over the requisite service period when the performance conditions are deemed probable of achievement.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and
assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options, and our expected dividend yield. We estimate the fair value of each restricted common stock granted based upon the difference between the fair value of our common stock on the grant date and the price per share paid by the purchasers.
As there was not a public market for our common stock prior to becoming publicly traded, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of grant of each option or restricted stock award, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our common stock valuations were prepared using either an option pricing method (OPM) or a hybrid method, both of which used market approaches to estimate our enterprise value. The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on the total equity value of a company, with exercise prices based on the value thresholds at which the allocation among the various holders of a company’s securities changes. Under this method, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceed the value of the preferred stock liquidation preferences at the time of the liquidity event, such as a strategic sale or a merger. The hybrid method is a probability-weighted expected return method (PWERM) where the equity value in one or more scenarios is calculated using an OPM. The PWERM is a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common stock based upon an analysis of future values for the company, assuming various outcomes. The common stock value is based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns considering each of the possible outcomes available as well as the rights of each class of stock. The future value of the common stock under each outcome is discounted back to the valuation date at an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate and probability weighted to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. A discount for lack of marketability of the common stock is then applied to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock.
In addition to the results of these third-party valuations, our board of directors also considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock on each grant date, including: (i) our stage of development and our business strategy; (ii) the progress of our research and development programs; (iii) the progress of our collaboration and licensing efforts; (iv) the illiquid nature of our common stock; (v) the prices at which we sold convertible preferred stock and the superior rights and preferences of the convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant; (vi) external market conditions affecting the biotechnology industry, and trends within the biotechnology industry; (vii) our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results; and (viii) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event.
Subsequent to the closing of the Business Combination, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of common stock underlying stock-based awards based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by the Nasdaq on the date of grant.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in note 2 to our audited annual consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” (EGC) under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the JOBS Act). Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or
revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of delayed adoption of new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as private entities. As an EGC, we may take advantage of certain exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions, as an EGC:
● we may present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations;
● we may avail ourselves of the exemption from providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● we may provide reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements; and
● we may not require nonbinding advisory votes on executive compensation or stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments.
We will remain an EGC until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of the CMLS III initial public offering, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous rolling three-year period, or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act).