Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on May 22, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, and forward purchase securities, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for an initial business combination after our initial public offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from May 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and, subsequent to the initial public offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $15,839,365, which consists of operating costs of $1,382,681, offset by a change in fair value of warrant liability of $15,899,200, a change in fair value of the forward purchase agreement liability of $1,300,000, interest earned from bank of $62 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $22,784.
For the period from May 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $10,795,459, which consists of operating costs of $476,742, a change in fair value of warrant liability of $7,583,500, a change in fair value of the forward purchase agreement liability of $1,900,000, transaction costs allocable to the warrants of $861,354, offset by interest earned from bank of $33 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $26,104.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 27, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 8,000,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000.
On August 25, 2020, the underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full, resulting in an additional 4,500,000 Units issued for total gross proceeds of $45,000,000. In connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 900,000 private placement warrants at $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating total proceeds of $900,000. A total of $45,000,000 was deposited into the trust account, bringing the aggregate proceeds held in the trust account to $345,000,000.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $345,000,000 was placed in the trust account and we had $912,561 of cash held outside of the trust account, after payment of costs related to the initial public offering, and available for
working capital purposes. We incurred $19,840,171 in transaction costs, including $6,900,000 in cash underwriting fees, $12,075,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $865,171 of other offering costs.
For the period ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,236,555. Net income of $15,839,365 was affected by non-cash charges for the change in fair value of warrant liability of $15,899,200, change in fair value of forward purchase agreement liability of $1,300,000, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $22,784 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $90,353 of cash in operating activities.
For the period from May 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $570,144. Net loss of $10,795,459 was affected by non-cash charges for the change in fair value of warrant liability of $7,583,500, change in fair value of forward purchase agreement liability of $1,900,000, transaction costs allocable to warrants of $861,354, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $26,104 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $93,435 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $345,048,888 and $345,026,104, respectively. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash of $853,130 and $589,685 outside of the trust account, respectively. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a initial business combination, the Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest.
On February 15, 2021, the Sponsor committed to provide us an aggregate of $500,000 in loans for working capital purpose.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay two affiliates of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 each for office space and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 24, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company incurred and paid an aggregate of $240,000 and $105,161 in connection with these agreements, respectively.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that the Company does not complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On July 2, 2020, we entered into a forward purchase agreement pursuant to which East Asset Management, an affiliate of the Sponsor, has agreed to purchase an aggregate of up to 5,000,000 forward purchase units, consisting of one forward purchase shares and one-half of one forward purchase warrants, for $10.00 per unit, or an aggregate maximum amount of $50,000,000, in a private placement that will close simultaneously with the closing of an initial business combination. East Asset Management will purchase a number of forward purchase units that will result in gross proceeds to us necessary to enable us to consummate an initial business combination and pay related fees and expenses, after first applying amounts available to us from the trust account (after paying the deferred underwriting discount and giving effect to any redemptions of Public Shares) and any other financing source obtained by us for such purpose at or prior to the consummation of an initial business combination, plus any additional amounts mutually agreed by us and East Asset Management to be retained by the post-business combination company for working capital or other purposes. East Asset Management’s obligation to purchase forward purchase units will, among other things, be conditioned on the initial business combination (including the target assets or business, and the terms of the initial business combination) being reasonably acceptable to East Asset Management and on a requirement that such initial business combination is approved by a unanimous vote of our board of directors. In determining whether a target is reasonably acceptable to East Asset Management, we expect that East Asset Management would consider many of the same criteria as we will consider but will also consider whether the investment is an appropriate investment for East Asset Management.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. The Company’s derivative instruments are recorded at fair value and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the Statements of Operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. The Company has determined the warrants and the forward contract for additional warrants are derivatives. As the financial instruments meet the definition of a derivative, the
warrants and the forward contract for additional warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of earnings, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net loss is allocated evenly on a pro rata basis between Class A and Class B on weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding over the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates its fair value. The calculation of diluted income per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. However, the diluted earnings per share calculation includes the shares subject to forfeiture from the first day of the interim period in which the contingency on such shares was resolved.
Recent accounting standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 for public business entities that meet the definition of a Securities SEC filer, excluding entities eligible to be smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We plan to adopt the standard on January 1, 2024, and we are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.