ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section should be read in conjunction with Item 1: Business; Item 1A: Risk Factors; and Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements relating to present or future trends or factors that are subject to risks and uncertainties. These risks include, but are not limited to: specific and overall impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic on Escalade’s financial condition and results of operations; Escalade’s plans and expectations surrounding the transition to its new Chief Executive Officer and all potential related effects and consequences; the impact of competitive products and pricing; product demand and market acceptance; new product development; Escalade’s ability to achieve its business objectives, especially with respect to its Sporting Goods business on which it has chosen to focus; Escalade’s ability to successfully achieve the anticipated results of strategic transactions, including the integration of the operations of acquired assets and businesses and of divestitures or discontinuances of certain operations, assets, brands, and products; the continuation and development of key customer, supplier, licensing and other business relationships; Escalade’s ability to develop and implement our own direct to consumer e-commerce distribution channel; Escalade’s ability to successfully negotiate the shifting retail environment and changes in consumer buying habits; the financial health of our customers; disruptions or delays in our business operations, including without limitation disruptions or delays in our supply chain, arising from political unrest, war, labor strikes, natural disasters, public health crises such as the coronavirus pandemic, and other events and circumstances beyond our control; Escalade’s ability to control costs; Escalade’s ability to successfully implement actions to lessen the potential impacts of tariffs and other trade restrictions applicable to our products and raw materials, including impacts on the costs of producing our goods, importing products and materials into our markets for sale, and on the pricing of our products; general economic conditions; fluctuation in operating results; changes in foreign currency exchange rates; changes in the securities markets; continued listing of the Company’s common stock on the NASDAQ Global Market and/or inclusion in market indices such as the Russell 2000; Escalade’s ability to obtain financing and to maintain compliance with the terms of such financing; the availability, integration and effective operation of information systems and other technology, and the potential interruption of such systems or technology; risks related to data security of privacy breaches; and other risks detailed from time to time in Escalade’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Escalade’s future financial performance could differ materially from the expectations of management contained herein. Escalade undertakes no obligation to release revisions to these forward-looking statements after the date of this report.
Overview
Escalade, Incorporated (Escalade, the Company, we, us or our) is focused on growing its Sporting Goods segment through organic growth of existing categories, strategic acquisitions, and new product development. The Sporting Goods segment competes in a variety of categories including basketball goals, archery, indoor and outdoor recreation and fitness products. Strong brands and on-going investment in product development provide a solid foundation for building customer loyalty and continued growth.
Within the sporting goods industry, the Company has successfully built a robust market presence in several niche markets. This strategy is heavily dependent on expanding our customer base, barriers to entry, strong brands, excellent customer service and a commitment to innovation. A key strategic advantage is the Company’s established relationships with major customers that allow the Company to bring new products to market in a cost-effective manner while maintaining a diversified portfolio of products to meet the demands of consumers. In addition to strategic customer relations, the Company has substantial manufacturing and import experience that enable it to be a reliable and low-cost supplier.
To enhance growth opportunities, the Company has focused on promoting new product innovation and development and brand marketing. In addition, the Company has embarked on a strategy of acquiring companies or product lines that complement or expand the Company's existing product lines or provide expansion into new or emerging categories in sporting goods. A key objective is the acquisition of product lines with barriers to entry that the Company can take to market through its established distribution channels or through new market channels. Significant synergies are achieved through assimilation of acquired product lines into the existing Company structure.
In October 2020, the Company acquired the assets of the billiard table, game room, and recreational product lines of American Heritage Billiards, including the related intellectual property. In December 2020, the Company acquired substantially all of the business and assets of Revel Match LLC, dba RAVE Sports, a brand known for its innovative and high-quality water recreation products. In January 2022, the Company completed its acquisition of the assets of the Brunswick Billiards® business, complementing its existing portfolio of billiards brands and other offerings in the Company’s indoor recreation market. These and other acquisitions strengthen the Company’s leadership in various product categories, while providing exciting new opportunities within the growing water sports market. The Company also sometimes divests or discontinues certain operations, assets, and products that do not perform to the Company's expectations or no longer fit with the Company's strategic objectives.
Management believes that key indicators in measuring the success of these strategies are revenue growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, and the expansion of channels of distribution. The following table sets forth the annual percentage change in revenues and net income over the past three years:
COVID-19 Pandemic
The emergence of the coronavirus (COVID-19) around the world, and particularly in the United States and China, continues to present significant risks to the Company, not all of which the Company is able to fully evaluate or even to foresee at the current time. Economic and health conditions in the United States and across most of the globe have changed rapidly during 2020 and 2021. Demand for the Company’s products increased substantially in fiscal year 2020 and remained strong in fiscal year 2021, most notably in our fitness products, basketball, playground, and indoor/outdoor games. Some of the increase in demand is likely due to consumers being required or encouraged by governmental authorities to stay at home, schools closures, and employers requiring or allowing employees to work remotely and/or implementing furloughs and layoffs, and consumers deciding to spend more time at home due to health and other considerations. Such increased demand may not continue and/or demand may decrease from historical levels depending on the uncertain duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the length of time it takes for normal economic and operating conditions to resume or permanent changes if such conditions result from the pandemic, additional governmental actions that may be taken and/or extensions of time for restrictions that have been imposed or proposed to date, and numerous other uncertainties. Our revenue growth in prior quarterly or annual periods should not be relied upon as an indication of future performance.
In addition, increased customer demand for certain products presents challenges for the Company to anticipate and adjust inventory levels to meet such demand. So far, the Company has been able to obtain products from its suppliers on a timely basis. To alleviate the risks of incurring product outages, the Company has accelerated orders of certain products with a resulting increase in inventories. While the Company believes it is currently in strong financial condition, a substantial decrease in customer demand and/or slower payments by the Company’s mass merchants, specialty dealers and other customers could adversely affect the Company’s liquidity.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to affect the Company’s operations through the fourth quarter of 2021 and may continue to do so indefinitely thereafter. All of these factors may have far reaching impacts on the Company’s business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including without limitation impacts on the health of the Company’s management and employees, manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales operations, customer and consumer behaviors, and on the overall economy. The scope and nature of these impacts, most of which are beyond the Company’s control, continue to evolve and the outcomes are uncertain.
Due to the above circumstances and as described generally in this Form 10-K, the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for fiscal year 2022. Management cannot predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s sales channels, supply chain, manufacturing and distribution nor to economic conditions generally, including the effects on consumer spending. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Results of Operations
The following schedule sets forth certain consolidated statement of operations data as a percentage of net revenue:
Revenue and Gross Margin
Net revenue increased 14.6% in 2021 compared to 2020. The Company recognized increased sales primarily in their outdoor product categories, including archery and pickleball, due to category growth and market share gains.
The overall gross margin decreased to 24.6% in 2021 compared with 27.3% in 2020. Gross margins were unfavorably impacted by currency exchange rates and higher supply chain, raw material, and inventory carrying costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) were $43.4 million in 2021 compared to $40.3 million in 2020, an increase of $3.1 million or 7.6%. The increase in SG&A is in line with the growth of the business. SG&A as a percent of sales is 13.8% in 2021 compared with 14.7% in 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2021 and 2020 was 20.1% and 21.2%, respectively. The 2021 effective tax rate is slightly lower than the federal statutory rate primarily due to the captive insurance premiums being tax exempt. With federal income tax credits helping to offset the impact of the state taxes and lower the statutory rate. The 2020 effective tax rate is slightly higher than the federal statutory rate primarily due to the impact of state taxes, with federal income tax credits helping to offset the impact of the state taxes and lower the statutory rate.
Sporting Goods
Net revenues, operating income, and net income for the Sporting Goods segment for the three years ended December 25, 2021 were as follows:
Net revenue increased 14.6% in 2021 compared to 2020.
Gross margin in 2021 was 24.6% compared to 27.3% in 2020. Gross margins were unfavorably impacted by currency exchange rates and higher supply chain, raw material, and inventory carrying costs. Operating income, as a percentage of net revenue, decreased to 10.1% in 2021 compared to 11.9% in 2020.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
The current ratio, a basic measure of liquidity (current assets divided by current liabilities), for 2021 was 3.5, compared to 3.1 in 2020. Receivable levels increased to $66.0 million in 2021 compared with $65.3 million in 2020 and net inventory increased $19.9 million to $92.4 million in 2021 from $72.5 million in 2020. Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities decreased $5.0 million to $40.2 million from $45.2 million in 2020.
The Company’s working capital requirements are primarily funded through cash flows from operations and revolving credit agreements with its bank. During 2021, the Company’s maximum borrowings under its primary revolving credit lines and overdraft facility totaled $69.2 million compared to $33.6 million in 2020. The overall effective interest rate in 2021 was 2.9% compared to the effective rate of 2.4% in 2020. Total debt at the end of the Company’s 2021 fiscal year was $57.5 million.
On July 7, 2021, the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, Indian Industries, Inc. (“Indian”) entered into the Fourth Amendment dated as of July 7, 2021 (the “Fourth Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of January 21, 2019 (the “2019 Restated Credit Agreement”) among the Company, Indian, each of their domestic subsidiaries, and Chase, as Administrative Agent and as Lender (the “Lender”). Under the terms of the Fourth Amendment, the Lender extended a $50.0 million term loan to the Company and reduced the maximum availability under the senior revolving credit facility from $75.0 million to $50.0 million. The Company may prepay the revolving credit facility, in whole or in part, and reborrow prior to the revolving loan maturity date.
On January 21, 2022, the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, Indian entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2022 Restated Credit Agreement”) with its issuing bank, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“Chase”), and the other lenders identified in the Restated Credit Agreement (collectively, the “Lenders”). The 2022 Restated Credit Agreement amends and restates the 2019 Credit Agreement, as amended, in its entirety, and continues the existing Company’s credit facilities which have been in place since April 30, 2009. The Company’s indebtedness under the 2022 Restated Credit Agreement continues to be collateralized by liens on all of the present and future equity of each of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries and substantially all of the assets of the Company (excluding real estate). Under the terms of the 2022 Restated Credit Agreement, Old National Bank has been added as a Lender. The Lenders have now made available to Escalade and Indian a senior revolving credit facility with increased maximum availability of $65.0 million (the “Revolving Facility”), up from $50.0 million, plus an accordion feature that would allow borrowings up to $90.0 million under the Revolving Facility subject to certain terms and conditions. The maturity date of the revolving credit facility was extended to January 21, 2027. The Company may prepay the Revolving Facility, in whole or in part, and reborrow prior to the revolving loan maturity date. The 2022 Restated Credit Agreement further extended the maturity date for the term loan facility to January 21, 2027. As of January 21, 2022, the outstanding principal amount of the term loan was $46.4 million.
Cash flows from operations and revolving credit agreements were used to fund acquisitions, to pay shareholder dividends, and to fund stock repurchases.
In 2022, the Company estimates capital expenditures to be approximately $4.5 million.
The Company believes that cash generated from its projected 2022 operations and the commitment of borrowings from its primary lender will provide it with sufficient cash flows for its operations.
It is possible that if economic conditions deteriorate, this could have adverse effects on the Company’s ability to operate profitably during fiscal year 2022. To the extent that occurs, management will pursue cost reduction initiatives and consider realignment of its infrastructure in an effort to match the Company’s overhead and cost structure with the sales level dictated by current market conditions.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements under the sub-heading “New Accounting Pronouncements”.
Contractual Obligations
The following schedule summarizes the Company’s material contractual obligations as of December 25, 2021:
Note:
(1) Assumes that the Company will not increase borrowings under its long-term credit agreements and that the effective interest rate experienced in 2021 of 2.9% will continue for the life of the agreements.
The contractual obligations table does not reflect the Restated Credit Agreement entered into by the Company on January 21, 2022. The impact of the Restated Credit Agreement is to increase future interest payments by $0.6 million and extending the debt maturity date from 2026 to 2027. Amounts in the table above also exclude legally binding minimum lease payments for a lease agreement that was signed, but had not yet commenced as of December 25, 2021, in the amount of $9.9 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The methods, estimates and judgments used in applying the Company’s accounting policies have a significant impact on the results reported in its financial statements. Some of these accounting policies require difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The most critical accounting estimates are described below and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Product Warranty
The Company provides limited warranties on certain of its products for varying periods. Generally, the warranty periods range from 30 days to one year. However, some products carry extended warranties of three-year, five-year, seven-year, ten-year, fifteen-year, and lifetime warranties. The Company records an accrued liability and reduction in sales for estimated future warranty claims based upon historical experience and management’s estimate of the level of future claims. Changes in the estimated amounts recognized in prior years are recorded as an adjustment to the accrued liability and sales in the current year. To the extent there are product defects in current products that are unknown to management and do not fall within historical defect rates, the product warranty reserve could be understated and the Company could be required to accrue additional product warranty costs thus negatively affecting gross margin.
Inventory Valuation Reserves
The Company evaluates inventory for obsolescence and excess quantities based on demand forecasts over specified time frames, usually one year. The demand forecast is based on historical usage, sales forecasts and current as well as anticipated market conditions. All amounts in excess of the demand forecast are deemed to be potentially excess or obsolete and a reserve is established based on the anticipated net realizable value. To the extent that demand forecasts are greater than actual demand and the Company fails to reduce manufacturing output accordingly, the Company could be required to record additional inventory reserves which would have a negative impact on gross margin.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information and existing economic conditions. Accounts receivable are ordinarily due between 30 and 60 days after the issuance of the invoice. Accounts are considered delinquent when more than 90 days past due. Delinquent receivables are reserved or written off based on individual credit evaluation and specific circumstances of the customer. To the extent that actual bad debt losses exceed the allowance recorded by the Company, additional reserves would be required which would increase selling, general and administrative costs.
Customer Allowances
Customer allowances are common practice in the industries in which the Company operates. These agreements are typically in the form of advertising subsidies, volume rebates and catalog allowances and are accounted for as a reduction to gross sales. The Company reviews such allowances on an ongoing basis and accruals are adjusted, if necessary, as additional information becomes available.
Impairment of Goodwill
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable, in accordance with guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standard Codification (ASC) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. A qualitative assessment is first performed to determine if the fair value of the reporting unit is "more likely than not" less than the carrying value. If so, we proceed to a quantitative assessment, in which the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of goodwill exceeds the implied estimated fair value calculated, an impairment charge to current operations is recorded to reduce the carrying value to the implied estimated fair value.
If a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment testing is required, the Company establishes fair value by using an income approach or a combination of a market approach and an income approach. The market approach uses the guideline-companies method to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on reported sales of publicly-held entities engaged in the same or a similar business as the reporting unit. The income approach uses the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit by calculating the present value of the expected future cash flows of the reporting unit. The discount rate is based on a weighted average cost of capital determined using publicly-available interest rate information on the valuation date and data regarding equity, size and country-specific risk premiums/decrements compiled and published by a commercial source. The Company uses assumptions about expected future operating performance in determining estimates of those cash flows, which may differ from actual cash flows.
The Company has one reporting unit that is identical to our operating segment, Sporting Goods. Of the total recorded goodwill of $32.7 million at December 25, 2021, the entire amount was allocated to the Escalade Sports reporting unit. The results of the qualitative impairment assessment of the Escalade Sports reporting unit indicated that it was not “more likely than not” that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than the carrying value as of December 25, 2021.
Long Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of certain long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Estimates of future cash flows used to test recoverability of long-lived assets include separately identifiable undiscounted cash flows expected to arise from the use and eventual disposition of the assets. Where estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, impairment losses are recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets.
Capital Expenditures
As of December 25, 2021, the Company had no material commitments for capital expenditures. In 2022, the Company estimates capital expenditures to be approximately $4.5 million.