Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans, and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure in Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a leading provider of vertically tailored customer engagement software and integrated payments solutions. At EngageSmart, our mission is to simplify customer and client engagement to allow our customers to focus resources on initiatives that improve their businesses and better serve their communities. We offer single instance, multi-tenant, true Software-as-a-Service ("SaaS") vertical solutions that are designed to simplify our customers’ engagement with their clients by driving digital adoption and self-service. As of December 31, 2021, we serve more than 79,000 customers in the SMB Solutions segment and more than 3,100 customers in the Enterprise Solutions segment across several core verticals: Health & Wellness, Government, Utilities, Financial Services, Healthcare and Giving. Our SaaS solutions are purpose-built for each of our verticals and they simplify and automate mission-critical workflows such as scheduling, client
onboarding, client communication, paperless billing, and electronic payment processing. Our solutions transform our customers’ digital engagement and empower them to manage, improve, and grow their businesses.
Our vertically tailored solutions include software and payment tools that automate mission-critical business workflows for customers across our verticals. Our value proposition is focused on transforming our customers’ digital engagement through four core SaaS solutions, including:
•SimplePractice. An end-to-end practice management and electronic health record ("EHR") platform that health and wellness professionals use to manage their practices. SimplePractice serves practitioners, who are our customers, throughout their career journey, allowing them to manage their practice development from licensure to private practice. SimplePractice enables customers to engage with their clients across both virtual and in-person settings, schedule appointments, document cases, and handle all aspects of billing and insurance processing on one integrated platform. Our platform also helps our customers build and grow their practices through the use of our online marketplace, Monarch.
•InvoiceCloud. An electronic bill presentment and payment solution that helps our Government, Utility, and Financial Services customers digitize billing, client communications, and collections. We believe InvoiceCloud drives superior client digital adoption, which increases engagement and drives operational efficiency for our customers.
•HealthPay24. A patient engagement and payment platform that helps health systems, physician groups, dental practices, and medical billers efficiently drive patient self-pay collections.
•DonorDrive. A fundraising software platform that helps non-profits, healthcare organizations, and higher education institutions produce virtual events, launch branded donation campaigns, and create peer-to-peer fundraising experiences.
Our Business Segments
We organize our solutions into two reportable segments, Enterprise Solutions and SMB Solutions. The chief operating decision maker (“CODM”), which is our chief executive officer, evaluates segment operating performance using revenue and Adjusted EBITDA from reportable segments to make resource allocation decisions and to evaluate segment performance.
•Enterprise Solutions. The Enterprise Solutions segment is primarily engaged in providing SaaS solutions that simplify customer-client engagement primarily through electronic billing and digital payments, and includes our InvoiceCloud, HealthPay24 and DonorDrive solutions. Enterprise solutions are built to address the unique needs of specific verticals: Government, Utilities, Financial Services, Healthcare and Giving. For the Enterprise Solutions segment, we integrate directly with our customers’ core software systems and utilizes a partner-assisted direct sales model for purposes of our go-to-market strategy. We generate a significant majority of our revenue in this segment from transaction and usage-based revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, this segment generated 50% of revenue.
•SMB Solutions. The SMB Solutions segment is primarily engaged in providing end-to-end practice management solutions geared toward the Health & Wellness industry and includes our SimplePractice solution. For our SMB Solutions segment, we primarily rely on a free trial to paid customer sales model. We generate interest for our offerings in our SMB Solutions segment through a combination of search engine optimization, word-of-mouth, paid customer referrals, and search engine marketing. We generate a majority of our revenue in this segment from subscription revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, this segment generated 50% of revenue.
Our Revenue Model
We primarily generate two types of revenue: (i) subscription revenue and (ii) transaction and usage-based revenue.
•Subscription revenue. Generally consists of recurring monthly SaaS subscriptions from the sale of our solutions.
•Transaction and usage-based revenue. Generally based on the number of Transactions Processed, as defined below, or the dollar value of the Transactions Processed within our software solutions, which is paid to us by our customers, our customers’ clients, or a combination of both. For our transaction and usage-based revenue that is derived from the facilitation of payment processing, in general, we receive more revenue for card-based payments than for electronic check and ACH payments.
No single customer represented more than 2% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Dollar-based Net Retention Rate
Our goal is to drive digital adoption of our software solutions, and our transaction and usage-based revenue aligns our success with our customers’ success. The more our customers and their clients accelerate digital adoption, the more our revenue increases. Our ability to grow with our customers is best demonstrated by our dollar-based net retention rate.
We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate at the end of a given period by using (a) the revenue from all customers during the twelve months ending one year prior to such period as the denominator and (b) the revenue from all remaining customers during the twelve months ending as of the end of such period minus the revenue from all customers who are new customers during those twelve months as the numerator. We define new customers as customers with whom we have generated less than twelve months of revenue. Acquired businesses are reflected in our dollar-based net retention rate beginning one year following the date of acquisition.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate was 119% and 124%, respectively.
Initial Public Offering
On September 27, 2021, we completed our initial public offering ("IPO"), in which we issued and sold 13,620,054 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $26.00 per share, including 620,054 shares issued upon the exercise of the underwriters' option to purchase additional shares. We raised net proceeds of $326.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount of $22.1 million and offering expenses of $5.6 million. Additionally, certain existing shareholders sold an aggregate of 3,112,446 shares at the same price, resulting in net proceeds to the selling stockholders of $75.9 million. On September 27, 2021, we used a portion of the net proceeds from our IPO to repay in full the outstanding borrowings of $114.2 million under our Credit Facilities, as defined below.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Our customers and partners were impacted and will continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which ultimately affects our business operations and results. The impact of COVID-19 differed across the verticals we serve. For our SMB Solutions segment, practitioners accelerated adoption of our practice management software as they transitioned to virtual healthcare. Our pre-built features such as telehealth, online scheduling, AutoPay, and secure messaging proved to be invaluable to our customers. For our Enterprise Solutions segment, COVID-19 accelerated adoption of our online and automatic payment features, and we were able to provide customers the digital engagement and electronic payment capabilities they needed to serve their clients. On the other hand, certain solutions experienced a slowdown in usage in 2020. For example, elective procedures and nonessential hospital visits were delayed or canceled, and charities and nonprofits were unable to host large, in-person events given social distancing policies. These headwinds were partially offset by our ability to offer digital engagement, such as virtual fundraising and online donations, which enabled our customers to continue hosting events. During the second half of 2021, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our solutions began to decrease and our operating results began to normalize.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. Given the evolving nature of COVID-19, we will continue to closely monitor the pandemic’s impact on both the verticals we serve and our business specifically. We will continue to prioritize the safety of our employees, customers, their clients and communities in which we operate. Refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks related to our business and industry - The COVID-19 pandemic could have a material adverse impact on our employees, customers, partners, clients and other key stakeholders, which could materially and adversely impact our business, operating results and financial condition.”
Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We review the following key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. Accordingly, we believe our key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations in the same manner as our management team. Our key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from similarly titled metrics or measures presented by other companies.
Number of Customers
We serve a wide variety of customers across our verticals. The majority of our customers are based in the United States. For the purposes of measuring our key business metrics, we define customers as individuals or entities with whom we directly contract to use our solutions. The number of customers in the table below represents the total number of customers for each of our segments at the end of each fiscal year.
Transactions Processed
We define Transactions Processed as the number of accepted payment transactions, such as credit card and debit card transactions, ACH payments, emerging electronic payments, other communication, text messaging and interactive voice response transactions, and other payment transaction types, which are facilitated through our solutions during a given period. We believe Transactions Processed is a useful key business metric for investors because it directly correlates with transaction and usage-based revenue. We use Transactions Processed to evaluate changes in transaction and usage-based revenue over time.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss excluding interest expense, net; benefit from income taxes; depreciation; and amortization of intangible assets, as further adjusted for transaction-related expenses, fair value adjustment of acquired deferred revenue, stock/equity-based compensation, and restructuring (reversal) charges. We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue plus the fair value adjustment of acquired deferred revenue. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, when taken collectively with our GAAP results, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
We define Adjusted Gross Profit as gross profit as adjusted for fair value adjustment of acquired deferred revenue, amortization of intangible assets, stock/equity-based compensation, and transaction-related expenses. We define Adjusted Gross Margin as Adjusted Gross Profit divided by revenue plus the fair value adjustment of acquired deferred revenue. We believe that Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin, when taken collectively with our GAAP results, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit, and Adjusted Gross Margin:
•as a measure of operating performance because it assists us in comparing the operating performance of our business on a consistent basis, as it removes the impact of items not directly resulting from our core operations;
•for planning purposes, including the preparation of our internal annual operating budget and financial projections;
•to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of our operational strategies; and
•to evaluate our capacity to expand our business.
By providing these non-GAAP financial measures, together with a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, we believe we are enhancing investors’ understanding of our business and our results of operations, as well as assisting investors in evaluating how well we are executing our strategic initiatives. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit, and Adjusted Gross Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative to, or a substitute for net loss, gross profit, or other financial statement data presented in our consolidated financial statements as indicators of financial performance. Some of the limitations are:
•such measures do not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•such measures do not reflect our tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future and such measures does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate such measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following tables present the reconciliations for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from providing access to our SaaS solutions via subscription and transaction and usage-based fees for services provided through such solutions. To a lesser extent, we also generate revenue from the sale of implementation services, sale of on-demand learning courses and the sale of hardware.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of personnel-related expenses for our customer support and operations teams, certain variable transaction and licensing costs, amortization of intangible assets related to acquired developed technology, and hosting and data storage costs associated with our infrastructure and platform environments. We expect that cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars, but it may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period as we continue to invest in growing our business across our segments.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, professional and consulting-related expenses, software costs and non-income tax-related expenses. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company and to support the anticipated growth of our business. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period. Over the longer term, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as we leverage the scale of our business.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, inclusive of sales commission expense, fees paid to third-party partners, and costs to market and promote our solutions through advertisements and marketing events. We expect our selling and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in new customer acquisition and retention efforts, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, third-party consulting costs, and costs for software tools for product management and software development. Costs associated with developing new products and features that qualify as internal use software are capitalized and amortized. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period as we expand our research and development team to develop new products and enhance existing products.
Contingent Consideration Expense
Contingent consideration expense consists of increases or decreases in the fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities. We remeasure the fair value of potential future payments based upon the achievement levels of remaining targets at each subsequent reporting period until the contingent liabilities are settled or have expired.
Restructuring (Reversal) Charges
Restructuring (reversal) charges consist of charges related to our restructuring efforts associated with relocating certain operations. Refer to Note 15 - Restructuring to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets, within operating expenses, consists primarily of amortization of customer relationships and tradenames assets acquired as part of a business combination. We amortize acquired intangible assets over their estimated useful lives based on the pattern of consumption of the economic benefits or, if that pattern cannot be readily determined, on a straight-line basis.
Other Expense
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense on our long-term and related party debt, costs incurred to extinguish debt, amortization of debt issuance costs and fees associated with unused revolving credit facility commitments.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods presented, each line item from our consolidated statements of operations on a percentage of revenue basis. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results. The information contained in the table below should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Revenue
Revenue increased $69.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $38.8 million in transaction and usage-based revenue, driven by an increase in the number of Transactions Processed and an increase of $30.6 million in subscription revenue, driven by an increase in the number of customers utilizing our solutions.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to an increase of $8.5 million in certain variable transaction, licensing and hosting costs due to higher usage of our solutions, and a $7.4 million increase in personnel-related costs, driven by headcount growth within our customer support departments needed to sustain the increased demand for our solutions.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $14.0 million in personnel-related costs, driven by an increase of $7.6 million in stock-based compensation expense as well as increased headcount to support overall growth and to expand our infrastructure to support public company operations. In addition, professional fees associated with legal, accounting, and other consulting services increased $5.1 million related to our IPO as well as increased costs required to support operating as a public company.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses increased $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $9.7 million in personnel-related costs associated with headcount growth, an increase of $5.2 million in fees paid to third-party channel partners and an increase of $5.1 million in advertising and other marketing-related spend utilized to drive new customer additions.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $10.1 million in personnel-related costs associated with headcount growth and an increase of $1.4 million in third-party consulting costs. Headcount growth and the increase in usage of third-party consultants was associated with enhancing the functionality and ease of use of our solutions.
Contingent Consideration Expense
Contingent consideration expense was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in contingent consideration expense relates to the change in fair value of the contingent consideration liability.
Restructuring (Reversal) Charges
Restructuring (reversal) charges decreased $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $2.4 million restructuring charge associated with a lease exited in the third quarter of 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a $0.2 million reversal of restructuring expense associated with a change to sublease assumptions used to calculate the revised restructuring liability.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets, within operating expenses, remained consistent for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the extinguishment of our prior Credit Facilities (as defined below) on September 27, 2021.
Benefit from Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.0 million. Our effective income tax rate was 6.5% for the year ended December 31 2021, compared to 28.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the statutory rate of 21.0% due to stock-based compensation adjustments, acquisition earnout payments, and other permanent items. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the statutory rate of 21.0% due to the impact of state income taxes as well as permanent adjustments and excess benefits from stock-based compensation.
Segment Information
Our reportable segments have been determined in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC"), ASC 280, Segment Reporting. Currently, we have two reportable segments: Enterprise Solutions and SMB Solutions. The CODM, which is our chief executive officer, evaluates segment operating performance using revenue and Adjusted EBITDA from reportable segments to make resource allocation decisions and to evaluate segment performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss excluding interest expense, net; benefit from income taxes; depreciation; and amortization of intangible assets, as further adjusted for transaction-related expenses, fair value adjustment of acquired deferred revenue, stock/equity-based compensation, and restructuring (reversal) charges. Adjusted EBITDA from reportable segments excludes unallocated corporate costs which are primarily comprised of costs for accounting, finance, legal, human resources and costs for certain executives supporting overall business strategy and execution.
Adjusted EBITDA from reportable segments is a non-GAAP measure. Refer to “Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the Enterprise Solutions segment increased $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to an increase of $23.4 million in transaction and usage-based revenue driven by an increase in Transactions Processed.
Revenue for the SMB Solutions segment increased $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to an increase of $29.9 million in subscription revenue driven by an increase in the number of customers utilizing our solutions and a $15.4 million increase in transaction and usage-based revenue driven by an increase in Transactions Processed.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA margin for the Enterprise Solutions segment declined from 14.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 13.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2020, given the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we delayed investments in headcount for our sales, support and operations teams and temporarily reduced certain in-person marketing programs. During 2021, hiring and marketing programs began to normalize driving the reduction in Adjusted EBITDA margin.
Adjusted EBITDA margin for the SMB Solutions segment declined from 33.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 32.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Adjusted EBITDA margin was impacted by our investment in research and development headcount to continue to drive product leadership as well as incremental costs associated with the migration to a new Telehealth back-end provider. This was partially offset by a reduction in marketing spend as a percentage of revenue year over year, which was due to the higher cost of paid search marketing at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $254.3 million, which were primarily held for working capital purposes. Our primary source of funds has been, and we expect it to continue to be, cash generated from our net revenues, supplemented through debt financing and sale of our equity securities. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operations and access to our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, as defined below, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditures needs for at least the next 12 months.
On September 27, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 13,620,054 shares of common stock at a price of $26.00 per share. We raised net proceeds of $326.4 million from the IPO after deducting the underwriting discounts of $22.1 million and offering expenses of $5.6 million.
On September 27, 2021, we entered into a revolving credit agreement ("2021 Revolving Credit Facility") which allows us to borrow up to $75.0 million, $7.5 million of which may be comprised of a letter of credit facility. On September 27, 2021, we used a portion of the net proceeds from our IPO to repay in full the outstanding borrowings of $114.2 million under our then existing credit facility with Ares Capital Corporation, as administrative and collateral agent, and certain other lenders.
The 2021 Revolving Credit Facility matures on September 27, 2026 and proceeds of any borrowings under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility will be used for general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2021, we have not drawn upon the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, although $2.1 million has been utilized against the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility in the form of a line of credit, reducing our borrowing capacity to $72.9 million. The 2021 Revolving Credit Facility contains certain financial maintenance covenants, which require us to not exceed certain specified total net leverage ratios at the end of each fiscal quarter. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility.
To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to negotiate terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when required, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our primary source of operating cash is revenue generated from subscription and transaction and usage-based fees associated with our SaaS solutions. Our primary uses of operating cash are personnel-related costs and payments to our vendors. Our cash flows from operating activities are impacted by the amount of our net income (loss), revenue and customer growth, volume of transactions, changes in working capital accounts, the timing of payments to vendors and add-backs of non-cash expense items such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, and non-cash interest expense.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $10.7 million increase in net income (loss) adjusted for non-cash items, partially offset by a decrease in $5.9 million in cash generated from the change in operating asset and liability accounts.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Investing activities primarily consist of payments made related to the acquisition of businesses and capital expenditures.
Net cash flows from investing activities increased $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash flows from investing was driven by $25.5 million of cash paid for acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020, which did not occur in the year ended December 31, 2021 and a $0.9 million decrease in capital expenditures.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Financing activities primarily consist of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, payment of offering costs, proceeds and repayments on long-term and related party debt, and proceeds from the exercise of stock/equity-based options.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $170.3 million for the for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $205.0 million, which was primarily driven by $332.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon our IPO and $1.6 million of proceeds from issuance of stock options, offset by $114.2 million used to repay long-term debt, $5.9 million used to repay related party notes, $5.3 million of payments related to our offering costs, contingent consideration payments of $1.9 million, and payments of debt issuance costs of $1.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $34.7 million, which was primarily driven by $31.3 million of proceeds from issuance of long-term debt and $5.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of equity-based options, offset by contingent consideration payments of $1.5 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, our future contractual obligations were related to operating leases and non-cancellable commitments to vendors. Our future commitments related to operating leases are $40.5 million, with $5.7 million expected to be paid within one year and $34.8 million thereafter. The commitments under our operating lease obligations primarily consist of lease payments for our Braintree, Massachusetts corporate headquarters, and our offices in Santa Monica, California, Los Angeles, California and Marlborough, Massachusetts. Our future commitments related to non-cancellable
commitments are $3.1 million, with $1.9 million expected to be paid within one year and $1.2 million thereafter. Our non-cancellable commitments to vendors primarily consist of subscriptions to third party software products.
For additional discussion on our operating leases and other non-cancellable commitments, refer to Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods, as well as related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and any such differences may be material.
Our significant accounting policies, including those considered to be critical accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following critical accounting policies reflect significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements: revenue recognition, valuation of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of contingent consideration liabilities, stock-based compensation, and income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenue primarily from providing access to our SaaS solutions via subscription and transaction and usage-based fees for services provided through our solutions. In accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers: Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), we recognize revenue following a five-step model.
Application of ASC 606 related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction (gross revenue) or an agent (net revenue) as it relates to certain transaction and usage-based revenue arrangements can require considerable judgement. We have concluded that we are acting as an agent in these arrangements as we do not control the services performed by card networks, sponsor banks and credit card processors as each of these parties is the primary obligor for their portion of transaction and usage-based services performed. Therefore, transaction and usage service revenue is recognized net of any fees owed to these intermediaries. Changes in our principal versus agent judgment could impact the amount of revenue recognized but not our operating income (loss) or net income (loss).
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The valuation of assets acquired in a business combination and subsequent impairment reviews of such assets require the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, and we record goodwill when consideration paid in a business acquisition exceeds the value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if facts and circumstances warrant a review. We assess both the existence of potential impairment and the amount of loss, if any, by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit that includes goodwill with its carrying amount, including goodwill. Our estimates are based upon assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which do not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur. As of December 31, 2021, we performed a qualitative assessment for each of our reporting units. The qualitative analyses resulted in us determining that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
Intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. We amortize acquired intangible assets over their estimated useful lives based on the pattern of consumption of the economic benefits or, if that pattern cannot be readily determined, on a straight-line basis. The estimated fair values of these intangible assets reflect various assumptions including discount rates, revenue growth rates, operating margins, terminal values, useful lives, and other prospective financial information. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value of intangibles as well as the estimated lives, could materially impact net income or loss in periods subsequent to an acquisition as a result of amortization expense recorded within the consolidated statements of operations.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration Liabilities
Our acquisitions may provide for potential future cash payments to former owners upon achievement of certain future performance targets. We estimate the fair value of these payments as of each respective acquisition date, and we remeasure the fair value of the potential payments based upon the estimated achievement levels of the remaining targets at each subsequent reporting date until the liability is fully settled. Increases or decreases in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability are recorded through contingent consideration expense on the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities is determined using a variety of valuation methods, including Monte Carlo simulations, and include significant unobservable inputs, such as forecasted net recurring revenue, net recurring revenue volatility, discount rate and expected term. A change in any of the unobservable inputs would have a corresponding impact on the liability recognized. As of December 31, 2021, the maximum amount we would be required to pay related to contingent consideration is $3.0 million, which is fixed and was measured using observable inputs.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure awards with service-based vesting or performance-based vesting granted to employees, non-employees, and directors based on the fair value of the award on the date of grant. Compensation expense for the awards is recognized over the requisite service period for employees and directors and as services are delivered for non-employees, both of which are generally the vesting period of the respective award.
We estimate the fair value of stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of highly subjective estimates and assumptions, including:
•Fair value of common stock. Prior to our IPO, we estimated the fair value of common stock based on valuations and other factors deemed relevant by management. Following our IPO, we used the quoted market price of our common stock to establish the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock options.
•Expected term. The expected term reflects the average of the vesting term and the contractual lives of all options awarded.
•Expected volatility. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies over the option's expected term.
•Expected dividend yield. We have never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
•Risk-free interest rate. We base the risk-free interest rate on the applicable rate for the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
If any assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model changed significantly, stock-compensation expense for future awards may differ materially compared with the expense for awards granted previously. Following our IPO, we shifted from assessing the fair value of our common stock utilizing third-party valuations and other factors to utilizing the quoted market price of our common stock. We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or in our tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and deferred tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
The ability to utilize deferred tax assets may be restricted or eliminated by changes in our ownership, changes in legislation, and other rules affecting the ability to offset future taxable income with losses or other tax attributes from prior periods. Future determinations on the need for a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets will be made on an annual basis. This is more fully described in Note 13 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.
JOBS Act
We currently qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). Accordingly, we have the option to adopt new or revised accounting guidance either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. Our utilization of these transition periods may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the transition periods afforded under the JOBS Act.