Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Corporate Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company singularly focused on developing and commercializing accessible, oral, once-daily, non-statin medicines for patients struggling with elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or LDL-C. Through commercial execution and advancement of our CLEAR Outcomes trial as well as our pre-clinical pipeline, we continue to evolve into a differentiated, global cardiometabolic biotech. Our team of lipid experts are dedicated to lowering bad cholesterol through the discovery, development and commercialization of innovative medicines and their combinations with established medicines. Our first two products were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, European Medicines Agency, or EMA and Swiss Agency for Therapeutic Products, or Swissmedic, in 2020. Bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet are oral, once-daily, non-statin, LDL-C lowering medicines for patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, or ASCVD, or heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or HeFH.
On April 26, 2021, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd, or DS. Pursuant to the agreement, we granted DS exclusive development and commercialization rights to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, Vietnam, Brazil, Macao, Cambodia and Myanmar, or the DS Territory. The agreement allows for potential expansion across geographies including Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, Yemen, Colombia and other Latin American countries. Except for certain development activities in South Korea and Taiwan, DS will be responsible for development and commercialization in these territories. We received an upfront cash payment of $30.0 million in May 2021 and are eligible to receive up to an additional $175.0 million in sales milestones. We will also receive tiered royalties ranging from 5 percent to 20 percent on net sales in the DS Territory.
On April 26, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 2, or the RIPA Amendment, to the Revenue Interest Purchase Agreement, or RIPA, with Eiger III SA LLC, or Oberland, an affiliate of Oberland Capital LLC, as agent for the purchaser parties thereto dated as of June 26, 2019 (as amended by the Amendment No. 1 dated as of November 9, 2020). Pursuant to the RIPA Amendment, Oberland waived the original trailing six-month world-wide net sales condition to the third installment payment under the RIPA and released the final $50 million payment payable to us under the terms of the RIPA. The Company
and Oberland also agreed to amend additional terms of the RIPA and the related Security Agreement, which are discussed further in Note 10 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On October 18, 2021, we announced our plan to align operational and expense structure to better enable future growth for our two first-in-class oral medicines, NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, and prioritize our investment in the CLEAR Outcomes trial. We reduced operational expense across our organization through a corporate workforce reduction of approximately 40%, or the Reduction, and through targeted program savings. We focused our commercialization efforts on an optimized blend of focused outreach including a streamlined sales force, directed to targeted cardiologists and primary care physicians, and a suite of digital initiatives designed to increase awareness and utilization of our medicines in appropriate patients.
On October 22, 2021, we entered into a privately negotiated exchange agreement, or the Exchange Agreement, with two co-managed holders, or the Holders, of our Convertible Notes. Under the terms of the Exchange Agreement the Holders agreed to exchange with us $15.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes held in the aggregate by them (and accrued interest thereon) for shares of our common stock. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, the number of shares of common stock to be issued by us to the Holders upon consummation of the Exchange was determined based upon the volume-weighted-average-price per share of common stock, subject to a floor of $5.62 per share, during the five trading-day averaging period, commencing on the trading day immediately following the date of the Exchange Agreement. The Exchange closed on November 3, 2021, resulting in an issuance of 1,094,848 shares of our common stock. Refer to Note 11 in our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
On December 2, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, or Wainwright. Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we agreed to sell, in a firm commitment offering, 32,142,858 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value per share, and accompanying warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,142,858 shares of common stock, as well as up to 4,821,428 additional shares of common stock and/or accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 4,821,428 shares of our common stock that may be purchased by Wainwright pursuant to a 30-day option granted to Wainwright by us, or the Offering. Each share of common stock was sold together with a common warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at an exercise price of $9.00 per share. Such common warrants are immediately exercisable and will expire two years from the date of issuance. The combined public offering price of each share of common stock and accompanying common warrant sold in the Offering was $7.00, and the combined price of each share of common stock and accompanying common warrant purchased by Wainwright from the Company was $6.51. On December 3, 2021, Wainwright exercised its option to purchase additional warrants to purchase 4,821,428 shares of Common Stock. The Offering, including the additional warrants sold pursuant to the exercise of Wainwright's option to purchase additional warrants, closed on December 7, 2021. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the offering was $208.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us and excluding the net proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the common warrants. Refer to Note 12 in our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We are conducting a global cardiovascular outcomes trial, or CVOT, -known as Cholesterol Lowering via BEmpedoic Acid, an ACL-inhibiting Regimen (CLEAR) Outcomes. The trial is designed to evaluate whether treatment with bempedoic acid reduces the risk of cardiovascular events in patients who are statin averse and who have CVD or are at high risk for CVD. We initiated the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT in December 2016 and fully enrolled the study with over 14,000 patients in August 2019. The primary endpoint of the study is the effect of bempedoic acid on four types of major adverse cardiovascular events, or MACE (cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, or coronary revascularization; also referred to as "four-component MACE"). CLEAR Outcomes is an event-driven trial and will conclude once the predetermined number of MACE endpoints occur. Based on estimated cardiovascular event rates, we expect to meet the target number of events in the second half of 2022 and report top-line results in the first quarter of 2023. In February 2022, we accumulated 90% of the primary 4-component MACE endpoints. We intend to use positive results from this CVOT to support submissions for a CV risk reduction indication in the U.S., Europe and other territories.
We were incorporated in Delaware in January 2008, and commenced our operations in April 2008. Since our inception, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on developing and commercializing bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe tablet. In February 2020, the FDA approved NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL was commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and NEXLIZET was commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020. While we began to generate revenue from the sales of our products in 2020, we have funded our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and warrants, public offerings of common stock and warrants, the incurrence of indebtedness, through collaborations with third parties and revenue interest purchase agreements. We have incurred losses in each year since our inception.
We have never been profitable and our net losses were $269.1 million, $143.6 million and $97.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in
connection with research and development programs, selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing activities, including, among others:
•commercializing NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in the U.S; and
•completing the clinical development activities for the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT.
Accordingly, we may need additional financing to support our continuing operations and further the development and commercialization of our products. We may seek to fund our operations and further development activities through collaborations with third parties, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, permitted debt financings, permitted royalty-based financings, permitted public or private equity offerings or through other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy or continue operations. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Product Overview
NEXLETOL is a first-in-class ATP Citrate Lyase, or ACL, inhibitor that lowers LDL-C by reducing cholesterol biosynthesis and up-regulating the LDL receptors. Completed Phase 3 studies conducted in more than 3,000 patients, with over 2,000 patients treated with NEXLETOL, demonstrated an average 18 percent placebo corrected LDL-C lowering when used in patients on moderate or high-intensity statins. NEXLETOL was approved by the FDA in February 2020 as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C.
NEXLIZET contains bempedoic acid and ezetimibe and lowers elevated LDL-C through complementary mechanisms of action by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis in the liver and absorption in the intestine. Phase 3 data demonstrated NEXLIZET lowered LDL-C by a mean of 38 percent compared to placebo when added on to maximally tolerated statins. NEXLIZET was approved by the FDA in February 2020 as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C.
NILEMDO is a first-in-class ACL inhibitor that lowers LDL-C by reducing cholesterol biosynthesis and up-regulating the LDL receptors. NILEMDO was approved by the EC in March 2020 for use in adults with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial) or mixed dyslipidemia, as an adjunct to diet in combination with a statin or statin with other lipid-lowering therapies in adult patients unable to reach LDL-C goals with the maximum tolerated dose of a statin, or alone or in combination with other lipid-lowering therapies as an adjunct to diet in adult patients who are statin-intolerant, or for whom a statin is contraindicated.
NUSTENDI contains bempedoic acid and ezetimibe and lowers elevated LDL-C through complementary mechanisms of action by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis in the liver and absorption in the intestine. NUSTENDI was approved by the EC in March 2020 for use in adults with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial) or mixed dyslipidemia, as an adjunct to diet in combination with a statin in adult patients unable to reach LDL-C goals with the maximum tolerated dose of a statin in addition to ezetimibe, alone in patients who are either statin-intolerant or for whom a statin is contraindicated, and are unable to reach LDL-C goals with ezetimibe alone, or as an adjunct to diet in adult patients already being treated with the combination of bempedoic acid and ezetimibe as separate tablets with or without statin.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $65.9 million in direct expenses related to our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and other ongoing clinical studies.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $70.4 million in direct expenses related to our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and other ongoing clinical studies.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $108.9 million in direct expenses related to our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT, our open-label extension study, and our 1002-FDC-058 study.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The full extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, or the future outbreak of any other highly infectious or contagious diseases, may impact our business, including our CVOT and commercialization efforts will depend on continuously changing circumstances, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, such as the duration of such pandemic including future waves of infection, the emergence and prevalence of more contagious variants, such as the recent "Omicron" variant of the virus, or the global availability and utilization of effective vaccines, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. The ongoing fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic but it has had a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of heightening the risks to which we are subject, including potential impacts on the progress and time to completion of our ongoing CVOT, the reliance on third parties in our supply chain for materials and manufacturing and delivery of our drugs and drug candidates, our ability to effectively promote and market our approved products, disruptions in health regulatory agencies' operations globally, the volatility of our common stock, our ability to access capital markets, and our ability to successfully commercialize and generate revenue from our approved drugs.
We are continuing to assess the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business operations in an effort to mitigate interruption to our commercialization of our approved drugs and other business activities and to ensure the safety and well being of our employees, as well as the physicians and patients participating in our CVOT. Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the U.S. and worldwide, and as new strains continue to be identified, certain national, state, and local governmental authorities have issued orders, proclamations, and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Although some of these restrictions were eased or lifted, in response to local surges and new waves of infection, some countries, states, and local governments have reinstituted these restrictions, and additional, more restrictive orders, proclamations, and/or directives may be issued in the future. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, partners, and patients, including encouraging all employees to work-from-home if able to perform their duties remotely, and requiring adherence to onsite occupancy limits and appropriate safety measures designed to comply with federal, state, and local guidelines.
Our ability to successfully launch, commercialize, and generate revenue from NEXLETOL, NEXLIZET, NILEMDO and NUSTENDI has been and may continue to be adversely affected by the economic impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Physicians’ offices and other medical institutions continue to have limited access for nonpatients, which includes our sales personnel. In addition, social distancing requirements and precautionary measures due to COVID-19 have impacted the ability of our sales personnel to interact in-person with customers. As a result, in many circumstances we have needed to limit our interactions with physicians and payors and adapt our launch strategies and tactics to a virtual model, including developing and deploying various technology-enabled platforms for virtual engagement such as remote detailing, digital and non-personal marketing channels, and social media. These circumstances have affected and may continue to adversely affect the ability of our sales professionals to effectively market our approved drugs to physicians and the rates of uptakes for our approved drugs, which may have a negative impact on our sales and our market penetration. In addition, patient visits with physicians have decreased as a result of COVID-19, due to travel restrictions, social distancing or testing requirements, prioritization of healthcare resources to address the pandemic, and/or fear of exposure to the virus, which we believe has adversely affected and could continue to have an adverse impact on new patient starts and overall patient treatment volume. Market disruption and unemployment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may lead to delays in obtaining insurance coverage and reimbursement of newly approved products.
We have had to optimize our cost structure in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the conventional healthcare model associated with normal health management practices, such as regular physician office visits, lab tests, and prescription fills. As a result of the impact COVID-19 has had on our business and demand, in October 2021, we announced our plan to align operational and expense structure to better enable future growth for NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and prioritize our investment in the CLEAR Outcomes trial. This included reducing operational expense across the organization through a corporate workforce reduction of approximately 40% and through targeted program savings. We will focus our commercialization efforts on an optimized blend of focused outreach including a streamlined sales force, directed to targeted cardiologists and primary care physicians, and a suite of digital initiatives designed to increase awareness and utilization of our medicines in appropriate patients. We adjusted our 2021 operating expense guidance and planned 2022 operating expense budget accordingly, including our budgeted production plans. While it is not possible at this time to estimate the entirety of the impact that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business or operations, the continued spread or future waves of COVID-19, measures taken by governments, actions taken to protect employees, and the broad impact of the pandemic on all business activities may materially and adversely affect our preclinical activities, clinical development progress, data and timelines, commercialization efforts including any revenue from sales, supply chain continuity, and general business operations, and our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations could be materially harmed as a result.
To date, we have not experienced any interruption of our supply of drug products needed to support our ongoing clinical study and product sales. However, such interruptions may occur due to supply chain issues related to COVID-19, such as the demand for vaccines and potential for manufacturing facilities and materials to be commandeered under the Defense Production Act of 1950, or equivalent foreign legislation, which may make it more difficult to obtain materials or manufacturing capacity at our third-party manufacturers to the products needed for our clinical trials and commercial product, which could lead to delays in our ongoing trial and/or issues with our commercial supply. We remain focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet, liquidity and financial flexibility and continue to monitor developments as we deal with the disruptions and uncertainties from a business and financial perspective relating to COVID-19. We will continue to work diligently with our partners and stakeholders to continue supporting patient access to our approved medicines, advancing our product under regulatory review as well as in our clinical studies to the extent safe to do so for patients, caregivers and healthcare practitioners, and ensuring the continuity of our manufacturing and supply chain. For additional information related to the potential impact of COVID-19 on our business, please read Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Product sales, net
Product sales, net is related to our sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL was commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and NEXLIZET was commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue is related to our collaboration agreements with Daiichi Sankyo and Otsuka. Collaboration revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily related to the initial recognition of the upfront payment from our license and collaboration agreement with DS, sales of bulk tablets under supply agreements, and royalty revenue received from collaboration partners. Collaboration revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily related to the $150.0 million milestone from the Marketing Authorisation Applications, or MAA, transfer to DSE and $60.0 million from the upfront payment with Otsuka. Under contracted supply agreements with ex-U.S. collaborators, we may manufacture and supply quantities of active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, or bulk tablets reasonably required by ex-U.S. collaboration partners for the development or sale of licensed products in their respective territory. We recognize revenue when the collaboration partner has obtained control of the API or bulk tablets. We also receive royalties from the commercialization of such products, and record our share of the variable consideration, representing a percentage of net product sales, as collaboration revenue in the period in which such underlying sales occur and costs are incurred by the collaborators.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold is related to our net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the cost of goods sold from our supply agreements with collaboration partners. Prior to the FDA approval of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, expenses associated with the manufacturing of our products were recorded as research and development expense.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, contract research organizations, or CROs, and investigative sites that conduct our preclinical and clinical studies;
•the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical study materials and commercial product manufacturing supply prior to product approval, including the procurement of ezetimibe in our continued development of our bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and travel expenses;
•allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies; and
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. To date, substantially all of our research and development work has been related to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors. Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical studies. We do not allocate acquiring and manufacturing clinical study materials, salaries, stock-based compensation, employee benefits or other indirect costs related to our research and development function to specific programs.
We will continue to incur research and development expenses in the foreseeable future as they relate to our ongoing CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and any other development programs or additional indications we choose to pursue. We cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs associated with the ongoing or future clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet. The duration, costs and timing associated with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet will depend on a variety of factors, including uncertainties associated with the results of our clinical studies and our ability to obtain regulatory approval outside the U.S. and Europe. For example, if a regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical studies beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development or post-commercialization clinical studies of bempedoic acid or the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development or post-commercialization clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet.
In accordance with ASC 730-10-25-1, Research and Development, costs incurred in obtaining in-licenses are charged to research and development expense if the in-licensed technology has not reached commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. Such licenses purchased by us require substantial completion of research and development, regulatory and marketing approval efforts in order to reach commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation, associated with our sales, executive, accounting and finance, commercial, operational and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses include selling expenses, facility-related costs, communication expenses and professional fees for legal, patent prosecution, protection and review, consulting and accounting services.
As a result of the Reduction and other targeted program savings, we anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will decrease in 2022 compared to 2021. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase after we report top-line results from the CLEAR Outcomes trial in the first quarter of 2023 in connection with potential additional global regulatory submissions for new product indications, expanded commercialization initiatives for NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and increases in our associated headcount.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was related to our Revenue Interest Purchase Agreement, or RIPA, with Eiger III SA LLC, or Oberland, an affiliate of Oberland Capital and our Convertible Notes issued in November 2020.
Other Income
Other income, net, primarily relates to the gain on extinguishment on an exchange of $15 million of our convertible notes for shares of our common stock, the sale of lease vehicles associated with the reduction in force, interest income and the accretion or amortization of premiums and discounts earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investment securities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, including those related to our collaboration agreements and revenue interest liability. We base
our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to understanding our results and financial operations.
Product Sales, Net
We sell NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET to wholesalers in the U.S and, in accordance with ASC 606, recognize revenue at the point in time when the customer is deemed to have obtained control of the product, which generally occurs upon receipt by the customer. Product sales are recorded at the net selling price, which includes variable considerations for rebates, chargebacks, co-pay assistance programs, distribution related fees, product returns, and other sales-related discounts and fees. Calculating these net product sales involves judgments and estimates. We estimate a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as contracts with customers, healthcare providers, payors and government agencies, statutorily-defined discounts applicable to government-funded programs, forecasted payor mix, customer buying and payment patterns, and other relevant factors. The reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the applicable contract. The amount of variable consideration may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Given the early stage of our commercial operations we have provided constraint of our variable consideration due to its potential consumption trends. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. Each period, we review our estimates of rebates, co-pay assistance programs, distribution fees and other applicable provisions. If actual results vary from estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Revenue Interest Liability
We have entered into a RIPA to support the commercialization and further development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet and provide for other working capital needs. The revenue interest liability related to the RIPA is presented net of deferred issuance costs on the balance sheets. The Company imputes interest expense associated with this liability using the effective interest rate method and is presented as interest expense on the statements of operations. The effective interest rate is calculated based on the rate that would enable the debt to be repaid in full over the anticipated life of the arrangement. The interest rate on the liability may vary during the term of the agreement depending on a number of factors, including the level of forecasted net sales. This estimate is complex and highly judgmental as it is based on our future revenue projections and expectations about future economic and market conditions. The Company evaluates the interest rate quarterly based on its current net sales forecasts utilizing the prospective method. A significant increase or decrease in net sales will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment. Issuance costs in connection with the RIPA are amortized to interest expense over the estimated term of the RIPA.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
For information on new accounting standards adopted and the impact, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements found elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Product sales, net
Product sales, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $40.0 million relating to our sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET compared to $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $27.0 million. The increase is primarily due to prescription growth of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET became commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and June 4, 2020, respectively.
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue recognized from our collaboration agreements for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.4 million compared to $214.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $176.2 million. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the initial recognition of the upfront payment from our license and collaboration agreement with Daiichi Sankyo in April 2021, product sales to collaboration partners under our supply agreements and royalty revenue. Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the $60.0 million upfront payment from Otsuka and $150.0 million from Daiichi Sankyo related to the MAA transfer milestone.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $14.2 million compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.8 million. The increase is primarily related to increased product sales to our collaboration partners under our supply agreements, increased net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the impact of pre-launch inventory on the year ended December 31, 2020. NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET became commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and June 4, 2020, respectively.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $106.0 million compared to $146.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $40.9 million. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a decline in manufacturing costs which were classified as research and development expense prior to FDA approval of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET on February 21, 2020 and February 26, 2020, respectively, as well as an overall reduction in ongoing clinical research activities, including compensation costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $185.0 million compared to $199.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $14.6 million. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to decreases in advertising, compensation costs, and costs incurred to support the initial launch of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in the U.S. in 2020 offset partially by a $13.3 million one-time charge associated with a legal settlement in 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $46.4 million, compared to $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $23.7 million. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to additional interest expense attributable to the additional fundings under our RIPA with Oberland and the Convertible Notes entered in November 2020.
Other income, net
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $4.0 million compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.5 million. This increase was primarily related a $2.6 million gain on extinguishment on the exchange of our convertible notes for shares of our common stock and a gain on sale of our lease vehicles due to the reduction in force.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 may be found in the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
While we began to generate revenue from the sales of our products in 2020, we have funded our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and warrants, public offerings of common stock and warrants, the incurrence of indebtedness, milestone payments from collaboration agreements and revenue interest purchase agreement. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreements with Daiichi Sankyo and Otsuka, we are eligible for substantial additional sales and regulatory milestone payments and royalties. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreements entered into April 2021 with Daiichi Sankyo, we received an upfront cash payment of $30.0 million in May 2021 and are eligible for substantial additional sales milestone payments and royalties. Pursuant to the amended RIPA with Oberland, we received an additional $50.0 million in May 2021. The amended RIPA increases the revenue interest we will pay Oberland based on the net sales of our products as outlined in Note 10 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In December 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement where we sold shares of common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of $208.7 million. We anticipate that we will incur losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to incur substantial expenses related to the ongoing commercialization of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and our ongoing CLEAR Outcomes CVOT. We anticipate that our current cash, cash equivalents, investments, expected future net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, and expected future revenue under our collaboration agreements is sufficient to allow us to complete and report results from the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and fund continuing operations for the foreseeable future beyond the CVOT read-out.
As of December 31, 2021, our primary sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments which totaled $309.3 million, which includes $50 million that is restricted per the amendment and waiver with Oberland. We invest our cash equivalents and investments in highly liquid, interest-bearing investment-grade securities and government securities to preserve principal.
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods presented below:
Operating Activities
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur, significant costs related to the commercialization of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and related to ongoing research and development, regulatory and other clinical study costs associated with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet.
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $263.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and $30.0 million in upfront fees from our collaboration agreement with DS fully offset by cash used to fund the commercialization activities of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the research and development costs related to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, adjusted for non-cash expenses such as stock-based compensation expense, interest expense related to our RIPA with Oberland and convertible notes, depreciation and amortization and changes in working capital. Net cash used in operating activities totaled $85.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of the $150.0 million milestone payment from our collaboration agreement with DSE, $60.0 million from the Otsuka collaboration agreement and net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET offset by cash used to fund the commercialization activities of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the research and development costs related to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, adjusted for non-cash expenses such as stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt issuance costs, interest expense related to our RIPA with Oberland and Convertible Notes, depreciation and amortization and changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $50.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of purchases of highly liquid, interest bearing investment grade and government securities. Net cash provided by investing activities of $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of proceeds from the sale and maturities of highly liquid, interest bearing investment grade and government securities partially offset by $12.5 million for the purchase of in-process research and development to in-license intellectual property for our PCSK9 inhibitor program.
Funds invested in available-for-sale investments in the year ended December 31, 2021 will become available for our use over the next twelve months.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $268.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, related primarily to net $208.7 million received from our offering of common stock and warrants in December 2021, $50.0 million in cash from our RIPA with Oberland, proceeds from the issuance of common stock through the "at-the-market" offering and cash received from stock option exercises, offset by payments on our revenue interest liability. Net cash provided by financing activities of $201.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related primarily to the $271.6 million, net, in cash received from the Convertible Notes, $25.0 million in cash received from the RIPA with Oberland upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL and $6.6 million in cash received from stock option exercises, offset by the prepayment of a forward stock repurchase of $55.0 million and $46.0 million from the purchase of capped call options related to the Convertible Notes as described in Item 8, Note 11, Convertible Notes.
On August 3, 2021, we filed an automatically effective registration statement on Form S-3ASR, or Registration Statement, with the SEC which registers the offering, issuance and sale of an unspecified amount of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units of any combination thereof. We simultaneously entered into an open market sale agreement with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent, to provide for the issuance and sale by the Company of up to $250 million of common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings under the Registration Statement and related prospectus filed with the
Registration Statement, or the ATM Program. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 897,364 shares of common stock resulting in net proceeds of approximately $9.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses, pursuant to the ATM Program. We may continue to use an ATM Program to address potential short-term or long-term funding requirements that may arise. Such program will continue to be subject to the volatility of the price of our common stock and general market conditions.
In December 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement where we sold 32,142,858 shares of common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,142,858 shares of our common stock. We also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to 4,821,428 additional shares of common stock and/or accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 4,821,428 shares of our common stock. The underwriters exercised the option to purchase additional warrants to purchase 4,821,428 shares of Common Stock. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the offering was $208.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us and excluding the net proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the common warrants. The warrants are immediately exercisable and will expire two years from the date of issuance, at an exercise price of $9.00 per share, which may provide us with additional funding, if such warrants are exercised by their holders.
In 2019, we entered into a RIPA with Oberland. Pursuant to the RIPA, Oberland paid us $125.0 million at closing, less certain issuance costs, and, subject to the terms and conditions of the RIPA, we received an additional $25.0 million upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL in 2020 and were eligible to receive an additional $50.0 million at our option upon reaching certain sales thresholds. In April 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to the RIPA and Oberland waived the original trailing six-month world-wide net sales condition to the third installment payment under the RIPA and released the final $50 million payment payable to us under the terms of the RIPA. The amendment also updated the tiered payment percentage. As the quarterly net revenue from sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and certain other products in the United States did not exceed $15.0 million for the quarter ended September 30, 2021, we deposited $50.0 million in a deposit account with Oberland, which reduced our unrestricted cash. As consideration for the payments, Oberland has the right to receive certain revenue interests from us based on the net sales of certain products which will be tiered payments ranging from 3.3% to 10% of our net sales in the covered territory (as detailed in the RIPA). Esperion reacquires 100% revenue rights upon repayment completion. We recorded the proceeds from the RIPA as a liability on the balance sheets and are accounting for the RIPA under the effective-interest method over the estimated life of the RIPA. Future payments under the RIPA may range from $11.3 million in the next year to a maximum total payment of $434.8 million beyond one year. Per the terms of the agreement, every $100 million of net sales generated, less than or equal to $250 million in an annual aggregate, would result in a repayment obligation of approximately $10.0 million or 10% at the stated repayment rate in the first year. In the future, as net sales thresholds set forth in the agreement are met and the repayment percentage rate changes, the amount of the obligation and timing of payment is likely to change. As the U.S. net sales were less than $350 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Covered Territory is expanded to include worldwide sales beginning in 2022. A significant increase or decrease in net sales will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment. Refer to Note 10 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
On November 16, 2020, we issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% convertible senior subordinated notes due 2025 to certain financial institutions as the initial purchasers of the convertible notes. An additional $30.0 million of additional convertible notes (collectively, the "Convertible Notes"), which were issued pursuant to the exercise of the initial purchasers' option to purchase such convertible notes, closed on November 18, 2020. On October 22, 2021, we entered into the Exchange Agreement with the Holders, of our Convertible Notes. Under the terms of the Exchange Agreement the Holders agreed to exchange with us $15.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes held in the aggregate by them (and accrued interest thereon) for shares of our common stock, which closed on November 3, 2021. Future payments under the convertible notes include annual interest of $10.6 million and a principal payment of $265.0 million in 2025. Refer to Note 11 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Plan of Operations and Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and our continued commercialization activities associated with NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in the U.S. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreements with DSE, Otsuka, and DS, we are eligible for substantial additional sales and regulatory milestone payments and royalties. We estimate that current cash resources, proceeds to be received in the future for product sales and proceeds under the collaboration agreements with Daiichi Sankyo and Otsuka are sufficient to fund operations for the foreseeable future. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may need to secure additional cash resources or implement certain additional cost reduction initiatives to continue to fund the commercialization and further development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, particularly if there are delays in the
completion of the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT or our net product sales do not meet our expectations. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and ongoing commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, and the extent to which we entered and may enter into collaborations with pharmaceutical partners regarding the development and commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the development and commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•our ability to successfully develop and commercialize NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET or other product candidates;
•the costs, timing and outcomes of our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and other ongoing clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet;
•the time and cost necessary to obtain regulatory approvals for bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet outside the U.S. and Europe;
•our ability to establish any future collaboration or commercialization arrangements on favorable terms, if at all;
•our ability to realize the intended benefits of our existing and future collaboration and partnerships;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•the implementation of operational and financial information technology.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate U.S. substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of collaborations with third parties, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, permitted debt financings, permitted royalty-based financings and equity offerings or other sources. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available and permitted under the terms of our RIPA, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners or royalty-based financing arrangements, such as the collaboration arrangement with DSE, Otsuka and DS, and the RIPA with Oberland, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. For instance, as part of the RIPA with Oberland, Oberland has the right to receive certain revenue interests from us based on the net sales of certain products, and we have granted Oberland a senior security interest in certain of our assets. If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to allow us to make required payments, we may have to reduce or delay capital expenditures, sell assets or seek additional capital. If we raise funds by selling additional equity, such sale would result in dilution to our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or permitted debt financings or through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements or permitted royalty-based financing arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We do not currently have, nor did we have during the periods presented, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Securities and Exchange Commission rules.