Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and other items in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements and information that are based on management’s beliefs, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, management. When used in this document, the words “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “project,” “forecast,” “plan,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although management believes that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct. These statements are subject to numerous risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements in this report. Certain of these risks are summarized in this report under Item 1A. Risk Factors, which you should read carefully in connection with our forward-looking statements. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those anticipated. We undertake no obligation to release publicly any revisions to these forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
For a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on March 10, 2021.
Overview
We are a growth-oriented independent oil and gas company engaged in the acquisition and development of oil and gas reserves through activities that include the acquisition, drilling and development of undeveloped leases, asset and corporate acquisitions and mergers. Our operations are all in the upstream segment of the oil and natural gas industry and all our properties are onshore in the United States. Our assets are currently located in the Midland Basin in West Texas, the Eagle Ford Trend in South Texas, and the Delaware Basin in New Mexico.
Earthstone is the sole managing member of Earthstone Energy Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (together with its wholly-owned consolidated subsidiaries, “EEH”), with a controlling interest in EEH. Earthstone, together with its
wholly-owned subsidiary, Lynden Corp, and Lynden Corp’s wholly-owned consolidated subsidiary, Lynden US and also a member of EEH, consolidates the financial results of EEH and records a noncontrolling interest in the Consolidated Financial Statements representing the economic interests of EEH’s members other than Earthstone and Lynden US (collectively, the “Company” “our,” “we,” “us,” or similar terms).
Bighorn Agreement
On January 30, 2022, Earthstone, EEH, and Bighorn entered into the Bighorn Agreement. Pursuant to the Bighorn Agreement, EEH will acquire (the “Bighorn Acquisition”) interests in oil and gas leases and related property of Bighorn located in the Midland Basin in West Texas, for a purchase price (the “Bighorn Purchase Price”) of $770 million in cash and 6,808,511 shares of Class A Common Stock. The Bighorn Purchase Price is subject to customary purchase price adjustments with an effective date of January 1, 2022. In connection with the Bighorn Agreement, EEH deposited $50 million in cash into a third-party escrow account as a deposit pursuant to the Bighorn Agreement, which will be credited against the Bighorn Purchase Price upon closing of the Bighorn Acquisition. The Bighorn Acquisition is expected to close in the second quarter of 2022.
Credit Agreement
On January 30, 2022, Earthstone, EEH, as Borrower, Wells Fargo, as Administrative Agent, the lenders party thereto (the “Lenders”) and the guarantors party thereto entered into an amended and restated Fifth Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement dated November 21, 2019, by and among EEH, as Borrower, Earthstone, as Parent, Wells Fargo, as Administrative Agent and Issuing Bank, Royal Bank of Canada, as Syndication Agent, Truist Bank, Citizens Bank, N.A., KeyBank National Association, U.S. Bank National Association, Fifth Third Bank, PNC Bank, National Association, and Bank of America, N.A., as Documentation Agents, and the Lenders party thereto (together with all amendments or other modifications, the “Credit Agreement”). Among other things, the Amendment increased the borrowing base and corresponding elected commitments from $650 million to $825 million upon the Chisholm Closing; provides that upon the closing of the Bighorn Acquisition, the borrowing base and corresponding elected commitments would increase to $1.325 billion, unless Earthstone completes a Notes Offering prior to the closing of the Bighorn Acquisition in which case the elected commitments will be reduced by the amount of the net proceeds from a Notes Offering up to $500 million; provides for an increase in interest rates by 0.50% in the event a Notes Offering has not been completed prior to the closing of the Bighorn Acquisition; provides mechanics relating to the transition from LIBOR to a benchmark replacement rate, SOFR, to be effective contemporaneously with the effectiveness of the amendment on January 30, 2022; adds certain hedging requirements relating to anticipated oil and natural gas production of the properties to be acquired pursuant to the Bighorn Acquisition; adjusts some financial covenants; redefines the limitations on certain restricted payments the Borrower may make; and made certain administrative changes to the Credit Agreement.
Securities Purchase Agreement
On January 30, 2022, Earthstone entered into the Securities Purchase Agreement with EnCap Fund XI and Post Oak to sell, in a private placement (the “Private Placement”), 280,000 shares of Preferred Stock, each share of which will be convertible into 90.0900900900901 shares of Class A Common Stock for anticipated gross proceeds of $280.0 million, at a price of $1,000.00 per share of Preferred Stock (or $11.10 per share of Class A Common Stock on an as-converted basis). The Private Placement is contingent upon the closing of the Bighorn Acquisition. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the sale of the Preferred Stock to partially fund the Bighorn Acquisition. The Preferred Stock will convert automatically on the 20th calendar day after Earthstone mails a definitive information statement to holders of its Common Stock notifying them that holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Common Stock have consented to the conversion feature of the Preferred Stock and the issuance of Class A Common Stock upon conversion of the Preferred Stock. As of January 30, 2022, Earthstone had received written consent for the conversion feature of the Preferred Stock and the issuance of the Class A Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Preferred Stock from stockholders representing more than 50% of Earthstone’s outstanding shares of Common Stock. As of the date of the Securities Purchase Agreement, EnCap and its affiliates beneficially owned approximately 46.5% of the outstanding voting power of Earthstone. Two members of the Board are employed by EnCap. The Securities Purchase Agreement and the Private Placement were evaluated and unanimously approved by the Audit Committee and unanimously approved by the Board.
Chisholm Acquisition
On February 15, 2022, Earthstone, EEH, and Chisholm, as seller, consummated the transactions contemplated in the Chisholm Agreement. At the closing of the Chisholm Agreement, among other things, EEH acquired (the “Chisholm Acquisition”) interests in oil and gas leases and related property of Chisholm located in Lea County and Eddy County, New Mexico, for aggregate consideration consisting of: (i) approximately $314.7 million in cash, net of preliminary and customary purchase price adjustments and remains subject to post-closing settlement between EEH and Chisholm paid at the closing of the
Chisholm Acquisition, (ii) $70 million in cash to be paid as follows: $40 million to be paid six months after the closing of the Chisholm Acquisition and $30 million to be paid 12 months after the closing of the Chisholm Acquisition, subject to acceleration in the event that Earthstone receives gross proceeds of more than $450 million from a high yield bond offering or more than $50 million in gross proceeds from an offering of Class A Common Stock or preferred stock; and (iii) 19,417,476 shares of Class A Common Stock. See further discussion in Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures and Note 14. Related Party Transactions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cash consideration for the Chisholm Acquisition was funded by borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility whose borrowing base was increased from $650 million to $825 million upon consummation of the Chisholm Acquisition.
Liquidity Update
As of March 1, 2022, we had approximately $1 million in cash and $652 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement, as amended, with a borrowing base of $825 million. With the $173 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $1 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $174 million.
Areas of Operation
At present, our assets are located almost entirely in the Midland and Delaware Basins in West Texas and New Mexico, respectively, along with some oil and natural gas assets in the Eagle Ford Trend of South Texas.
Midland Basin
We believe that the Midland Basin continues to have attractive economics and we expect to continue growing our footprint through development drilling, acreage trades, asset acquisitions, and corporate merger and acquisition opportunities.
We continue to be active in acreage trades and acquisitions in the Midland Basin which generally allow for longer laterals, increased operated inventory and greater operating efficiency.
During 2021, we completed and began producing from 19 gross / 15.4 net operated wells and 8 gross / 0.8 net non-operated wells. We exited 2021 with 14 gross / 13.7 net operated wells that were in various stages of drilling and completion, of which 5 gross / 5 net wells have been completed as of March 1, 2022. We expect to complete and bring the remaining 9 gross / 8.7 net wells online in the second quarter of 2022.
Consistent with our operations from the latter part of 2021, we are running two drilling rigs in the Midland Basin, and we plan to do so throughout 2022. We anticipate spudding 40 gross / 35.8 net operated wells and bringing online 40 gross / 36.7 net operated wells on our Midland Basin properties during 2022.
Delaware Basin
Upon the consummation of the Chisholm Acquisition on February 15, 2022, we acquired approximately 36,100 net acres located in the Delaware Basin with approximately 85% held by production and approximately 92% operated. We now have interests in approximately 333 gross / 168.6 net producing wells, of which we operate 190 gross / 149.5 net producing wells. We have identified approximately 414 gross / 237.1 net potential drilling locations in this acreage.
We are currently utilizing two drilling rigs on our recently acquired Chisholm acreage, and we plan to do so throughout 2022 and we plan to spud 20 gross / 11.8 net operated wells and bring online 18 gross / 11.6 net operated wells in the Delaware Basin.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
(1)Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equals one barrel of oil equivalent (Boe).
NM - Not meaningful
Results of Operations Highlights
The IRM Acquisition, the Eagle Ford Acquisitions, the Tracker Acquisition, the Sequel Acquisition, the Foreland Acquisition and the BCC Acquisition (collectively, the “Acquisitions”) have had a significant and pervasive impact on our results of operations when compared to the prior year and, as it relates to the year ended December 31, 2020, diminished somewhat by operating results due to voluntary production shut-ins resulting from low commodity prices. In addition, commodity prices in 2021 have improved compared to the prior corresponding periods further impacting our results of operations. Below is a detailed discussion highlighting the impact of our recent acquisitions.
Oil revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, oil revenues increased by $176.8 million or 147% compared to 2020. Of the increase, $95.3 million was attributable to an increase in our realized price and $81.5 million was attributable to an increase in volume. Our average realized price per Bbl increased from $37.85 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $67.83 or 79% for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had a net increase in the volume of oil sold of 1,202 MBbls or 38%, which included an increase of 1,562 MBbls related to the wells acquired in the Acquisitions and new wells coming online related to our 2021 drilling program, offset by a decrease of 360 MBbls in our other wells primarily resulting from natural declines and shut-ins resulting from Winter Storm Uri in February 2021.
Natural gas revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, natural gas revenues increased by $42.2 million or 493% compared to 2020. Of the increase, $25.3 million was due to increased sales volumes and $16.9 million was attributable to an increase in realized price. Our average realized price per Mcf increased 197% from $1.18 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.50 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The total volume of natural gas produced and sold increased 7,223 MMcf or 99% which included an increase of 5,910 MMcf related to the wells acquired in the Acquisitions and an increase of 1,313 MMcf in our other wells primarily resulting from new wells coming online related to our 2021 drilling program, as well as prior year volumes being impacted by voluntary production shut-ins.
NGL revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, NGL revenues increased by $56.1 million or 359% compared to 2020. Of the increase, $33.6 million was attributable to higher sales volumes and $22.5 million was due to an increase in our realized price. The volume of NGLs produced and sold increased by 1,059 MBbls or 88%, which included an increase of 870 MBbls related to the wells acquired in the Acquisitions and an increase of 189 MBbls in our other wells primarily resulting from new wells coming online related to our 2021 drilling program, as well as prior year period volumes being impacted by voluntary production shut-ins.
Lease operating expense (“LOE”)
LOE includes all costs incurred to operate wells and related facilities for both operated and non-operated properties. In addition to direct operating costs such as labor, repairs and maintenance, re-engineering and workovers, equipment rentals, materials and supplies, fuel and chemicals, LOE includes product marketing and transportation fees, insurance and overhead charges provided for in operating agreements.
LOE increased by $20.2 million or 69% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $16.1 million increase resulting from the LOE of the properties acquired in the Acquisitions and a $4.1 million increase resulting from new wells coming online related to our 2021 drilling program, as well as prior year period volumes being impacted by voluntary production shut-ins.
Production and ad valorem taxes
Production and ad valorem taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $17.0 million or 181% compared to 2020, due to a $10.6 million increase resulting from the properties acquired in the Acquisitions and a $6.4 million increase related to our existing wells resulting from improved commodity prices, as well as prior year period volumes being impacted by voluntary production shut-ins.
Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not record any non-cash impairments with respect to our oil and natural gas assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash impairments totaling $64.5 million which consisted of $25.3 million to proved oil and natural gas properties, $21.6 million to unproved oil and natural gas properties and $17.6
million to goodwill. See Note 7. Oil and Natural Gas Properties in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of how impairments are measured.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”)
DD&A increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 by $10.0 million, or 10% compared to 2020, primarily due to a $28.9 million increase in DD&A related to the assets acquired in the Acquisitions, offset by an $18.9 million decrease in DD&A related to our other wells primarily resulting from lower prior year period volumes due to the impact of voluntary production shut-ins, as well as additional volumes added to the depletable base of our properties resulting from the impact of improved commodity prices on our estimated proved reserves.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”)
G&A for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $13.7 million, or 48% compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase of $11.0 million in stock-based compensation expense of which $7.9 million resulted from the modification of an equity award and $3.1 million resulted from an increase in the market value of our Class A Common Stock. The remainder of the increase was due to $1.7 million resulting from the reinstatement of our short-term incentive program which was suspended in the prior year period and an increase of $1.0 million related to professional fees and lower administrative overhead reimbursements.
Transaction costs
For the year ended December 31, 2021, transaction costs increased by $4.3 million compared to 2020, primarily due to $6.1 million in legal and professional fees and severance costs primarily associated with the Acquisitions and other potential acquisitions, partially offset by $1.2 million of net reimbursements received related to the Olenik litigation. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded transaction costs primarily due to legal, consulting and other fees of approximately $1.0 million related to the IRM Acquisition which was consummated on January 7, 2021 and $0.3 million related to other potential transactions, offset by net reimbursements of $0.7 million related to the business combination (the “Bold Transaction”) pursuant to the Bold Contribution Agreement (as defined below) which closed on May 9, 2017.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense includes commitment fees, amortization of deferred financing costs, and interest on outstanding indebtedness. Interest expense increased from $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to higher average borrowings outstanding compared to the prior year primarily resulting from borrowings related to the Acquisitions. See Note 12. Long-Term Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(Loss) gain on derivative contracts, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a net loss on derivative contracts of $116.8 million, consisting of net realized losses on settlements of our commodity hedges of $76.9 million, partially offset by net realized gains on our interest rate swap of $0.9 million, along with unrealized mark-to-market losses of $41.2 million related to our commodity hedges, partially offset by unrealized mark-to-market gains of $0.4 million related to our interest rate swap. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net gain on derivative contracts of $59.9 million, consisting of net realized gains on settlements of $56.0 million and unrealized mark-to-market gains of $3.9 million.
Income tax (expense) benefit
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded total income tax expense of $1.9 million which included (1) deferred income tax expense for Lynden US of $0.9 million as a result of its share of the distributable income from EEH, (2) deferred income tax expense for Earthstone of $6.3 million as a result of its share of the distributable loss from EEH, which was offset by a valuation allowance as future realization of the net deferred tax asset cannot be assured and (3) current income tax expense of $0.63 million and (4) deferred income tax expense of $0.33 million related to the Texas Margin Tax. Lynden Corp incurred no material income or loss, or related income tax expense or benefit, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded total income tax benefit of $0.11 million which included (1) deferred income tax expense for Lynden US of $0.15 million as a result of its share of the distributable income from EEH, (2) deferred income tax benefit for Earthstone of $0.61 million as a result of its share of the distributable loss from EEH, which was offset by a valuation allowance as future realization of the net deferred tax asset cannot be assured and (3) current income tax expense of $0.55 million offset by deferred income tax benefit of $0.51 million related to the Texas Margin Tax. Lynden Corp incurred no material income or loss, or related income tax expense or benefit, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have significant undeveloped acreage and future drilling locations. Drilling horizontal wells, generally consisting of 7,500 to 12,000-foot lateral lengths, in the Midland and Delaware Basins is capital intensive. As of December 31, 2021, we had $4.0 million in cash and $320.0 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement with a borrowing base of $650.0 million. With the $330.0 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $4.0 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $334.0 million. Subsequent to year-end, Earthstone closed on its previously announced Chisholm Acquisition and amended the Credit Agreement. As of March 1, 2022, we had approximately $1 million in cash and $652 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement, as amended, with a borrowing base of $825 million. With the $173 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $1 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $174 million.
With two drilling rigs operating in the Midland Basin and two additional rigs operating in the Delaware Basin, we expect to spend $410-$440 million based on our current 2022 drilling plan. We believe we will have sufficient liquidity with cash flows from operations and borrowings under the Credit Agreement to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months.
Working Capital
Working Capital (presented below) was a deficit of $89.2 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to a deficit of $20.8 million as of December 31, 2020, representing an increase in the deficit of $68.4 million. Of the $68.4 million increase in the working capital deficit, $50.3 million resulted from a decrease in the net fair value of our derivative contracts expected to settle in the 12 months subsequent to December 31, 2021 resulting from increased oil price futures as of December 31, 2021. The remaining decrease of $18.1 million primarily resulted from increased drilling in the current year. The components of working capital are presented below:
We expect that changes in receivables and payables related to our pace of development, production volumes, changes in our hedging activities, realized commodity prices and differentials to NYMEX prices for our oil and natural gas production will continue to be the largest variables affecting our working capital.
We expect to finance future development activities with cash flows from operating activities, borrowings under the Credit Agreement and, various means of corporate and project financing. Additionally, we may continue to partially finance our
drilling activities through the sale of participating rights to financial institutions or industry participants, and we could structure such arrangements on a promoted basis, whereby we may earn working interests in reserves and production greater than our proportionate share of capital costs.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $230.9 million compared to $131.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the impact of oil and natural gas property acquisitions and the timing of payments and receipts partially offset by the cash settlement of derivative contracts as compared to the prior year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $426.2 million from $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to acquisitions of oil and gas properties.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $197.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to cash flows used in financing activities of $56.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to borrowings required to fund acquisitions of oil and gas properties.
Capital Expenditures
Our accrual basis capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Hedging Activities
The following table sets forth our outstanding derivative contracts at December 31, 2021. When aggregating multiple contracts, the weighted average contract price is disclosed.
(1)The basis differential price is between WTI Midland Argus Crude and the WTI NYMEX.
(2)The basis differential price is between W. Texas (WAHA) and the Henry Hub NYMEX.
Hedging Update
The following table sets forth our outstanding derivative contracts at March 1, 2022. When aggregating multiple contracts, the weighted average contract price is disclosed.
(1)The basis differential price is between WTI Midland Argus Crude and the WTI NYMEX.
(2)The basis differential price is between W. Texas (WAHA) and the Henry Hub NYMEX.
Obligations and Commitments
We had the following contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)2022 amount represents interest payable under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Environmental Regulations
Our operations are subject to risks normally associated with the exploration for and the production of oil and natural gas, including blowouts, fires, and environmental risks such as oil spills or natural gas leaks that could expose us to liabilities associated with these risks.
In our acquisition of existing or previously drilled well bores, we may not be aware of prior environmental safeguards, if any, that were taken at the time such wells were drilled or during such time the wells were operated. We maintain comprehensive insurance coverage that we believe is adequate to mitigate the risk of any adverse financial effects associated with these risks.
However, should it be determined that a liability exists with respect to any environmental cleanup or restoration, the liability to cure such a violation could still accrue to us. No claim has been made, nor are we aware of any liability which we may have, as it relates to any environmental cleanup, restoration, or the violation of any rules or regulations relating thereto.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion of financial condition and results of operations is based upon the information reported in our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these statements requires us to make certain assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and other sources that we believe to be reasonable at the time. Actual results may vary from our estimates due to changes in circumstances, weather, politics, global economics, mechanical problems, general business conditions and other risks. We have outlined below certain of these policies as being of particular importance to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by our management.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We use the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas operations. Under this method, costs to acquire oil and natural gas properties, drill successful exploratory wells, drill and equip development wells, and install production facilities are capitalized. Exploration costs, including unsuccessful exploratory wells, geological and geophysical are charged to operations as incurred. Depreciation, depletion and amortization of the leasehold and development costs that are capitalized for proved oil and natural gas properties are computed using the units-of-production method, at the field level, based on total proved reserves and proved developed reserves, respectively, as estimated by independent petroleum engineers. Oil and natural gas properties are periodically assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts and circumstances indicate a possible significant deterioration in the future cash flows expected to be generated by an asset group, but at least annually. Individual assets are grouped for impairment purposes at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets, generally on a field-by-field basis. All of our properties are located within the continental United States.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserve Quantities
Reserve quantities and the related estimates of future net cash flows affect our periodic calculations of depletion, impairment of our oil and natural gas properties, and asset retirement obligations. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of oil, natural gas and NGLs which geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future periods from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. Reserve quantities and future cash flows included in this report are prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the SEC and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). The accuracy of our reserve estimates is a function of:
•The quality and quantity of available data;
•The interpretation of that data;
•The accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and
•The judgments of the persons preparing the estimates.
Our proved reserves information included in this report is based on estimates prepared by our independent petroleum engineers, CG&A. The independent petroleum engineers evaluated 100% of our estimated proved reserve quantities and their related future net cash flows as of December 31, 2021. Estimates prepared by others may be higher or lower than our estimates. Because these estimates depend on many assumptions, all of which may differ substantially from actual results, reserve estimates may be different from the quantities of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered. We make revisions to reserve estimates throughout the year as additional information becomes available. We make changes to depletion rates, impairment calculations, and asset retirement obligations in the same period that changes to reserve estimates are made.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Our rate of recording DD&A is dependent upon our estimates of total proved and proved developed reserves, which estimates incorporate various assumptions and future projections. If the estimates of total proved or proved developed reserves decline, the rate at which we record DD&A expense increases, reducing our net income. Such a decline in reserves may result from lower commodity prices, which may make it uneconomic to drill for and produce higher cost fields. We are unable to predict changes in reserve quantity estimates as such quantities are dependent on the success of our exploitation and development program, as well as future economic conditions.
Impairment of Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We review the value of our oil and natural gas properties whenever management judges that events and circumstances indicate that the recorded carrying value of properties may not be recoverable. Impairments of producing properties are determined by comparing the pretax future net undiscounted cash flows to the net book value at the end of each period. If the net capitalized cost exceeds undiscounted future cash flows, the cost of the property is written down to “fair value,” which is determined based on expected future cash flows using discount rates commensurate with the risks involved, using prices and costs consistent with those used for internal decision making. Different pricing assumptions or discount rates could result in a different calculated impairment. We provide for impairments on significant undeveloped properties when we determine that the property will not be developed or a permanent impairment in value has occurred.
Asset Retirement Obligation
Our asset retirement obligations (“AROs”) consist primarily of estimated future costs associated with the plugging and abandonment of oil and natural gas wells, removal of equipment and facilities from leased acreage, and land restoration in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws. The discounted fair value of an ARO liability is required to be recognized in the period in which it is incurred, with the associated asset retirement cost capitalized as part of the carrying cost of the oil and natural gas asset. The recognition of an ARO requires that management make numerous assumptions regarding such factors as the estimated probabilities, amounts and timing of settlements; the credit-adjusted risk-free rate to be used; inflation rates; and future advances in technology. In periods subsequent to the initial measurement of the ARO, we must recognize period-to-period changes in the liability resulting from the passage of time and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the original estimate of undiscounted cash flows. Increases in the ARO liability due to passage of time impact net income as accretion expense. The related capitalized cost, including revisions thereto, is charged to expense through DD&A over the life of the field.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activity
We are exposed to certain risks relating to our ongoing business operations, such as commodity price risk. Derivative contracts are utilized to economically hedge our exposure to price fluctuations and reduce the variability in our cash flows associated with anticipated sales of future oil and natural gas production. We follow FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, to account for our derivative financial instruments. We do not enter into derivative contracts for speculative trading purposes. It is our policy to enter into derivative contracts only with counterparties that are creditworthy financial institutions deemed by management as competent and competitive. We did not post collateral under any of these contracts.
Our crude oil and natural gas derivative positions consist of fixed price swaps, basis swaps and costless collars. Swaps exchange floating price risk in the future for a fixed price at the time of the hedge. Costless collars set both a maximum (sold ceiling) and a minimum (bought floor) future price. We have elected to not designate any of our derivative contracts for hedge accounting. Accordingly, we record the net change in the mark-to-market valuation of these derivative contracts, as well as all payments and receipts on settled derivative contracts, in “(Loss) gain on derivative contracts, net” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. All derivative contracts are recorded at fair market value and are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets as assets or liabilities.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognized stock-based compensation expense associated with restricted stock units, which include both time- and performance-based awards. The Company accounts for forfeitures of equity-based incentive awards as they occur. Stock-based compensation expense related to time-based restricted stock units is based on the price of the Class A common stock, $0.001 par value per share of Earthstone (“Class A Common Stock”), on the grant date and recognized over the vesting period using the straight-line method. The Company classifies grants to be settled in shares as equity awards and awards to be settled in cash a liability awards. The Company accounts for these awards based on a grant date Monte Carlo Simulation pricing model, which calculates multiple potential outcomes for an award and establishes fair value based on the most likely outcome, and is recognized over the vesting period using the straight-line method. The fair value of the liability awards is updated on a quarterly basis.
Income Taxes and Uncertain Tax Positions
We are a U.S. company operating in Texas, as of December 31, 2021, as well as one foreign legal entity, Lynden Corp, which is a Canadian company. Consequently, our tax provision is based upon the tax laws and rates in effect in the applicable jurisdiction in which our operations are conducted and income is earned. The income tax rates imposed and methods of computing taxable income in these jurisdictions vary. Therefore, as a part of the process of preparing the consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate the income taxes in each of these jurisdictions. This process involves estimating the
actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation, amortization and certain accrued liabilities for tax and accounting purposes. Our effective tax rate for financial statement purposes will continue to fluctuate from year to year as our operations are conducted in different taxing jurisdictions.
Our corporate structure requires the filing of two separate consolidated U.S. Federal income tax returns and one Canadian income tax return resulting from Earthstone’s acquisition of Lynden Corp in 2016 (the “Lynden Arrangement”) that includes Lynden US, Earthstone, and Lynden Corp. As such, taxable income of Earthstone cannot be offset by tax attributes, including net operating losses, of Lynden US, nor can taxable income of Lynden US be offset by tax attributes of Earthstone. Earthstone and Lynden US record a tax provision, respectively, for their share of the book income or loss of EEH, net of the noncontrolling interest, as well as any standalone income or loss generated by each company. As EEH is treated as a partnership for U.S. Federal income tax purposes, it is not subject to income tax at the federal level and only recognizes the Texas Margin Tax.
On January 7, 2021, upon closing of the IRM Acquisition, the acquired entity, Independence Resources Management, LLC (along with its wholly owned subsidiaries, collectively “IRM”), became a wholly owned subsidiary of EEH. IRM’s results will be reported on the U.S. Return of Partnership Income (Form 1065) and will flow to EEH through Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). As IRM is treated as a Partnership, for federal and state income tax purposes, it is not subject to income taxes at the federal level. At the state level, IRM only operates in Texas and is subject to the Texas Margin Tax.
Our deferred tax expense or benefit represents the change in the balance of deferred tax assets or liabilities reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
On February 15, 2022, as a result of the completion of the Chisholm Acquisition, which included the issuance of 19,417,476 shares of our Class A Common Stock, a limitation was triggered under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). We are currently assessing the impact of the limitation on both our NOL and our deferred tax asset.
We apply the accounting standards related to uncertainty in income taxes. This accounting guidance clarifies the accounting for uncertainties in income taxes by prescribing a minimum recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the consolidated financial statements. It requires that we recognize in the consolidated financial statements the financial effects of a tax position, if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, including resolution of any appeals or litigation processes, based upon the technical merits of the position. It also provides guidance on measurement, classification, interest, penalties and disclosure. Our tax positions related to our pass-through status and state income tax liability, including deductibility of expenses, have been reviewed by our management and they believe those positions would more likely than not be sustained upon examination. Accordingly, we have not recorded an income tax liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Revenue Recognition
We predominantly derive our revenue from the sale of produced oil, natural gas and NGLs. Revenues are recognized when the recognition criteria of FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, are met, which generally occurs at the point in which title passes to the customers. We receive payment from one to three months after delivery. At the end of each quarter, we estimate the amount of production delivered to purchasers and the price we will receive. Variances between our estimated revenue and actual payment are recorded in the month the payment is received. Historically, however, differences have been insignificant.
Accounting for Business Combinations
Our business has grown substantially through acquisitions, and our business strategy is to continue to pursue acquisitions as opportunities arise. We have accounted for all of our business combinations to date using the purchase method.
Under the purchase method of accounting, a business combination is accounted for at a purchase price based upon the fair value of the consideration given. The assets and liabilities acquired are measured at their fair value including the recognition of acquisition-related costs that are separate from the acquired net assets. The purchase price is allocated to the assets and liabilities based upon these fair values. The excess of the cost of an acquired entity, if any, over the net amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill. The excess of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed over the cost of an acquired entity, if any, is allocated as a pro rata reduction of the amounts that otherwise would have been assigned to certain acquired assets.
Determining the fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired involves the use of judgment, since some of the assets and liabilities acquired do not have fair values that are readily determinable. Different techniques may be used to determine fair values, including market prices (where available), appraisals, and comparison to transactions for similar assets and liabilities,
and present value of estimated future cash flows, among others. Since these estimates involve the use of significant judgment, they can change as new information becomes available.
Noncontrolling Interest
We account for noncontrolling interest in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 810, Consolidation, which requires the recording of a noncontrolling interest component of Net income (loss), as well as a noncontrolling interest component within equity. Noncontrolling interest represents third-party equity ownership of EEH and is presented as a component of equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as an adjustment to Net income (loss) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, Earthstone and Lynden US held 60.9% of the outstanding membership interests in EEH while Bold Holdings, the noncontrolling party, held the remaining 39.1%. See further discussion in Note 8. Noncontrolling Interest in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this report for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards affecting us.