ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Tabular dollar and unit amounts, except per unit data, are in millions)
Energy Transfer LP is a Delaware limited partnership whose common units are publicly traded on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “ET.”
The following discussion of our historical consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that are subject to risk and uncertainties. Actual results may differ substantially from the statements we make in this section due to a number of factors that are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report.
Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Partnership” and “Energy Transfer” mean Energy Transfer LP and its consolidated subsidiaries.
OVERVIEW
Energy Transfer directly and indirectly owns equity interests in Sunoco LP and USAC, which are limited partnerships engaged in diversified energy-related services. Sunoco LP and USAC have publicly traded common units.
Energy Transfer derives cash flows from distributions related to its investment in its subsidiaries, including Sunoco LP and USAC. The amount of cash that Sunoco LP and USAC distribute to their respective partners, including Energy Transfer, each quarter is based on earnings from their respective business activities and the amount of available cash, as discussed below.
The primary activities in which we are engaged, which are in the United States and Canada, and the operating subsidiaries through which we conduct those activities are as follows:
•natural gas operations, including the following:
•natural gas midstream and intrastate transportation and storage;
•interstate natural gas transportation and storage; and
•crude oil, NGL and refined products transportation, terminalling services and acquisition and marketing activities, as well as NGL storage and fractionation services.
In addition, we own investments in other businesses, including Sunoco LP and USAC, both of which are publicly traded master limited partnerships.
Energy Transfer derives cash flows from distributions related to its investment in its subsidiaries, including Sunoco LP and USAC. Energy Transfer’s primary cash requirements are for distributions to its partners, general and administrative expenses and debt service requirements. Energy Transfer distributes its available cash remaining after satisfaction of the aforementioned cash requirements to its Unitholders on a quarterly basis.
We expect our subsidiaries to utilize their resources, along with cash from their operations, to fund their announced growth capital expenditures and working capital needs; however, Energy Transfer may issue debt or equity securities from time to time as we deem prudent to provide liquidity for new capital projects of our subsidiaries or for other partnership purposes.
General
Our primary objective is to increase the level of our distributable cash flow to our Unitholders over time by pursuing a business strategy that is currently focused on growing our subsidiaries’ natural gas and liquids businesses through, among other things, pursuing certain construction and expansion opportunities relating to our subsidiaries’ existing infrastructure and acquiring certain strategic operations and businesses or assets. The actual amounts of cash that we will have available for distribution will primarily depend on the amount of cash our subsidiaries generate from their operations.
Our reportable segments are as follows:
•intrastate transportation and storage;
•interstate transportation and storage;
•midstream;
•NGL and refined products transportation and services;
•crude oil transportation and services;
•investment in Sunoco LP;
•investment in USAC; and
•all other.
Recent Developments
Energy Transfer and ETO Rollup Mergers
On April 1, 2021, Energy Transfer, ETO and certain of ETO’s subsidiaries consummated several internal reorganization transactions (the “Rollup Mergers”). In connection with the Rollup Mergers, ETO merged with and into Energy Transfer, with Energy Transfer surviving. The impacts of the Rollup Mergers also included the following:
•All of ETO’s long-term debt was assumed by Energy Transfer, as more fully described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”.
•Each issued and outstanding ETO preferred unit was converted into the right to receive one newly created Energy Transfer preferred unit. A description of the Energy Transfer Preferred Units is included in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
•Each of ETO’s issued and outstanding Class K, Class L, Class M and Class N units were converted into an aggregate 675,625,000 newly created Class B Units representing limited partner interests in Energy Transfer. All of the Class B Units are held by ETP Holdco, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Energy Transfer.
Series H Preferred Units Issuance
On June 15, 2021, the Partnership issued 900,000 of its 6.500% Series H Preferred Units at a price of $1,000 per unit. The net proceeds were used to repay amounts outstanding under the Partnership’s term loan and for general partnership purposes.
Winter Storm Impacts
Winter Storm Uri, which occurred in February 2021, resulted in one-time impacts to the Partnership’s consolidated net income and Adjusted EBITDA and also affected the results of operations in certain segments, as discussed in “Results of Operations”. The recognition of the impacts of Winter Storm Uri during the year ended December 31, 2021 required management to make certain estimates and assumptions, including estimates of expected credit losses and assumptions related to the resolution of disputes with counterparties with respect to certain purchases and sales of natural gas. The ultimate realization of credit losses and the resolution of disputed purchases and sales of natural gas could materially impact the Partnership’s financial condition and results of operations in future periods.
Enable Acquisition
On December 2, 2021, the Partnership completed the previously announced merger with Enable (the “Enable Acquisition”). Under the terms of the merger agreement, Enable’s common unitholders received 0.8595 of an Energy Transfer common unit in exchange for each Enable common unit. In addition, each outstanding Enable Series A preferred unit was exchanged for 0.0265 of an Energy Transfer Series G Preferred Unit. A total of 384,780 Series G Preferred Units were issued in connection with the Enable Acquisition. The total fair value of Energy Transfer common units and Series G Preferred Units issued was approximately $3.5 billion at the closing date. Energy Transfer also made a $10 million cash payment for Enable’s general partner.
In connection with the Enable Acquisition on December 2, 2021, Energy Transfer repaid $800 million outstanding on the Enable 2019 Term Loan Agreement and $35 million outstanding on the Enable Five-Year Revolving Credit Facility, and both facilities were terminated. In addition, the Partnership assumed $3.18 billion aggregate principal amount of Enable senior notes.
Regulatory Update
Interstate Natural Gas Transportation Regulation
Rate Regulation
Effective January 2018, the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) changed several provisions of the federal tax code, including a reduction in the maximum corporate tax rate. On March 15, 2018, in a set of related proposals, the FERC addressed treatment of federal income tax allowances in regulated entity rates. The FERC issued a Revised Policy Statement on Treatment of Income Taxes (“Revised Policy Statement”) stating that it will no longer permit master limited partnerships to recover an income tax allowance in their cost-of-service rates. The FERC issued the Revised Policy Statement in response to a remand from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in United Airlines v. FERC, in which the court determined that the FERC had not justified its conclusion that a pipeline organized as a master limited partnership would not “double recover” its taxes under the current policy by both including an income-tax allowance in its cost of service and earning a return on equity calculated using the discounted cash flow methodology. On July 18, 2018, the FERC clarified that a pipeline
organized as a master limited partnership will not be precluded in a future proceeding from arguing and providing evidentiary support that it is entitled to an income tax allowance and demonstrating that its recovery of an income tax allowance does not result in a double-recovery of investors’ income tax costs. On July 31, 2020, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued an opinion upholding the FERC’s decision denying a separate master limited partnership recovery of an income tax allowance and its decision not to require the master limited partnership to refund accumulated deferred income tax balances. In light of the rehearing order’s clarification regarding an individual entity’s ability to argue in support of recovery of an income tax allowance and the court’s subsequent opinion upholding denial of an income tax allowance to a master limited partnership, the impact of the FERC’s policy on the treatment of income taxes on the rates we can charge for FERC-regulated transportation services is unknown at this time.
Even without application of the FERC’s recent rate making-related policy statements and rulemakings, the FERC or our shippers may challenge the cost-of-service rates we charge. The FERC’s establishment of a just and reasonable rate is based on many components, including ROE and tax-related components, but also other pipeline costs that will continue to affect FERC’s determination of just and reasonable cost of service rates. Moreover, we receive revenues from our pipelines based on a variety of rate structures, including cost-of-service rates, negotiated rates, discounted rates and market-based rates. Many of our interstate pipelines, such as ETC Tiger, Midcontinent Express and Fayetteville Express, have negotiated market rates that were agreed to by customers in connection with long-term contracts entered into to support the construction of the pipelines. Other systems, such as FGT, Transwestern and Panhandle, have a mix of tariff rate, discount rate, and negotiated rate agreements. The revenues we receive from natural gas transportation services we provide pursuant to cost-of-service based rates may decrease in the future as a result of changes to FERC policies, combined with the reduced corporate federal income tax rate established in the Tax Act. The extent of any revenue reduction related to our cost-of-service rates, if any, will depend on a detailed review of all of our cost-of-service components and the outcomes of any challenges to our rates by the FERC or our shippers.
On July 18, 2018, the FERC issued a final rule establishing procedures to evaluate rates charged by the FERC-jurisdictional gas pipelines in light of the Tax Act and the FERC’s Revised Policy Statement. By the Order issued January 16, 2019, the FERC initiated a review of Panhandle’s existing rates pursuant to Section 5 of the NGA to determine whether the rates currently charged by Panhandle are just and reasonable and set the matter for hearing. On August 30, 2019, Panhandle filed a general rate proceeding under Section 4 of the NGA. The Natural Gas Act Section 5 and Section 4 proceedings were consolidated by order of the Chief Judge on October 1, 2019. A hearing in the combined proceedings commenced on August 25, 2020 and adjourned on September 15, 2020. The initial decision by the administrative law judge was issued on March 26, 2021. On April 26, 2021, Panhandle filed its brief on exceptions to the initial decision. On May 17, 2021, Panhandle filed its brief opposing exceptions in this proceeding. This matter remains pending before the FERC.
Pipeline Certification
The FERC issued a Notice of Inquiry on April 19, 2018 (“Pipeline Certification NOI”), thereby initiating a review of its policies on certification of natural gas pipelines, including an examination of its long-standing Policy Statement on Certification of New Interstate Natural Gas Pipeline Facilities, issued in 1999, that is used to determine whether to grant certificates for new pipeline projects. On February 18, 2021, the FERC issued another NOI (“2021 NOI”), reopening its review of the 1999 Policy Statement. Comments on the 2021 NOI were due on May 26, 2021; we filed comments in the FERC proceeding. In September 2021, FERC issued a Notice of Technical Conference on Greenhouse Gas Mitigation related to natural gas infrastructure projects authorized under Sections 3 and 7 of the Natural Gas Act. A technical conference was held on November 19, 2021, and post-technical conference comments were submitted to the FERC on January 7, 2022. The FERC has not taken any further action regarding the 2018 NOI, 2021 NOI, or Technical Conference on Greenhouse Gas Mitigation, and we are unable to predict what, if any, changes may be proposed as a result of the NOIs or following the technical conference that might affect our natural gas pipeline or LNG facility operations, or when such proposals, if any, might become effective. We do not expect that any change in this policy would affect us in a materially different manner than any other natural gas pipeline company operating in the United States.
Interstate Common Carrier Regulation
The FERC utilizes an indexing rate methodology which, as currently in effect, allows common carriers to change their rates within prescribed ceiling levels that are tied to changes in the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods, or PPI-FG. Many existing pipelines utilize the FERC liquids index to change transportation rates annually. The indexing methodology is applicable to existing rates, with the exclusion of market-based rates. The FERC’s indexing methodology is subject to review every five years. In a December 2020 order, FERC determined that during the five-year period commencing July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2026, common carriers charging indexed rates will be permitted to adjust their indexed ceilings annually by PPI-FG plus 0.78 percent. The Commission received requests for rehearing of its December 17, 2020 order and on January 20, 2022, granted rehearing and modified the oil index. Specifically, for the five-year period commencing July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2026, liquids pipelines charging indexed rates are permitted to adjust their indexed ceilings annually by Producer Price
Index minus 0.21%. FERC directed liquids pipelines to recompute their ceiling levels for July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022 based on the new index level. Where an oil pipeline’s filed rates exceed its ceiling levels, FERC ordered such oil pipelines to reduce the rate to bring it into compliance with the recomputed ceiling level to be effective March 1, 2022.
Trends and Outlook
Recent market disruptions involving the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted our earnings and cash flows from operations and may continue to do so. Demand for natural gas, NGLs, refined products and/or crude oil caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has generally trended toward a recovery since the lows experienced from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. However, recent variants of COVID-19 have continued to cause market disruptions and earnings volatility in 2021. Any future variants or resurgence of existing variants could result in decreased volumes transported on our pipeline systems and decreased overall utilization of our midstream services.
With respect to commodity prices, the outlook is mixed and could have a varying impact on our business. Crude oil prices have seen significant recovery recently; however, global supply uncertainty has kept the forward curve in steep backwardation. Additionally, the market continues to be impacted by heightened levels of demand uncertainty as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We cannot predict the future impacts, or the duration of such impacts, resulting from COVID-19.
Natural gas prices have also strengthened over the past year. Uncertainty about winter weather, particularly in Texas, has supported opportunity on our intrastate transportation and storage assets. In addition, high European natural gas prices have increased demand for LNG exports from the U.S., which has further helped to support prices. The overall outlook for our midstream services will depend, in part, on the timing and extent of recovery in the commodity markets.
While we anticipate that current and projected commodity prices and the related impact to activity levels in both the upstream and midstream sectors will impact our business, we cannot predict the ultimate magnitude of that impact and expect it to be varied across our operations, depending on the region, customer, type of service, contract term and other factors.
While the vast majority of our revenues are from counterparties that are investment grade rated companies, recent market disruptions increased the likelihood that some of our counterparties may be forced to file for bankruptcy protection. However, we believe that the recent increases in commodity prices, along with recent expense-cutting initiatives by many companies, have generally strengthened the credit profile for the majority of our producer counterparties.
Ultimately, the extent to which our business will be impacted by recent market developments depends on the factors described above as well as future developments beyond our control, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. In response to the recent market volatility and uncertainties, we reduced growth capital spending over the last two years, and we expect to continue to a lower level of growth capital spending going forward. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information on our capital expenditures over the last three years and our forecasted capital expenditures for 2022.
Regarding the recently completed Enable acquisition, the transaction closed in December 2021; therefore, our consolidated results for 2021 only reflect one month of activity from Enable’s business. We expect that the combined operations will favorably impact our results going forward, primarily impacting our natural gas businesses.
We currently have ample liquidity to fund our business, and we do not anticipate any liquidity concerns in the immediate future (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below). In addition, we continue to have access to the debt capital markets on generally favorable terms. In the event we seek additional equity or debt capital, our blended cost of capital for equity and debt is expected to be modestly higher in the near term; however, we will continue to evaluate growth projects and acquisitions as such opportunities may be identified in the future in light of this higher cost of capital.
In addition to the trends and outlook discussed above with respect to the Partnership’s existing business and finances, we also anticipate that the Partnership will continue to increase its focus on the development of alternative energy projects. The Partnership has announced several such projects recently and will continue to pursues opportunities aimed at continuing to reduce its environmental footprint throughout its operations.
Results of Operations
We report Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as measures of segment performance. We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as total Partnership earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion, amortization and other non-cash items, such as non-cash compensation expense, gains and losses on disposals of assets, the allowance for equity funds used during construction, unrealized gains and losses on commodity risk management activities, inventory valuation adjustments, non-cash impairment charges, losses on extinguishments of debt and other non-operating income or expense items. Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA reflect amounts for unconsolidated affiliates based on the same recognition and measurement methods used to record equity in earnings of
unconsolidated affiliates. Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates excludes the same items with respect to the unconsolidated affiliate as those excluded from the calculation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, such as interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion, amortization and other non-cash items. Although these amounts are excluded from Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates, such exclusion should not be understood to imply that we have control over the operations and resulting revenues and expenses of such affiliates. We do not control our unconsolidated affiliates; therefore, we do not control the earnings or cash flows of such affiliates. The use of Segment Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates as an analytical tool should be limited accordingly.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA, as reported for each segment in the table below, is analyzed for each segment in the section titled “Segment Operating Results.” Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure used by industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies to assess the financial performance and the operating results of the Partnership’s fundamental business activities and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitution for net income, income from operations, cash flows from operating activities or other GAAP measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Consolidated Results
Adjusted EBITDA (consolidated). For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, Adjusted EBITDA increased 24%, primarily due to the impacts of Winter Storm Uri in February 2021. The most significant impacts from the storm were recognized in our intrastate transportation and storage segment, where realized storage margin increased by $1.5 billion compared to the prior period as a result of withdrawals during the storm. In addition, realized natural gas sales increased $950 million and retained fuel revenues increased $132 million in our intrastate transportation and storage segment, and these increases were also primarily due to the impacts of the storm.
The change in Adjusted EBITDA also reflected the impacts of non-storm-related factors among all of the Partnership’s reportable segments. In our crude oil transportation and services segment, Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased $235 million primarily due to lower average tariff rates realized on our Texas crude pipeline system, as well as a decrease from our crude oil acquisition and marketing business. In our interstate transportation and storage segment, Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased
$165 million primarily due to shipper contract expirations and a recent shipper bankruptcy. In our midstream segment, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $198 million primarily due to favorable NGL and natural gas prices.
Additional information on changes impacting Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, including other impacts from Winter Storm Uri and other non-storm-related factors, is available below in “Segment Operating Results.”
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased primarily due to additional depreciation from assets recently placed in service and recent acquisitions.
Interest Expense, Net of Interest Capitalized. Interest expense, net of interest capitalized, decreased primarily due to the following:
•interest expense recognized by the Partnership (excluding Sunoco LP and USAC) decreased by $51 million due to lower aggregate debt and lower interest rates on refinanced debt, partially offset by lower capitalized interest;
•an increase of $1 million recognized by USAC was primarily due to increased borrowings under its credit agreement and increased amortization of debt issuance costs related to the amendment and restatement of its credit agreement in the current period, partially offset by lower weighted average interest rates under the credit agreement; and
•a decrease of $12 million recognized by Sunoco LP due to a slight decrease in average total long-term debt and a decrease in the weighted average interest rate on long-term debt for the respective periods.
Impairment Losses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, impairment losses included fixed asset impairments of $5 million recognized by USAC related to its compression equipment and $10 million recognized by Energy Transfer Canada related to a processing plant, as well as a $6 million impairment of intangible assets related to customer contracts within the Partnership’s crude operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Partnership recognized goodwill impairments totaling $2.2 billion and fixed asset impairments totaling $58 million, primarily due to decreases in projected future cash flows as a result of overall market demand decline. In addition, USAC recognized a goodwill impairment of $619 million as well as an equipment impairment of $8 million based on changes in market conditions.
Gains (Losses) on Interest Rate Derivatives. Our interest rate derivatives are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes; therefore, changes in fair value are recorded in earnings each period. Gains on interest rate derivatives increased by $264 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in forward swap rates.
Unrealized Gains (Losses) on Commodity Risk Management Activities. The unrealized gains and losses on our commodity risk management activities include changes in fair value of commodity derivatives and the hedged inventory included in designated fair value hedging relationships. Information on the unrealized gains and losses within each segment are included in “Segment Operating Results” below, and additional information on the commodity-related derivatives, including notional volumes, maturities and fair values, is available in “