Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 1. Business,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and the consolidated financial statements, and the notes thereto, included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The information covered in this section provides a comparison of material changes in the Company's results of operations and financial condition for fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020. For the discussion of fiscal year 2020 relative to fiscal year 2019, see "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Executive Overview
Net loss attributable to Equitrans Midstream common shareholders was $1,439.0 million ($(3.32) per diluted share) in 2021 compared to net income attributable to Equitrans Midstream common shareholders of $364.4 million ($1.06 per diluted share) in 2020. The decrease resulted primarily from an impairment of the Company's equity method investment in the MVP Joint Venture, lower equity income from the Company's investment in the MVP Joint Venture, lower operating revenues on Gathering (primarily due to impacts of the EQT Global GGA) and Water, higher net interest expense, higher other expense and additional loss on extinguishment of debt charges, partially offset by lower income tax expense, lower net income attributable to noncontrolling interest and transaction costs recorded during 2020. See Note 4 and Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impairment of the Company's equity method investment in the MVP Joint Venture and deferred revenues under the EQT Global GGA, respectively.
COVID-19 Update
While the COVID-19 pandemic is continuing, the outbreak has had, and continues to have, a minimal direct impact on the Company’s overall operations. The Company continues to actively manage its response to the COVID-19 pandemic in collaboration with relevant parties and, given that the situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid, a number of Company-wide measures undertaken in response to COVID-19 remain in effect to continue to promote the safety and health of field and office-based employees and contractors.
On November 4, 2021, the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued an Emergency Temporary Standard (ETS) to carry out President Biden’s executive order requiring all employers with at least 100 employees to ensure that their employees are fully vaccinated or require unvaccinated workers to produce a negative test result at least once a week. On January 13, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court granted an application to stay the ETS pending disposition of the applicants' petitions for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. Effective January 26, 2022, OSHA withdrew the ETS as an enforceable emergency temporary standard, but did not withdraw the ETS as a proposed rule. Should the ETS, or a similar state or local requirement, take effect in the future, the Company expects it would be subject to such regulation concerning COVID-19 vaccination or testing. In that case, the Company may be required to implement a requirement that many or most employees get vaccinated, subject to limited exceptions, or be tested, resulting in additional costs to the Company. At this time, it is not possible to predict the impact that a vaccine or testing requirement would have on the Company or its workforce. Any such mandate may result in increased costs, operational disruptions or employee attrition for the Company. See “The loss or disengagement of key personnel could adversely affect our ability to execute our strategic, operational and financial plans.” under "Item 1A. Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Notwithstanding the outbreak’s minimal direct impact to date on the Company’s overall operations, the Company acknowledges that the COVID-19 pandemic is still ongoing and therefore the Company cannot predict that the pandemic, or further developments regarding variants of COVID-19 or other governmental action, will not have any impact in the future on the Company's business, results of operations or financial position. For further information regarding the potential impact of COVID-19 on the Company, see "The ongoing outbreak of COVID-19 and its variant strains (or any future pandemic) could harm our business, results of operations and financial condition." under "Item 1A. Risk Factors" and "Item 1. Business" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Sustainability and Corporate Responsibility
The Company recognizes that the long-term interests of shareholders are served by managing ESG matters important to the Company’s stakeholders and working to be resilient and appropriately positioned in any environment, including a lower-carbon economy. The Company has, throughout its corporate history, embraced conducting business in a socially responsible and ethical manner by respecting all stakeholders, and is focused on identifying and executing on ESG and sustainability initiatives while further integrating corporate responsibility and ESG concerns into its business strategy and decision-making throughout the organization. The Company also is committed to continuing to operate with integrity, accountability and transparency. As a result, the Company anticipates that its allocation of capital resources to ESG and sustainability initiatives will increase in the future, which the Company believes will distinctively position the Company and create value.
The Company believes that natural gas will remain a significant component of the global and national energy complex and will play a vital role in the transformation to a lower-carbon economy, notwithstanding increased demand for alternative energy sources. However, the Company acknowledges the reality and risks of climate change as one of the most critical current issues. As an energy infrastructure company, the Company recognizes the ongoing developments and risks surrounding climate change, as well as corresponding potential opportunities, and that it must continue to focus on long-term sustainable performance, including working to minimize impacts to the environment and society, such as by aggressively pursuing its
climate change mitigation targets while also balancing the immediate and increasing need to deliver reliable, safe, and affordable natural gas energy in the United States now and in the future.
The Company is focused on incorporating sustainability-focused risks and opportunities into the Company’s strategic and capital spending decision processes. For example, among other initiatives, in 2021 the Company made investments to replace certain high-bleed pneumatic devices with low-bleed pneumatic devices and replace certain gas-driven pneumatics with instrument air systems so as to reduce pneumatic methane emissions relative to 2019 levels in support of its publicized climate policy and methane reduction targets. The Company expects to continue to pursue strategic sustainability initiatives as appropriate, including with respect to climate change, and to incur costs and capital expenditures to do so, and certain of such future costs and capital expenditures could be material.
As discussed in “Our business is subject to climate change-related transitional risks (including evolving climate-focused regulation and climate change-driven trends emphasizing financing non-fossil fuel businesses and prompting pursuit of emissions reductions, lower-carbon technologies and alternative forms of energy) and physical risks that could significantly increase our operating expenses and capital costs, adversely affect our customers’ development plans, and reduce demand for our products and services.” in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Regulatory Environment” in “Item 1. Business”, the Company recognizes the evolving landscape of international accords and federal, state and local laws and regulations regarding GHG emissions or climate change initiatives. Changing market conditions, competition from lower emitting fuels, new laws and regulatory requirements, as well as unanticipated or inconsistent application of existing laws and regulations by administrative agencies, make it difficult to predict the long-term business impact of GHG emission and climate change initiatives on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources, results of operations and financial condition. However, the Company is taking steps to adjust its approach to capital investment given regulatory change and recognizes that responsive adaptation efforts are likely to be costly and time consuming.
Business Segment Results
Operating segments are revenue-producing components of an enterprise for which separate financial information is produced internally and is subject to evaluation by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources. Headquarters costs consist primarily of transaction costs and other unallocated corporate expenses. Net interest expense, components of other (expense) income, net, and income tax (benefit) expense are managed on a consolidated basis. The Company has presented each segment's operating income (loss), unrealized (loss) gain on derivative instruments, equity income, impairment of equity method investment and various operational measures in the following sections. Management believes that the presentation of this information is useful to management and investors regarding the financial condition, results of operations and trends and uncertainties of its segments. The Company has reconciled each segment's operating income (loss) to the Company's consolidated operating income and net (loss) income in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
GATHERING RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(a)For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, firm reservation fee revenues included approximately $11.3 million and $15.0 million, respectively, of MVC unbilled revenues. There were no MVC unbilled revenues during the year ended December 31, 2019.
(b)Other (expense) income, net, includes the unrealized (loss) gain on derivative instruments associated with the Henry Hub cash bonus payment provision. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
(c)Includes volumes up to the contractual MVC under agreements structured with MVCs. Volumes in excess of the contractual MVC are reported under Volumetric-based services.
(d)Includes approximately $14.1 million, $41.6 million and $25.9 million of capital expenditures related to noncontrolling interests in Eureka Midstream for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gathering operating revenues decreased by $150.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Firm reservation fee revenues decreased by $127.6 million primarily due to higher deferred revenue of $194.2 million primarily resulting from a cumulative adjustment associated with certain potential contract extensions impacting the estimated total consideration under the EQT Global GGA, partly offset by $54.3 million of increased MVC revenues resulting from the EQT Global GGA and $12.2 million of increased firm reservation revenues from other customers. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of deferred revenues under the EQT Global GGA. Volumetric-based fee revenues decreased by $22.7 million primarily due to lower gathered volumes, partially offset by higher compression revenues.
Gathering operating expenses decreased by $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the impairments of gathering assets and customer-related intangible assets totaling $55.6 million, as described in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, and transaction costs associated with the EQM Merger and related transactions in 2020, partially offset by increases in operating and maintenance, selling, general and
administrative, depreciation expenses and amortization of intangible assets in 2021 compared to 2020. Operating and maintenance expense increased by $12.2 million primarily as a result of an increase in repairs and maintenance expense and personnel costs. Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $1.7 million primarily due to legal fees associated with the Hammerhead pipeline arbitration and personnel costs. Depreciation expense increased by $15.7 million as a result of additional assets placed in-service.
See "Outlook" and Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the impairment of long-lived assets. See also Part II, "