ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our historical performance, financial condition and future prospects should be read in conjunction with Part I, Item 1. “Business” and the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
On December 31, 2021, Enviva Partners, LP (the “Partnership”) converted from a Delaware limited partnership to a Delaware corporation (the “Conversion”) named “Enviva Inc.” References to “Enviva,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to (i) Enviva Inc. and its subsidiaries for the periods following the Conversion and (ii) Enviva Partners, LP and its subsidiaries for periods prior to the Conversion, except where the context otherwise requires. References to common units for periods prior to the Conversion refer to common units of Enviva Partners, LP, and references to common stock for periods following the Conversion refer to shares of common stock of Enviva Inc. As a result of the Conversion, the primary financial impact to the consolidated financial statements contained herein consisted of (i) reclassification of partnership capital accounts to equity accounts reflective of a corporation and (ii) income tax effects.
References to “our former sponsor” refer to Enviva Holdings, LP, and, where applicable, its wholly owned subsidiaries Enviva MLP Holdco, LLC and Enviva Development Holdings, LLC. References to “our former General Partner” refer to Enviva Partners GP, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Enviva Holdings, LP. Please read Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements on page 1 and Part 1, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for information regarding certain risks inherent in our business.
Business Overview
We are a growth-oriented company originally formed as a Delaware limited partnership in 2013 that converted to a Delaware corporation named “Enviva Inc.” We develop, construct, acquire, and own and operate, fully contracted wood pellet production plants where we aggregate a natural resource, wood fiber, and process it into dry, densified, uniform pellets that can be effectively stored and transported around the world. We primarily sell our wood pellets through long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with creditworthy customers in the United Kingdom, the European Union, and Japan, who use our pellets to displace coal and other fossil fuels to generate renewable power and heat as part of their efforts to accelerate the energy transition from conventional energy generation to renewable energy generation. Increasingly, our customers are also using our pellets as renewable raw material inputs to decarbonize hard-to-abate sectors like steel, cement, lime, chemicals, and aviation fuels. Collectively, the wood pellets we produce are viewed by our customers as a critical component of their efforts to reduce life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions in their core energy generation or industrial manufacturing processes, and mitigate the impact of climate change.
We own and operate ten plants (collectively, “our plants”) with a combined production capacity of approximately 6.2 million metric tons (“MT”) of wood pellets per year (“MTPY”) in Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida and Mississippi, the production of which is fully contracted, with many of our contracts extending well into the 2040s. We export our wood pellets to global markets through our deep-water marine terminal at the Port of Chesapeake, Virginia, terminal assets at the Port of Wilmington, North Carolina, the Port of Pascagoula, Mississippi, and from third-party deep-water marine terminals in Savannah, Georgia, Mobile, Alabama, and Panama City, Florida. All of our facilities are located in geographic regions with low input costs and favorable transportation logistics. Owning these cost-advantaged assets in a rapidly expanding industry provides us with a platform to generate stable and growing cash flows. Our plants are sited in robust fiber baskets providing stable pricing for the low-grade fiber used to produce wood pellets. Our raw materials are byproducts of traditional timber harvesting, principally low-value wood materials, such as trees generally not suited for sawmilling or other manufactured forest products, and tree tops and limbs, understory, brush, and slash that are generated in a harvest.
Our sales strategy is to fully contract the wood pellet production from our plants under long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with a diversified and creditworthy customer base. Our long-term off-take contracts typically provide for fixed-price deliveries that often include provisions that escalate the price over time and provide for other margin protection. During 2021, production capacity from our wood pellet production plants, together with wood pellets sourced from third parties, was approximately equal to the contracted volumes under our existing long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts. Our long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts provide for a product sales backlog of $21.2 billion and have a total weighted-average remaining term of 14.5 years from February 1, 2022.
Our largest customers use our wood pellets as a substitute fuel for coal in dedicated biomass or co-fired coal power plants. Wood pellets serve as a suitable “drop-in” alternative to coal because of their comparable heat content, density, and form. Due to the uninterruptible nature of our customers’ fuel consumption, our customers require a reliable supply of wood pellets that meet stringent product specifications. We have built our operations and assets to deliver and certify the highest levels of product
quality and our proven track record of reliable deliveries enables us to charge premium prices for this certainty. In addition to our customers’ focus on the reliability of supply, they are concerned about the combustion efficiency of the wood pellets and their safe handling. Because combustion efficiency is a function of energy density, particle size distribution, ash/inert content, and moisture, our customers require that we supply wood pellets meeting minimum criteria for a variety of specifications and, in some cases, provide incentives for exceeding our contract specifications.
Basis of Presentation
On October 14, 2021, the Partnership entered into and closed on an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among the Partnership, Enviva Holdings, LP (“Holdings”), Enviva Partners Merger Sub, LLC (“Merger Sub”), and the limited partners of Holdings (the “Holdings Limited Partners”) set forth in the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, (a) the Company acquired our former sponsor and our former General Partner and (b) the incentive distribution rights held by our former sponsor were cancelled and eliminated (collectively, the “Simplification Transaction”). In connection with the Simplification Transaction, the Company acquired certain assets under development, as well as off-take contracts in varying stages of negotiation. The consolidated financial statements have been retroactively recast to reflect the Simplification Transaction as if the Simplification Transaction occurred on March 18, 2010, the date on which Holdings was originally organized, instead of October 14, 2021, the closing date of the Simplification Transaction.
We own all of the Class B units of Enviva Wilmington Holdings, LLC (the “Hamlet JV”). The Hamlet JV owns a wood pellet production plant in Hamlet, North Carolina (the “Hamlet plant”). We are the managing member of the Hamlet JV, which is a consolidated subsidiary partially owned by a third party. For more information regarding our rights and obligations with respect to the Hamlet JV, see Note 17, Equity-Hamlet JV.
Recent Developments
Simplification Transaction
In October 2021, we closed the Simplification Transaction and acquired all of the ownership interests in our former sponsor and eliminated all outstanding incentive distribution rights in exchange for 16.0 million common units, which were distributed to the owners of our former sponsor.
The owners of our former sponsor agreed to reinvest in our common stock all dividends from 9.0 million of the 16.0 million common units issued in connection with the Simplification Transaction during the period beginning with the distribution for the third quarter of 2021 through the fourth quarter of 2024. On the date of the Simplification Transaction, the non-management owners of our former sponsor held 27.7 million common units.
As a result of the Simplification Transaction, we now perform the business activities previously performed by our former sponsor, including corporate, commercial, sales and marketing, communications, public affairs, sustainability, development, and construction activities. We plan to construct fully contracted wood pellet production plants and deep-water marine terminals using our “build and copy” model as a part of our organic growth initiatives. We expect the cost to construct such assets to be lower than our historical cost of acquiring them from our former sponsor in drop-down acquisitions.
In addition, we acquired four existing take-or-pay off-take contracts with investment grade-rated counterparties, a fully contracted plant in Epes, Alabama currently under development (the “Epes plant”), and a prospective production plant in Bond, Mississippi in the Simplification Transaction. The off-take contracts we acquired have an aggregate revenue backlog of $4.4 billion and a weighted-average term of 19 years, with an associated base volume of 21 million metric tons of wood pellets. The Epes plant is designed and permitted to produce 1.1 million MTPY of wood pellets. The Bond plant is being developed to produce 1.1 million MTPY of wood pellets.
In connection with the Simplification Transaction, our existing management services fee waivers (the “MSA Fee Waivers”) and other support agreements with our former sponsor were consolidated, fixed, and novated to certain owners of our former sponsor. Under the consolidated support agreement, we are entitled to receive quarterly payments (the “Support Payments”) in an aggregate amount of up to $55.5 million with respect to periods from the fourth quarter of 2021 through the first quarter of 2024.
C-Corporation Conversion
The Partnership converted from a Delaware limited partnership to a Delaware corporation effective December 31, 2021; consequently, results for periods prior to December 31, 2021 reflect Enviva as a limited partnership, not a corporation. The primary financial impacts of the Conversion to the consolidated financial statements were (i) reclassification of partnership capital accounts to equity accounts reflective of a corporation and (ii) income tax effects. On the date of the Conversion, each
common unit representing a limited partner interest in the Partnership issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Conversion was exchanged for one share of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001 per share.
Issuance of Common Units and Common Shares
In June 2021, we issued 4,925,000 common units at a price of $45.50 per common unit for total net proceeds of $214.5 million, after deducting $9.5 million of issuance costs. The net proceeds partially financed the drop-down of the production plant under construction in Lucedale, Mississippi and the terminal at the Port of Pascagoula, Mississippi,from our former sponsor and partially financed our development activities to expand our wood pellet production plants in Sampson, North Carolina, Hamlet, North Carolina, and Cottondale, Florida (collectively the “Multi-Plant Expansions”).
In January 2022, we issued 4,945,000 common shares at a price of $70.00 per common share for total net proceeds of $334.0 million, after deducting $12.2 million of issuance costs. We intend to use the net proceeds of $334.0 million to fund a portion of our capital expenditures related to ongoing development projects. We initially used the net proceeds to repay borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility.
Financing Activities
In April 2021, we amended our senior secured revolving credit facility to increase the revolving credit commitments from $350.0 million to $525.0 million, extend the maturity from October 2023 to April 2026, increase the letter of credit commitment from $50.0 million to $80.0 million, and reduce the cost of borrowing by 25 basis points. In December 2021, we amended our senior secured revolving credit facility to increase the revolving credit commitments from $525.0 million to $570.0 million and to permit the issuance of commercial letters of credit.
Capacity Expansion and Development Activities
We completed our expansion project at our Northampton, North Carolina wood pellet production plant and are commissioning the recently expanded capacity at our Southampton, Virginia plant. We expect each plant to reach its expanded nameplate production capacity of approximately 750,000 and 760,000 MTPY, respectively, during 2022.
We are commissioning the expanded capacity of our Greenwood plant and expect production capacity to increase to 600,000 MTPY during 2022.
Commitment to Achieve Carbon-Neutral Operations
Consistent with our mission to displace coal, grow more trees, and fight climate change, we recently announced our commitment to become “net-zero” in greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions from our operations by 2030. The product we manufacture helps reduce the lifecycle GHG emissions of our customers, but we believe we must also do our part within our operations to mitigate the impacts of climate change. We expect to accomplish neutrality with respect to our Scope 1 emissions (i.e., direct emissions from our manufacturing) by improving energy efficiency and adopting lower-carbon processes, as well as through investment in carbon offsets. We also plan to neutralize our Scope 2 emissions (i.e., indirect emissions from energy we purchase) by using 100% renewable energy by 2030 through the purchase of renewable electricity and/or onsite generation where practicable. Moreover, we will seek to proactively engage with our suppliers, transportation partners, and other stakeholders to drive innovative improvements in our supply chain to reduce our Scope 3 emissions (i.e., indirect emissions in our value chain). We intend to report our Scopes 1, 2, and 3 emissions annually and fully meet the requirements of CDP (formerly known as the Carbon Disclosure Project) by 2022. Although it is difficult to project the incremental cost to our operations in 2030, we do not expect any material impact to our financial performance as a result of our efforts to achieve “net-zero” in GHG emissions from our operations. For more information, refer to the risk factor titled “Increasing attention to ESG matters, including our net-zero goals and our failure to successfully achieve them, could adversely affect our business.”
Outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus
The outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has significantly adversely impacted global markets and continues to present global public health and economic challenges. In the third quarter of 2021, our contractors and supply chain partners experienced labor-related, and other challenges associated with COVID-19 that had a temporal, but more pronounced than anticipated, impact on our operations and project execution schedule. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the prevalence of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 and increased rates of infection across areas in which we operate affected the availability of healthy workers from time to time at our facilities, and we experienced increased rates of absence in our hourly workforce as our workers who contracted COVID-19 quarantined at home. These absences contributed to reduced facility availability and in some cases, reduced aggregate production levels. We believe that these challenges were short-term in nature, and based on the actions we have taken and the plans we have in place, we believe these issues are beginning to be behind us.
We have taken prescriptive safety measures including social distancing, hygienic policies and procedures, and other steps recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”). We adopted the CDC’s risk management approach at the beginning of the outbreak and have established risk levels based on the degree to which the virus has spread in a given community and the nature of the work performed at that location. Within our field operations, we have continued operations largely as normal with additional precautionary measures; however, we continue to monitor local data on a daily basis and have prioritized putting the right plans, procedures, and measures in place to mitigate the risk of exposure and infection and the related impacts to our business. We have also facilitated access for our employees to receive vaccines at our locations and we provide ongoing financial incentives for our employees to remain up to date with their vaccinations, in accordance with CDC guidelines.
We specifically designed our operations and logistics systems with flexibility and redundancies so they are capable of effectively responding to unforeseen events. We operate a portfolio of ten wood pellet production plants geographically dispersed across the Southeast United States. Our wood pellet production capacity is committed under long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with fixed pricing and fixed volumes that are not impacted by the market prices of crude oil, natural gas, power or heat. We export our product from a portfolio of six bulk terminals and transport it to our customers under long-term, fixed-price shipping contracts with multiple shipping partners. Our shipping operations have not been affected by COVID-19.
Factors Impacting Comparability of Our Financial Results
Waycross
On July 31, 2020, we acquired all of the limited liability interests in Georgia Biomass Holding LLC, a Georgia limited liability company and the indirect owner of a wood pellet production plant located in Waycross, Georgia (the “Waycross plant,”) for total consideration of $164.0 million in cash, after accounting for certain adjustments (the “Georgia Biomass Acquisition”). The Georgia Biomass Acquisition was recorded as a business combination and accounted for using the acquisition method. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recognized at fair value on the acquisition date of July 31, 2020, and the difference between the fair value of consideration transferred, which excludes acquisition-related costs, and the fair values of the identified net assets acquired, was recognized as goodwill. For more information regarding the Georgia Biomass Acquisition, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data, Note 1, Description of Business and Basis of Presentation-Georgia Biomass Holding LLC and Note 4, Acquisition.
2026 Notes
During December 2019, we issued $600.0 million in principal amount of 6.5% senior unsecured notes due January 15, 2026 (the “2026 Notes”). We received gross proceeds of approximately $601.8 million from the offerings and net proceeds of approximately $595.8 million after deducting commissions and expenses.
In July 2020, we issued an additional $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.5% the 2026 Notes at an offering price of 103.75% of the principal amount, which implied an effective yield to maturity of approximately 5.7%. We received net proceeds of approximately $153.6 million from the offering after deducting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
Senior Secured Green Term Loan Facility
In February 2021, our former sponsor entered into a senior secured green term loan facility (the “Green Term Loan”) providing for $325.0 million principal amount, maturing in February 2026. Interest was priced at LIBOR plus 5.50% with a LIBOR floor of 1.00%. Our former sponsor received gross proceeds of $325.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $317.2 million after deducting original issue discount, commissions, and expenses. Our former sponsor used the net proceeds (1) to purchase the noncontrolling interest in Enviva JV Development Company, LLC (the “ Development JV”), (2) to repay the Riverstone Loan (see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data, Note 15, Related-Party Transactions), (3) to fund capital expenditures and liquidity reserve cash accounts, and (4) for general purposes.
In October 2021, our former sponsor repaid in full the Green Term Loan and recognized a $9.4 million loss in early retirement of debt resulting from the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discount.
How We Generate Revenue
Overview
We primarily earn revenue by supplying wood pellets to our customers under off-take contracts, the majority of which are long-term in nature. Our off-take contracts are considered “take-or-pay” because they include a firm obligation of the customer to take a fixed quantity of product at a stated price and provisions that require that we be compensated in the case of a
customer’s failure to accept all or a part of the contracted volumes or termination of a contract by a customer. Each of our long-term off-take contracts defines the annual volume of wood pellets that a customer is required to purchase and we are required to sell, the fixed price per MT for product satisfying a base net calorific value and other technical specifications. These prices are fixed for the entire term, and are subject to adjustments which may include annual inflation-based adjustments or price escalators, price adjustments for product specifications, as well as, in some instances, price adjustments due to changes in underlying indices. In addition to sales of our product under these long-term off-take contracts, we routinely sell wood pellets under shorter-term contracts, which range in volume and tenor and, in some cases, may include only one specific shipment. Because each of our off-take contracts is a bilaterally negotiated agreement, our revenue over the duration of such contracts does not generally follow observable current market pricing trends. Our performance obligations under these contracts include the delivery of wood pellets, which are aggregated into MT. We account for each MT as a single performance obligation. Our revenue from the sale of wood pellets we produce is recognized upon satisfaction of the performance obligation when control transfers to the customer at the time of loading wood pellets onto a ship.
Depending on the specific off-take contract, shipping terms under our long-term contracts are either Cost, Insurance and Freight (“CIF”), Cost and Freight (“CFR”), or Free On Board (“FOB”). Under a CIF contract, we procure and pay for shipping costs, which include insurance and all other charges, up to the port of destination for the customer. Under a CFR contract, we procure and pay for shipping costs, which include insurance (excluding marine cargo insurance) and all other charges, up to the port of destination for the customer. Shipping under CIF and CFR contracts after control has passed to the customer is considered a fulfillment activity rather than a performance obligation and associated expenses are accrued and included in the price to the customer. Under FOB contracts, the customer is directly responsible for shipping costs.
In some cases, we may purchase shipments of product from third-party suppliers and resell them in back-to-back transactions (“purchase and sale transactions”). We typically are the principal in such transactions because we control the wood pellets prior to transferring them to the customer and therefore recognize related revenue on a gross basis.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes fees from customers related to cancellations, deferrals or accelerations of shipments and certain sales and marketing, scheduling, sustainability, consultation, shipping, and risk management services (collectively, “Commercial Services”).
We recognize third-party terminal services revenue ratably over the contract term. Terminal services are performance obligations that are satisfied over time, as customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits of the terminal services we perform. The consideration is generally fixed for minimum quantities and services beyond minimum quantities are generally billed on a per-MT rate.
Contracted Backlog
As of February 1, 2022, we had approximately $21.2 billion of product sales backlog for firm and contingent contracted product sales to our long-term off-take customers and have a total weighted-average remaining term of 14.5 years compared to approximately $19.9 billion and a total weighted-average remaining term of 14.0 years as of February 1, 2021. Contracted backlog represents the revenue to be recognized under existing contracts assuming deliveries occur as specified in the contracts. Contracted future product sales denominated in foreign currencies, excluding revenue hedged with foreign currency forward contracts, are included in U.S. Dollars at February 1, 2022 forward rates. The contracted backlog includes forward prices, including inflation, as well as foreign currency and commodity prices. The contracted backlog also includes the effects of related foreign currency derivative contracts. Please read Part II,