Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Everbridge is a global software company that provides enterprise software applications that automate and accelerate organizations’ operational response to critical events in order to keep people safe and organizations running. During public safety threats including severe weather conditions, active shooter situations, terrorist attacks or a pandemic, as well as critical business events such as IT outages, cyber-attacks, product recalls or supply-chain interruptions, global customers rely on our Critical Event Management platform to quickly and reliably aggregate and assess threat data, locate people at risk and responders able to assist, automate the execution of pre-defined communications processes and track progress on executing response plans. Our customers use our platform to identify and assess hundreds of different types of threats to their organizations, people, assets or brand. Our solutions enable organizations to deliver intelligent, contextual messages to, and receive verification of delivery from, hundreds of millions of recipients, across multiple communications modalities such as voice, SMS and e-mail, in over 200 countries and territories, in several languages and dialects - all simultaneously. Our Critical Event Management platform is comprised of a comprehensive set of software applications packaged for organizations to address five core use cases, safeguarding: Business Operations, People Resilience, Digital Operations, Smart Security, and Public Safety. Everbridge’s individual products, addressing the full spectrum of tasks an organization requires to manage a critical event, include Mass Notification, Safety Connection, IT Alerting, Visual Command Center, Public Warning, Community Engagement, Risk Center, Crisis Management, CareConverge, Control Center, 911 Connect, Travel Risk Management, SnapComms and E911. We believe that our broad suite of integrated enterprise applications delivered via a single global platform is a significant competitive advantage in the market for Critical Event Management solutions, which we refer to generally as CEM.
Our customer base has grown from 867 customers at the end of 2011 to more than 6,100 customers as of December 31, 2021. Our customers are based in over 75 countries and include eight of the 10 largest U.S. cities, nine of the 10 largest U.S.-based investment banks, 47 of the 50 busiest North American airports, nine of the 10 largest global consulting firms, eight of the 10 largest global automakers, nine of the 10 largest U.S.-based health care providers, and seven of the 10 largest technology companies in the world. We provide our applications to customers of varying sizes, including enterprises, small businesses, non-profit organizations, educational institutions and governmental agencies. Our customers span a wide variety of industries including technology, energy, financial services, healthcare and life sciences, manufacturing, media and entertainment, retail, higher education and professional services.
We sell all of our critical event management applications on a subscription basis. We generally enter into contracts that range from one to three years in length, with an average contract duration of 1.9 years as of December 31, 2021, and generally bill and collect payment annually in advance. We derive most of our revenue from subscriptions to applications. On average, 95% of the revenue that we recognized in each of the eight most recently completed quarters was generated from contracts entered into in prior quarters or renewals of those contracts; the balance of the revenue that we recognized in each such quarter was generated from contracts entered into with new customers or new contracts, other than renewals, entered into with existing customers in such quarter. We derived 42% of our revenue in 2021 from sales of our Mass Notification application. Our pricing model is based on the number of applications subscribed to and, per application, the number of people, locations and things connected to our platform as well as the volume of communications. We also offer premium services including data feeds for social media, threat intelligence and weather. We generate additional revenue by expanding the number of applications that our customers subscribe to and the number of contacts and devices connected to our platform.
We generated revenue of $368.4 million in 2021, $271.1 million in 2020, $200.9 million in 2019 and $147.1 million in 2018, representing year-over-year increases of 36% in 2021, 35% in 2020 and 37% in 2019. We had net losses of $94.8 million, $93.4 million, $52.3 million and $47.5 million in 2021, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, 22% and 24% of our customers, respectively, were located outside of the United States and these customers generated 31% and 26% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have focused on rapidly growing our business and believe that the future growth of our business is dependent on many factors, including our ability to increase the functionality of our platform and applications, expand our customer base, accelerate adoption of our applications beyond Mass Notification within our existing customer base and expand our international presence. Our future growth will also depend on the growth in the market for critical event management solutions and our ability to effectively compete. In order to further penetrate the market for critical event management solutions and capitalize on what we believe to be a significant opportunity, we intend to continue to invest in research and development, build-out our data center infrastructure and services capabilities and hire additional sales representatives, both domestically and internationally, to drive sales to new customers and incremental sales of new applications to existing customers. Nevertheless, we expect to continue to incur losses in the near term and, if we are unable to achieve our growth objectives, we may not be able to achieve profitability.
Recent Developments
On January 15, 2021, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with RedSky pursuant to which we purchased all of the issued and outstanding shares of stock of RedSky for a base consideration of $55.4 million, net of cash acquired. We paid $32.4 million in cash, net of cash acquired, and issued 162,820 newly issued shares of our common stock at closing. On the date of this acquisition, the average price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Market was $141.46 per share. In addition to the base purchase price, there was also a potential contingent payment of up to $30 million that was eligible to be earned by the sellers based on certain revenue targets through the contractual measurement period. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid $0.4 million in cash and issued 4,058 shares of our common stock to settle RedSky’s contingent consideration liability. We acquired RedSky for its E911 incident response solutions platform to enhance our CEM suite of solutions as well as market penetration and customer reach.
In March 2021, we issued $375 million aggregate principal amount of 0% convertible senior notes due March 15, 2026, including $50 million aggregate principal amount of 2026 Notes issued upon exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase additional 2026 Notes. The 2026 Notes will mature on March 15, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased by us or converted by the holders pursuant to their terms. In connection with the pricing of the 2026 Notes and the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase additional 2026 Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with certain counterparties affiliated with the initial purchasers and other financial institutions. The cost of the purchased capped calls was $35.1 million. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of 2026 Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 2026 Notes, as the case may be, with such reduction and/or offset subject to a cap. In connection with the issuance of the 2026 Notes in March 2021, we paid approximately $58.6 million in cash and issued 1,288,994 shares of common stock to repurchase approximately $58.6 million principal amount of our 1.50% convertible senior notes due November 1, 2022. During March 2021, we also partially terminated capped call options entered into in connection with the 2022 Notes and received approximately $10.6 million as well as modified a capped call option agreement entered into in connection with the 2022 Notes. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 627,212 shares upon the conversion of approximately $21.1 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes.
On April 6, 2021, we signed a definitive agreement with xMatters pursuant to which we agreed to purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of stock of xMatters. This acquisition closed on May 7, 2021. We purchased all of the issued and outstanding shares of stock of xMatters for a base consideration of $242.6 million. We paid $178.1 million in cash and issued 555,332 newly issued shares of our common stock at closing. On the date of this acquisition, the average price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Market was $116.12 per share. We acquired xMatters for its service reliability platforms to enhance our CEM suite of solutions as well as market penetration and customer reach.
On November 4, 2021, we entered into an agreement with the shareholders of Anvil pursuant to which we purchased all of the issued and outstanding share capital of Anvil for a base consideration of $161.4 million. We paid $70.2 million in cash at closing, acquired net purchase liabilities of $1.6 million and issued Consideration Loan Notes valued at $89.7 million. On November 10, 2021, we issued 574,639 newly issued shares of common stock to settle consideration loan notes issued on the acquisition date. In addition to the base purchase price, there is also a potential contingent payment of up to $0.8 million that may be paid to the sellers on or before June 30, 2023. At the date of the acquisition, we preliminarily assessed the probability of the contingent consideration payment and recorded a $0.1 million preliminary fair value as part of the purchase price allocation. We acquired Anvil for its travel risk management, operational resiliency and occupational health solutions platforms to enhance our CEM suite of solutions as well as market penetration and customer reach.
In December 2021, David Meredith notified our Board of Directors of his intention to resign from his role as Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”). The Board of Directors accepted Mr. Meredith’s resignation and, soon thereafter, established an Office of the CEO and began to transition leadership to long-tenured company executives Patrick Brickley, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer, and Vernon Irvin, Executive Vice President and Chief Revenue Officer. Mr. Brickley and Mr. Irvin continue serving as Interim Co-Chief Executive Officers while we search for a permanent CEO. Mr. Meredith concluded his role on our Board of Directors on January 10, 2022 and we processed the termination of his employment on January 30, 2022.
Impacts of COVID-19 to Our Business
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financial results and operations for our Americas and international geographies were not significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have taken, and continue to take, a variety of measures to ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure, to promote the safety and security of our employees and to support the communities in which we operate. These measures include requiring remote working arrangements for employees where practicable, among other modifications. We are following evolving public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, such as the imposition of travel restrictions, the promotion of social distancing and the adoption of work-from-home arrangements. All of these policies and initiatives have been and may continue to impact our operations. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and stockholders. Due to the evolving nature of the situation, we are not able at this time to estimate the future impact of the pandemic on our financial results and operations, but the impact could be material during any future period affected either directly or indirectly by this pandemic. Due to our primarily subscription-based business model, the effect of the coronavirus may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods, if at all. See “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A included herein which includes information on risks associated with pandemics in general and COVID-19 specifically. The extent of the future impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including new information which may emerge concerning the duration and severity of the outbreak, impact of vaccinations and virus variants, international actions taken or which may be taken in the future to contain and treat it, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, and impact on our employees, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Since 2020, (1) we launched COVID-19 Shield, a new set of coronavirus protection solutions designed to protect the safety of employees and customers, maintain business operations, safeguard supply chains, and reduce costs and liabilities stemming from the impact of the global coronavirus pandemic; (2) we launched COVID-19 Return to Work, a software solution designed to help businesses and governments navigate the complexity of operating during the next phase of the COVID-19 pandemic and prepare to bring back the workforce and reopen society; (3) we launched COVID-19 Shield: Contact Tracing, a solution for corporate, government and healthcare organizations to supplement or complement existing manual contact tracing efforts; (4) we launched Control Center, a physical security information management software platform, which includes features designed to help organizations return to work by integrating and managing data and analytics from video cameras, thermal cameras, badge access and other building systems, and by automating the response to help organizations ensure the safety and protection of employees, as well as compliance with social distancing and personal protective equipment policies; and (5) we launched COVID-19 Shield: Vaccine Distribution, an extension to our CEM platform offering risk insights, logistics awareness and vaccine appointment management. These products were built off of our existing platforms.
Presentation of Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. Business acquisitions are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Our purchase accounting resulted in all assets and liabilities of acquired businesses being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition dates. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
We report our financial results as one operating segment. Our operating results are regularly reviewed on a consolidated basis by our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”), principally to make strategic decisions regarding how we allocate our resources and to assess our consolidated operating performance. Our CODM was David Meredith prior to his resignation as CEO, as described above. Mr. Brickley and Mr. Irvin are currently serving as interim CODMs of the Company.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive most of our revenue from the sale of subscriptions to our critical event management and enterprise safety applications.
We generally bill and collect payment for our subscriptions annually in advance. All revenue billed in advance of services being delivered is recorded in deferred revenue. The initial subscription period typically ranges from one to three years. We offer varying levels of customer support based on customer needs and the complexity of their businesses, including the level of usage by a customer in terms of minutes or the amount of data used to transmit the notifications. Our pricing model is based on the number of applications subscribed to and, per application, the number of people, locations and things connected to our platform as well as the volume of communications. We also offer premium services including data feeds for social media, threat intelligence and weather. We generate additional revenue by expanding the number of premium features and applications that our customers subscribe to and the number of contacts connected to our platform. Our revenue growth in the near-term may be adversely affected by our ability to integrate our recent acquisitions, drive new client adoption and sales of our full-suite of solutions.
We also sell professional services, which primarily consist of fees for deployment and optimization services as well as training. In addition, we also sell our software and related post contract support for on premises usage.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes expenses related to the fulfillment of our subscription services, consisting primarily of employee-related expenses for data center operations and customer support, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Cost of revenue also includes hosting costs, messaging costs and depreciation and amortization. As we add data center capacity and support personnel in advance of anticipated growth, our cost of revenue will increase and, if anticipated revenue growth does not occur, our gross profit will be adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense and other personnel costs are the most significant components of each of these expense categories. We include stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with the grant of stock options, restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units and our employee stock purchase plan within the applicable operating expense category based on the equity award recipient’s functional area.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of employee-related expenses for sales, marketing and public relations employees, including salaries, bonuses, commissions, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Sales and marketing expense also includes trade show, market research, advertising and other related external marketing expense as well as office and software related costs to support sales. We defer certain sales commissions related to acquiring new customers or services and amortize these expenses ratably over the period of benefit that we have determined to be four years. Sales commissions attributable to professional services are expensed within twelve months of selling the service to the customer. We plan to continue to expand our sales and marketing functions to grow our customer base and increase sales to existing customers. This growth will include adding sales personnel and expanding our marketing activities to continue to generate additional leads and build brand awareness. In the near term, we expect our sales and marketing expense to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we hire new sales representatives in the United States and worldwide and grow our marketing staff.
Research and Development
Research and development expense primarily consists of employee-related expenses for research and development staff, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Research and development expense also includes the cost of certain third-party services, office related costs to support research and development activities, software subscriptions and hosting costs. We capitalize certain software development costs that are attributable to developing new applications and adding incremental functionality to our platform and amortize these costs over the estimated life of the new application or incremental functionality, which is generally three years. We focus our research and development efforts on improving our applications, developing new applications and delivering new functionality. In the near term, we expect our research and development expense to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to increase the functionality of our platform and applications.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense primarily consists of employee-related expenses for administrative, legal, finance and human resource personnel, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees, insurance premiums, corporate expenses, transaction-related costs, office-related expenses, facility costs, depreciation and amortization and software license costs. In the near term, we expect our general and administrative expense to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to incur the costs associated with being a publicly traded company.
Interest and Investment Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash balances held at financial institutions. Investment income consist of interest earned on our short-term investments which consist of U.S. treasuries, U.S. government agency obligations and money market funds.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our outstanding debt obligations including amortization of debt discounts and offering costs.
Gain (Loss) on Extinguishment of Debt and Capped Call Modification
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification relates to the partial extinguishment of our 1.50% convertible senior notes due 2022, modification of a 2022 Notes capped call agreement and extinguishment of consideration loan notes issued in connection with our Anvil acquisition.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net consists primarily of realized foreign currency gains and losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of our historical results is not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future (in thousands):
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization of acquired intangible assets as follows (in thousands):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of revenue (1):
(1)
Columns may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $97.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was due to a $97.3 million increase in sales of our solutions driven by expansion of our customer base from 5,613 customers as of December 31, 2020 to 6,135 as of December 31, 2021, including increased sales to larger organizations with greater numbers of contacts and locations.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $31.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $17.0 million increase in employee-related costs, which includes stock-based compensation, associated with our increased headcount from 332 employees as of December 31, 2020 to 497 employees as of December 31, 2021 net of a reduction in stock-based compensation expense as a result of expected reduced performance metric achievement, a $9.3 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense attributable to our acquired intangible assets, a $4.1 million increase in hosting, software and messaging costs and a $0.8 million increase attributed to office and other related expenses to support revenue generating activities.
Gross margin percentage remained flat in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense increased by $38.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $28.6 million increase in employee-related costs, which includes stock-based compensation, associated with our increased headcount from 482 employees as of December 31, 2020 to 655 employees as of December 31, 2021 net of a reduction in stock-based compensation expense as a result of expected reduced performance metric achievement. The remaining increase was principally the result of a $6.3 million increase in trade show and advertising costs, a $1.6 million increase attributed to office related expenses and a $1.5 million increase in software expenses to support the sales team.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $19.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $20.1 million increase in employee-related costs, which includes stock-based compensation, associated with our increased headcount from 363 employees as of December 31, 2020 to 579 employees as of December 31, 2021 net of a reduction in stock-based compensation expense as a result of expected reduced performance metric achievement, a $1.6 million increase in hosting and software related cost, a $1.2 million increase in professional services and a $1.2 million increase in office related expenses to support research and development activities. In addition, a total of $13.5 million of internally-developed software costs during 2021 and $8.5 million of internally-developed software costs during 2020 were capitalized, resulting in a $5.0 million offset to the increase during 2021.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $13.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $13.0 million increase in depreciation and amortization as well as a $3.0 million increase in employee-related costs, which includes stock-based compensation, associated with our increased headcount from 167 employees as of December 31, 2020 to 221 employees as of December 31, 2021 net of a reduction in stock-based compensation expense as a result of expected reduced performance metric achievement and a reversal of previously recognized stock-based compensation as a result of Mr. Meredith’s resignation. The remaining increase was principally the result of a $6.0 million increase in professional services and office related expenses to support the administrative team and a $1.7 million increase in allowance for credit losses. These increases were partially offset by a $10.7 million net decrease in our contingent consideration obligation primarily due to final contingent consideration obligation adjustments for RedSky, One2Many Group B.V. (“one2many”), SnapComms Limited (“SnapComms”) and Techwan SA (“Techwan”).
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net increased by $7.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an $11.8 million increase in interest expense related to our convertible senior notes, a $2.5 million increase in loss on extinguishment of convertible notes and capped call modification, a decrease of $1.6 million of interest income due to lower interest rates on our investment balance and a $1.9 million increase in other expenses primarily related to net foreign currency transaction losses. These amounts were partially offset by a $10.1 million gain on the extinguishment of consideration loan notes issued in connection with our Anvil acquisition due the decrease in our stock price between the date the consideration loan notes were issued and the date the consideration loan notes were extinguished.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit increased by $10.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020. During 2021, deferred tax liabilities were recognized in connection with the purchase price accounting for our acquisitions. Certain of such deferred tax liabilities will be a source of future taxable income to realize a portion of our deferred tax assets, which resulted in a tax benefit of approximately $7.4 million related to U.S. acquired entities and a tax benefit of approximately $1.5 million related to non-U.S. acquisitions recognized during 2021 which is the primary reason for the increase in our income tax benefit from 2020 to 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Other Metrics
We regularly monitor a number of financial and operating metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions. Our other business metrics may be calculated in a manner different than similar other business metrics used by other companies (in thousands):
•
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA represents our net loss before interest and investment (income) expense, net, (benefit from) provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, (gain) loss on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification, change in fair value of contingent consideration and stock-based compensation expense. We do not consider these items to be indicative of our core operating performance. The items that are non-cash include depreciation and amortization expense, (gain) loss on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification, change in fair value of
contingent consideration and stock-based compensation expense. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to generate future operating plans, make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital and invest in initiatives that are focused on cultivating new markets for our solutions. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating adjusted EBITDA facilitates comparisons of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). We believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. Nevertheless, use of adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are: (1) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the capitalized software that is amortized will need to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements; (2) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (3) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation; (4) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments or receipts that may represent a reduction or increase in cash available to us; and (5) other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces the usefulness of the metric as a comparative measure. Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA alongside our other GAAP-based financial performance measures, net loss and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
•
Adjusted Gross Profit. Adjusted gross profit represents gross profit plus amortization of acquired intangibles and stock-based compensation. Adjusted gross profit is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to generate future operating plans. The exclusion of stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangibles facilitates comparisons of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis. In the near term, we expect these expenses to continue to negatively impact our gross profit. Adjusted gross profit is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that adjusted gross profit provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. Nevertheless, our use of adjusted gross profit has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. You should consider adjusted gross profit alongside our other GAAP-based financial performance measures, gross profit and our other GAAP financial results. The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted gross profit to gross profit, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
•
Free Cash Flow. Free cash flow represents net cash from operating activities minus capital expenditures and capitalized software development costs. Free cash flow is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to generate future operating plans. The exclusion of capital expenditures and amounts capitalized for internally-developed software facilitates comparisons of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis and excludes items that we do not consider to be indicative of our core operating performance. Free cash flow is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. Nevertheless, our use of free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. You should consider free cash flow alongside our other GAAP-based financial performance measures, net cash provided by operating activities, and our other GAAP financial results. The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash for operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Additional Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we provide investors with certain additional supplemental non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP cost of revenue, non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP sales and marketing expense, non-GAAP research and development expense, non-GAAP general and administrative expense, non-GAAP total operating expenses, non-GAAP operating income (loss) and non-GAAP net income (loss), which we collectively refer to as non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude all or a combination of the following (as reflected in the following reconciliation tables): stock-based compensation expense, amortization of acquired intangibles, change in fair value of contingent consideration, accretion of interest on convertible senior notes and (gain) loss on extinguishment of
debt and capped call modification and the tax impact of such adjustments. The tax impact of such adjustments was determined by recalculating current and deferred taxes utilizing non-GAAP pre-tax income for the year and analyzing changes in valuation allowance post purchase accounting. The tax impact was considered immaterial for fiscal years 2020 and 2019; however, the prior period tax impact presentation has been recast to align with our 2021 reporting presentation. The presentation of the non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. We use these non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision-making purposes and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our operating results, enhance the overall understanding of past financial performance and future prospects and allow for greater transparency with respect to metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision making. While our non-GAAP financial measures are an important tool for financial and operational decision making and for evaluating our own operating results over different periods of time, you should consider our non-GAAP financial measures alongside our GAAP financial results.
We exclude stock-based compensation expense which can vary based on plan design, share price, share price volatility, and the expected lives of equity instruments granted. We believe that providing non-GAAP financial measures that exclude stock-based compensation expense allow for more meaningful comparisons between our operating results from period to period because stock-based compensation expense does not represent a cash expenditure. We believe that excluding the impact of amortization of acquired intangibles allows for more meaningful comparisons between operating results from period to period as the intangibles are valued at the time of acquisition and are amortized over a period of several years after the acquisition. We believe that excluding the change in fair value of contingent consideration allows for more meaningful comparisons between operating results from period to period, as it is non-operating in nature. We believe that excluding the impact of accretion of interest on convertible senior notes allows for more meaningful comparisons between operating results from period to period as accretion of interest on convertible senior notes relates to interest cost for the time value of money and are non-operating in nature. We believe that excluding (gain) loss on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification allows for more meaningful comparisons between operating results from period to period as gains and losses on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification are non-operating in nature. We do not engage in the repurchase of convertible notes on a regular basis or in the ordinary course of business. Accordingly, we believe that excluding these expenses provides investors and management with greater visibility of the underlying performance of our business operations, facilitates comparison of our results with other periods and may also facilitate comparison with the results of other companies in our industry.
There are limitations in using non-GAAP financial measures because the non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies and exclude expenses that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. Further, stock-based compensation expense has been and will continue to be for the foreseeable future a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of the compensation provided to our employees.
The following table reconciles our GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash from sales to our customers, along with equity issuances and debt financing arrangements. Our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents totaling $488.0 million as of December 31, 2021. We have generated significant losses since inception and expect to continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalent balances and the cash flows generated by our operations will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. However, our belief may prove to be incorrect, and we could utilize our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect. We believe that our financial resources will allow us to manage the anticipated impact of COVID-19 on our business operations for the foreseeable future, which could include delays in payments from our customers. The challenges posed by COVID-19 on our business could evolve rapidly. We will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to COVID-19. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors.” We cannot assure you that we will be able to raise additional capital on acceptable terms or at all. In addition, if we fail to meet our operating plan during the next 12 months, our liquidity could be adversely affected.
Material Cash Requirements and Contractual Obligations
We expect to use cash primarily for operating activities, such as expansion of our sales and marketing operations, research and development activities and other working capital needs, such as salaries, bonuses, and other personnel cost and data center hosting costs, as well as payments for acquisitions of businesses and interest payments on our convertible senior notes. We expect to continue to finance our operations primarily through cash from sales to our customers and may consider future equity issuances and debt financing arrangements. Our commitments to settle contractual obligations include $825.0 million principal amount of indebtedness under the 2026 Notes, 2024 Notes and 2022 Notes (see Note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements) and lease obligations of $24.4 million (see Note 18 of the notes to consolidated financial statements).
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows (in thousands):
At December 31, 2021, $26.9 million of the $492.8 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was held by foreign subsidiaries. Our intention is to indefinitely reinvest foreign earnings in our foreign subsidiaries. If these earnings were used to fund domestic operations, they would be subject to additional income taxes upon repatriation.
Sources of Funds
Follow-On Public Offering
In January 2019, we completed a follow-on public offering in which we sold 2,645,000 shares of our common stock, which included 345,000 shares sold pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of an option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $55.25 per share. We received net proceeds of $139.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
Convertible Senior Notes
In March 2021, we issued $375.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes, including $50.0 million aggregate principal amount of notes issued upon exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase additional 2026 Notes. The 2026 Notes will mature on March 15, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased by the Company or converted by the holders pursuant to their terms.
The 2026 Notes have an initial conversion rate of 5.5341 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2026 Notes. This represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $180.70 per share of common stock and approximately 2.1 million shares issuable upon conversion. Throughout the term of the 2026 Notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. Holders of the 2026 Notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid special interest, if any, upon conversion of a 2026 Note, except in limited circumstances. Accrued but unpaid special interest, if any, will be deemed to be paid by cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock paid or delivered, as the case may be, to the holder upon conversion of a 2026 Note.
In connection with the issuance of the 2026 Notes, we purchased capped call options that in the aggregate relate to the total number of shares of our common stock underlying the 2026 Notes, with an initial strike price of approximately $180.70 per share, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the 2026 Notes and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of the 2026 Notes, and with a cap price of approximately $258.14. The cost of the purchased capped calls was $35.1 million.
In December 2019, we issued $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes, including $75.0 million aggregate principal amount of notes issued upon exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase additional 2024 Notes. The 2024 Notes will mature on December 15, 2024, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased by the Company or converted by the holders pursuant to their terms.
The 2024 Notes have an initial conversion rate of 8.8999 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes. This represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $112.36 per share of common stock and approximately 4.0 million shares issuable upon conversion. Throughout the term of the 2024 Notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. Holders of the 2024 Notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest, if any, upon conversion of a 2024 Note, except in limited circumstances. Accrued but unpaid interest will be deemed to be paid by cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock paid or delivered, as the case may be, to the holder upon conversion of a 2024 Note.
In connection with the issuance of the 2024 Notes, we purchased capped call options that in the aggregate relate to the total number of shares of our common stock underlying the 2024 Notes, with an initial strike price of approximately $112.36 per share, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the 2024 Notes and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of the 2024 Notes, and with a cap price of approximately $166.46. The cost of the purchased capped calls was $44.9 million.
During fiscal year 2019, we paid $57.8 million to repurchase $23.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes. We also partially terminated capped call options entered into in connection with the 2022 Notes during fiscal year 2019 and received $5.8 million.
During fiscal year 2020, we issued 362,029 shares upon the conversion of approximately $12.2 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes.
In connection with the issuance of the 2026 Notes in March 2021, we paid approximately $58.6 million in cash and issued 1,288,994 shares of common stock to repurchase approximately $58.6 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes. We also partially terminated capped call options entered into in connection with the 2022 Notes in March 2021 and received approximately $10.6 million. In addition, during fiscal year 2021, we issued 627,212 shares upon the conversion of approximately $21.1 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes.
Uses of Funds
Our historical uses of cash have primarily consisted of cash used for operating activities, such as expansion of our sales and marketing operations, research and development activities and other working capital needs as well as payments for acquisitions of businesses, purchases of convertible note caped call hedges and repurchases of convertible notes.
Operating Activities
Our net loss and cash flows provided by or used in operating activities are significantly influenced by our investments in headcount and infrastructure to support our growth, marketing and sponsorship expenses, and our ability to bill and collect in a timely manner. Our net loss has been significantly greater than our use of cash for operating activities due to the inclusion of non-cash expenses and charges.
Operating activities generated $22.2 million in net cash in 2021 from $121.5 million in non-cash operating expenses, which was partially offset by our net loss of $94.8 million and by a $4.5 million decrease in changes in operating assets and liabilities. Specifically, we recognized non-cash charges aggregating to $53.2 million for depreciation and amortization of intangible assets, capitalized software development costs and property and equipment, $44.1 million for stock-based compensation, $35.3 million related to the accretion of interest on our convertible senior notes, $14.4 million for amortization of deferred commissions, $4.8 million for provision for credit losses, offset by $13.0 million for deferred income taxes, $7.2 million gain on extinguishment of debt and capped call modification, $7.0 million change in the fair value of our contingent consideration obligation, a $2.7 million payment for contingent consideration and $0.4 million in other non-cash charges. The net change in operating assets and liabilities of $4.5 million reflected an $18.2 million increase in accounts receivable, a $16.8 million increase in deferred cost, a $4.0 million decrease in other liabilities, a $1.2 million increase in other assets and a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses. These amounts were offset by a $26.6 million increase in deferred revenue, a $3.8 million increase in accounts payable, a $3.1 million increase in accrued expenses and a $2.7 million increase in accrued payroll and employee related liabilities.
Operating activities generated $15.8 million in net cash in 2020 from $116.1 million in non-cash operating expenses, which was partially offset by our net loss of $93.4 million and by a $6.9 million decrease in changes in operating assets and liabilities. Specifically, we recognized non-cash charges aggregating $46.8 million for stock-based compensation expense, $30.8 million for depreciation and amortization of intangible assets, capitalized software development costs and property and equipment, $22.2 million of accretion on the convertible notes, $12.6 million in amortization of commissions, $3.7 million related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration, $3.1 million for the increase in our provision for credit losses and sales return reserve and a $0.4 million loss on extinguishment of convertible notes, offset by $3.5 million for deferred income taxes. The change in operating assets and liabilities reflected a $25.0 million increase in deferred revenue, a $22.6 million increase in accounts receivable, an $18.9 million increase in deferred costs due to timing of payments made for commissions, a $7.4 million increase in other liabilities, a $4.0 million increase in prepaid expenses, a $3.5 million increase in accrued employee-related expenses due to timing of payments, a $1.5 million increase in accounts payable due to the timing of payments made and a $1.1 million increase in accrued expenses due to timing of payments made to vendors, partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease in other assets.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures for capitalized software development costs, business acquisitions, property and equipment expenses and purchase and sales of short-term investments.
Investing activities used $281.8 million cash in 2021, which consisted of $262.1 million of cash paid related to the acquisitions of xMatters, Anvil, RedSky and SnapComms, $14.7 million of investment in software development and $5.1 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Investing activities used $85.2 million cash in in 2020, which consisted primarily of $55.1 million of cash paid for the acquisitions of Connexient, Inc. (“Connexient”), CNL Software Limited (“CNL Software”), one2many, Techwan and SnapComms, $17.1 million of cash paid for the purchase of intangible assets, $9.7 million of investment in software development and $3.3 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Cash generated by financing activities includes proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our follow-on public offering, borrowings under our convertible senior notes, proceeds from the partial termination of convertible note capped call hedges, proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options and contributions to our employee stock purchase plan. Cash used in financing activities includes payments for debt and offering issuance costs, purchases of convertible notes capped call hedges, extinguishment of debt, payment of contingent consideration and employee withholding liabilities from the exercise of restricted stock units.
Financing activities provided $276.3 million of cash in 2021, which reflects proceeds of $329.3 million from our 2026 Notes offering after deducting debt issuance cost and the cost for the capped call transactions entered into in connection with the 2026 Notes offering, $4.6 million from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan and $3.1 million from the exercise of stock options. These amounts were offset by $48.0 million in payments for the extinguishment of 2022 Notes offset by cash received for the partial termination of the 2022 Notes capped call options, $10.1 million in payments for employee withholding taxes related to the issuance of restricted stock units and $2.5 million in payments for contingent consideration.
Financing activities provided $5.1 million of cash in 2020, which reflects $8.2 million from the exercise of stock options and $3.4 million from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan. These amounts were offset by $6.4 million in payments for restricted stock unit employee withholding taxes.
Backlog
We generally sell our critical communications applications on a subscription basis. We generally enter into contracts that range from one to three years in length, with an average contract duration of 1.9 years as of December 31, 2021, and generally bill and collect payment annually in advance. Since we bill many of our customers at the beginning of each contract year, there can be amounts that we have not yet been contractually able to invoice. Until such time as these amounts are invoiced, they are not recorded in revenue, deferred revenue or elsewhere in our consolidated financial statements. We expect that the amount of backlog relative to the total value of our subscription agreements will change from year to year for several reasons, including the specific timing and duration of customer agreements, varying invoicing cycles of agreements, the specific timing of customer renewals and changes in customer financial circumstances. In addition, because revenue for any period is a function of revenue recognized from deferred revenue under contracts in existence at the beginning of the period, as well as contracts that are renewed and new customer contracts that are entered into during the period, backlog at the beginning of any period is not necessarily indicative of future performance. Our presentation of backlog may also differ from that of other companies in our industry. Due to these factors, as well as variances in billing arrangements with customers, we do not utilize backlog as a key management metric internally.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting estimates that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements are summarized below. The future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, cash flows, and financial position are unclear; however, we believe we have used reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from subscription services and professional services. We recognize revenue in accordance with FASB ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
Determination of the transaction price;
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription Services Revenues
Subscription services revenues primarily consist of fees that provide customers access to one or more of our hosted applications for critical event management, with routine customer support. Revenue is generally recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that our service is made available to the customer. All services are recognized using an output measure of progress looking at time elapsed as the contract generally provides the customer equal benefit throughout the contract period. Our subscription contracts are generally two years or longer in length, billed annually in advance, and non-cancelable.
Professional Services Revenues
Professional services revenues primarily consist of fees for deployment and optimization services, as well as training. The majority of our consulting contracts revenue is recognized over time as the services are performed. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed.
Software License Revenues
We also sell software and related post contract support for on premises usage as well as professional services, hardware and hosting. Our on premises license transactions are generally perpetual in nature and are recognized at a point in time when made available to the customer for use. Significant judgment is required to determine the standalone selling prices for each distinct performance obligation in order to allocate the transaction price for purposes of revenue recognition. Making this judgment of estimating a standalone selling price involves consideration of overall pricing objectives, market conditions and other factors, including the value of our other similar contracts, the applications sold, customer demographics, geographic locations, and the number and types of users within our contracts. The significant judgment was primarily due to using such considerations to estimate the price that each distinct performance obligation would be sold for on a standalone basis because such performance obligations are typically sold together on a bundled basis. Changes in these estimates of standalone selling prices can have a material effect on the amount of revenue recognized from each distinct performance obligation.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Most of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis for those performance obligations with stable observable prices and then the residual method applied for any performance obligation that has pricing which is highly variable. We determine the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including the value of our contracts, pricing when certain services are sold on a standalone basis, the applications sold, customer demographics, geographic locations, and the volume of services and users purchased.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Allowance for credit risk for accounts receivables and contract assets is established based on various factors including credit profiles of our customers, historical payments and current economic trends. We review the allowance for accounts receivables and contract assets by assessing individual accounts receivable or unbilled contract assets over a specific aging and amount. All other balances are pooled based on historical collection experience. The estimate of expected credit losses is based on information about past events, current economic conditions, and forecasts of future economic conditions that affect the collectability. Accounts receivable and contract assets are written-off on a case by case basis, net of any amounts that may be collected. If our estimate of uncollectible accounts is too low, credit loss expense may increase in future periods, and if it is too high, credit loss expense may decrease in future periods.
Deferred Costs
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. These costs are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be four years. Sales commissions attributable to professional services are expensed within twelve months of selling the service to the customer. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, our technology and other factors. Amortization of deferred commissions is included in sales and marketing expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for restricted stock unit awards (“RSUs”) based on the fair value of the award and on a straight-line basis over the vesting period based on the estimated portion of the RSU that is expected to vest. Our board of directors determines the fair value of RSUs based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
We grant performance-based RSUs (“PSUs”), that vest upon satisfaction of certain performance-based conditions. The PSUs generally vest based on us achieving certain revenue growth thresholds. The vesting of the PSUs is subject to the employee’s continued employment with us through the date of achievement. The fair value is based on the value of our common stock at the date of issuance and the probability of achieving the performance metric. Compensation cost is recognized under the accelerated method and is adjusted in future periods for subsequent changes in the expected outcome of the performance related conditions.
We recognize compensation expense for our employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”) based on the fair value of the award and on a straight-line basis over the term based on the estimated portion of the ESPP that is expected to vest. Inherent in the valuation and recording of stock-based compensation for ESPP, are several estimates that we made in regard to valuation and expense that will be incurred. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of ESPP. Expected volatility is based on a combination of historical stock price volatility and implied volatility of our common stock. The risk-free interest rate is based on the rate on U.S. Treasury securities with maturities consistent with the expected term. We have not paid dividends and do not anticipate paying a cash dividend in the foreseeable future and, accordingly, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Business Combinations
The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Purchase accounting results in assets and liabilities of an acquired business being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess consideration over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on each acquisition accounted for as a business combination in order to record the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on our best estimate of fair value. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, discount rates and selection of comparable companies. Significant estimation is required in determining the fair value of the customer relationship intangible assets, deferred revenue and contingent
consideration liabilities. The significant estimation is primarily due to the judgmental nature of the inputs to the valuation models used to measure the fair value of these intangible assets, deferred revenue and contingent consideration liabilities, as well as the sensitivity of the respective fair values to the underlying significant assumptions. We use the income approach to measure the fair value of these intangible assets, a discounted cash flow approach for deferred revenue and a Monte Carlo simulation model to measure the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities. The significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of the intangible assets, deferred revenue and contingent consideration liabilities included forecasted revenues from existing customers, existing customer attrition rates, estimated costs required to fulfill the deferred revenue obligation and forecasted revenues for the contingent consideration earnout period. When estimating the significant assumptions to be used in the valuation we include a consideration of current industry information, market and economic trends, historical results of the acquired business, nature of the performance obligations associated with the deferred revenue and other relevant factors. These significant assumptions are forward-looking and could be affected by future economic and market conditions. We engage the assistance of valuation specialists in concluding on fair value measurements in connection with determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
The valuation of the contingent consideration is derived using estimates of the probability of achievement within specified time periods based on projections of future revenue metrics per the terms of the applicable agreements. These include estimates of our assessment of the probability of meeting such results, with the probability-weighted earn-out using a Monte Carlo Simulation Model then discounted to estimate fair value. Fair value is estimated using the probability weighted cash flow estimate closer to the measurement date. The various operating performance measures included in these contingent consideration agreements primarily relate to product revenue.
Transaction costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate purchase price paid over the fair value of the net assets acquired in our business combinations. Goodwill is not amortized and is tested for impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We performed our annual impairment assessment on November 30, 2021. We operate under one reporting unit and as a result, evaluate goodwill impairment based on our fair value as a whole.
To determine the number of operating segments and reporting units that are present, we analyzed whether there is any customer, product or geographic information that drives the chief operating decision maker’s (our chief executive officer) decisions on how to allocate resources and whether any segment management exists. Management has concluded that operating decisions are made at the consolidated company level and there is no segment management in place that reviews results of operations with the chief operating decision maker.
In assessing goodwill for impairment, an entity has the option to assess qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying value, then performing the two-step impairment test is unnecessary. An entity can choose not to perform a qualitative assessment for any of its reporting units and proceed directly to the use of the two-step impairment test.
When assessing goodwill for impairment for the year ended December 31, 2021, we first performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it was necessary to perform the two-step quantitative analysis. Based on the qualitative assessment including our share price decrease as well as positive factors related to macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, financial performance and market capitalization, we determined it was unlikely that our reporting unit fair value was less than its carrying value and the two-step impairment test was not required. Based on the results of our most recent annual qualitative assessment performed on November 30, 2021, there was no impairment of goodwill recorded.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
We capitalize certain costs related to the development of our platform and other software applications for internal use. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we begin to capitalize our costs to develop software when preliminary development efforts are successfully completed, management has authorized and committed project funding, and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used as intended. We stop capitalizing these costs when the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, including the completion of all significant testing. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, generally estimated to be three years. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditure will result in additional functionality and expense costs incurred for maintenance and minor upgrades and enhancements. Costs incurred prior to meeting these criteria together with costs incurred for training and maintenance are expensed as incurred and recorded within product development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. We exercise judgment in determining the point at which various projects may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized. To the extent that we change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our platform, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal-use software development costs we capitalize and amortize could change in future periods.
Convertible Senior Notes
Significant judgment is required in determining the liability component of the related convertible senior notes as well as the balance sheet classification of the elements of the convertible senior notes. We accounted for the convertible senior notes, the partial repurchase and conversions of the 2022 Notes as separate liability and equity components, determining the fair value of the respective liability components based on an estimate of the fair value of a similar liability without a conversion option and assigning the residual value to the equity component.
We estimated the fair value of the liability component of the convertible senior notes using a discounted cash flow model with a risk adjusted yield for similar debt instruments, absent any embedded conversion feature. In estimating the risk adjusted yield, we utilized both an income and market approach. For the income approach, we used a convertible bond pricing model, which included several assumptions including volatility and the risk-free rate. For the market approach, we performed an evaluation of issuances of convertible debt securities issued by other comparable companies. Additionally, a detailed analysis of the terms of the convertible senior notes transactions was required to determine existence of any derivatives that may require separate mark-to-market accounting under applicable accounting guidance.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.