Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 7, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 21, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”) with Embraer S.A., a Brazilian corporation (sociedade anônima
) (“Embraer”), Embraer Aircraft Holding Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Embraer (“EAH”), and EVE UAM, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of EAH (“Eve”).
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on December 21, 2021, we entered into separate subscription agreements (collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with a number of investors (each, a “Subscriber” and collectively, the “Subscribers”), pursuant to which the Subscribers agreed to purchase, and we agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 30,500,000 shares of our common stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, or an aggregate purchase price of $305,000,000, in a private placement. On December 24, 2021, we entered into an additional Subscription Agreement with an additional investor to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, or an aggregate purchase price of $10,000,000. As a result, as of December 24, 2021, we have agreed to sell an aggregate of 31,500,000 shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $315,000,000.
On December 21, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into warrant agreements with the Strategic Investors (the “Strategic Warrant Agreements”), pursuant to which, subject to the consummation of the business combination, the Company has agreed to issue to the Strategic Investors new warrants to acquire an aggregate of (i) 14,150,000 shares of common stock, each with an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the “Penny Warrants”), which warrants will be issued at the closing of our initial business combination (the “Closing”) or in connection with the achievement of certain UAM Business milestones following the Closing, (ii) 12,000,000 shares of common stock, each with an exercise price of $15.00 per share, which warrants will be issued at the Closing, and (iii) 5,000,000 shares of common stock each with an exercise price of $11.50 per share, which warrants will be issued at the Closing. In general, each warrant is exercisable for a period of five or ten years following its issuance or first permitted exercise date. The Strategic Warrant Agreements provide for certain registration rights with respect to the resale of the shares of common stock underlying the warrants which are substantially similar to the registration rights provided under the Subscription Agreements. In addition, on December 21, 2021, we have entered into lock-up agreements with certain of the Strategic Investors, pursuant to which such Strategic Investors will be restricted from transferring certain of the new warrants issued at the Closing and the shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise of such new warrants until the date that is three or five years after date of the Closing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a business combination after our Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and activities in connection with searching for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $14,521,803, which consists of a change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $20,599,500 and interest income on investments held in the trust account of $23,403, offset by general and administrative expenses of $6,101,100.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $16,662,667, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $353,539, changes in fair value of derivative liabilities of $15,457,500 and transaction costs allocated to warrant issuance of $854,301, offset by interest earned on investments held in trust account of $2,673.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 19, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 23,000,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 9,650,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $9,650,000.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $232,300,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $13,143,093 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $493,093 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,496,472. Net income of $14,521,803 was affected by changes in fair value of derivative liabilities of $20,599,500 and interest income on investments held in the trust account of $23,403. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $4,604,628 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $310,096. Net loss of $16,662,667 was affected by transaction costs allocated to warrant issuance of $854,301, changes in fair value of derivative liabilities of $15,457,500 and interest income on investments held in the trust account of $2,673. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $43,443 of cash for operating activities.
At December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the trust account of $236,926,076. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $475,339 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
On May 18, 2021, our Sponsor exercised its option to purchase 2,300,000 private placement warrants, for an aggregate purchase price of $2,300,000, in order to extend the time the Company will have to consummate an initial business combination by 6 months, to November 19, 2021. On November 16, 2021, our Sponsor exercised its option to purchase 2,300,000 private placement warrants, for an aggregate purchase price of $2,300,000, in order to extend the time the Company will have to consummate an initial business combination by 6 months, to May 21, 2022.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
On February 3, 2022, the Sponsor issued the New Promissory Note, pursuant to which the Company could borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $2,000,000. The New Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) December 31, 2022 or (ii) the consummation of our initial business combination. The outstanding balance under the New Promissory Note is $0.
Going Concern
We have until May 19, 2022 to consummate a business combination. In addition, we will require additional funding if we are unable to consummate the currently contemplated initial business combination. We expect to consummate our initial business combination prior to May 19, 2022 (the “Liquidation Date”). If we are unable to consummate our initial business combination or raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily include or be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms or if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the Liquidation Date if an initial business combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on November 19, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On May 6, 2021, we entered into an agreement with a vendor for financial due diligence services related to our initial business combination. The agreement has a contingent fee element whereby 50% of the fees incurred for the services rendered are contingent upon the consummation of the initial business combination. The amount of contingent fees incurred as of December 31, 2021, which would be become payable upon consummation of the initial business combination is $280,500.
On May 6, 2021, we entered into an agreement with a vendor for investment banking services related to our initial business combination. Specifically, the agreement relates to assisting in raising the funds as part of the PIPE Investment. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee equal to 4% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE Investment.
On May 6, 2021, we entered into an agreement with a vendor for advisory services related to our initial business combination. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee equal to $5,000,000. If following or in connection with the termination, abandonment or failure to occur of any proposed business combination during the term of the agreement or during the 12-month period following the effective date of termination of the agreement, we are entitled to receive a break-up, termination, “topping,” expense reimbursement, earnest money payment or similar fee or payment (each and together, “termination payments”), the vendor is then entitled to receive a contingent fee equal to 25% of the aggregate amount of those termination payments, payable upon our receipt of such amount.
On December 7, 2021, we entered into an agreement with a vendor for investment banking services related to our initial business combination. Specifically, the agreement relates to assisting in raising the funds as part of the PIPE Investment. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee equal to 2% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE Investment.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption, if any, are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events.
All of the 23,000,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. Accordingly, all of the Company’s shares of Class A common stock are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Our derivative instruments are recorded at fair value and re-valued
at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the Statement of Operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current
based on whether or not net-cash
settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the warrants and the forward contract for additional warrants are derivatives. As the financial instruments meet the definition of a derivative, the warrants and the forward contract for additional warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.