Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several important factors, including without limitation those set forth under “Summary Risk Factors” and Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as well as a discussion of our 2019 fiscal year, specifically, has been reported previously in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 9, 2021, under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We are discovering and developing a new class of orally delivered investigational medicines that are intended to act on cells in the small intestine to produce therapeutic effects throughout the body. The target cells in the small intestine play a central role in governing human immune, metabolic and neurologic systems. We refer to this biology as the small intestinal axis, or SINTAX™. We have built a platform to discover and develop novel oral medicines which target the small intestinal axis. By harnessing the small intestinal axis, we have the potential to transform healthcare via medicines that have the potential to be effective, safe, convenient and affordable and to thereby treat patients at all stages of diseases and to treat patients globally.
Our first product candidates are orally delivered pharmaceutical preparations of naturally occurring, specific single strains of microbes or microbial extracellular vesicles. In preclinical models, our product candidates engaged immune cells in the small intestine and drove changes in systemic biology without any observed systemic exposure. We have observed in clinical trials and preclinical studies that our approach led to modulated immune responses throughout the body by acting on the small intestinal axis. Our most advanced product candidate, EDP1815, is being developed for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Additional product candidates in development include EDP1867 and EDP2939 for the treatment of inflammatory disease.
Clinical Programs
We are advancing SINTAX medicines to potentially treat a spectrum of immune mediated diseases, with an initial focus on inflammatory diseases and oncology. The efficiency of our platform has, in a relatively short period of time, allowed us to advance multiple product candidates into clinical trials for a range of diseases.
EDP1815 - a whole-microbe candidate for inflammatory diseases
EDP1815 is an investigational oral biologic being developed for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. It is a single strain of Prevotella histicola, selected for its specific pharmacology.
Psoriasis and atopic dermatitis
Phase 2 clinical trial in psoriasis
In September 2021, we announced positive data from our Phase 2 trial of EDP1815 in psoriasis. This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging Phase 2 trial was designed to evaluate three doses of an enteric coated capsule formulation of EDP1815 in adult patients with mild and moderate psoriasis. The trial included a treatment phase (Part A) and an off treatment, follow-up phase (Part B). In Part A of the trial, 249 patients were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to one of three parallel cohorts: 1 capsule, 4 capsules or 10 capsules. They were then randomized in a 2:1 ratio to active or placebo prior to the start of dosing. Trial medication was taken once daily for 16 weeks, and patients were followed for 4 weeks after treatment completion to week 20. PASI scores were assessed by both mean changes from baseline and responder rates. The primary endpoint was the mean percentage change in PASI scores between treatment and placebo at 16 weeks. Secondary endpoints included the proportion of study patients who achieved at least a PASI-50 response from baseline at the week 16 timepoint, and other clinical measures of disease such as PGA, BSA, PGA x BSA, PSI, and DLQI.
The primary endpoint, the difference in mean percentage change in PASI scores from baseline at week 16 between treatment and placebo, was prespecified as a Bayesian analysis. The Bayesian approach provides an estimate of the probability that EDP1815 was superior to placebo. The 16-week primary endpoint gave probabilities that EDP1815 is superior to placebo ranging from 80% to 90% across the prespecified analyses and cohorts.
The responder endpoint analysis evaluated the proportion of patients who achieved a PASI-50 (a meaningful clinical response) or greater reduction in PASI score at week 16. As shown in the figure below, 25% to 32% of patients across the three EDP1815 treated cohorts achieved a PASI-50 or greater reduction at week 16 compared to 12% on placebo. In cohorts 1 and 2, this difference in response rate was statistically significant (p <0.05). Cohort 3 was not statistically significant, but directionally similar (25% vs. 12%). The pooled PASI-50 response across all three EDP1815 cohorts, an exploratory analysis, was 29% vs. 12% for placebo and was also statistically significant with a p-value of 0.027. An increase in the number of capsules of EDP1815 did not lead to a dose response.
*p<0.05.
PASI-50 responses at week 16. Statistically significant p-value (<0.05) for 2 of the 3 individual dose cohorts, and for all 3 cohorts when pooled
Additionally, several patients on EDP1815 achieved a PASI-75 response or better at week 16. For individuals who had a PASI-50 response or better, consistent improvements in patient reported outcomes such as DLQI and PSI were observed as seen in the figure below.
Responders in active cohort demonstrated improvements across multiple secondary endpoints. A "responder" was defined as an active patient who achieved PASI-50 or greater.
EDP1815 was observed to be well tolerated in Part A (treatment phase) of the Phase 2 trial. The safety data were comparable to placebo. AEs classified as “gastrointestinal” were comparable between active and placebo groups, with no meaningful differences in rates of diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting. There were no drug related serious adverse events.
All patients in Part A of the Phase 2 trial had the option to enter Part B (extended follow-up phase, off-treatment) of the trial. The objective of Part B was to assess durability of treatment response and incidence of rebound (for example, increase in PASI score to 125% of baseline value or above, or onset of new pustular erythrodermic psoriasis within 3 months) following cessation of dosing. Patients in Part B were assessed during follow-up visits at weeks 24 and 28. Only patients who had achieved a PASI-50 or greater at week 16 were also evaluated at week 40. Patients were not permitted to start other psoriasis treatments or trials during Part B.
In February 2022, we announced data from Part B of the Phase 2 trial in psoriasis, which included durable and deeper clinical responses. Eighty-three patients who had received EDP1815 in Part A entered Part B. Thirty of these 83 patients had achieved a PASI-50 or greater reduction at week 16 of Part A. Eighteen of the 30 patients remained at PASI-50 or greater at the end of Part B. Ten of the 30 patients had achieved a PASI-75 or greater at the end of Part A and 5 remained at PASI-75 or greater at the end of Part B. These durable results were achieved without any new psoriasis medication being used during this time. Nineteen of the 83 patients had achieved clear skin (PGA 0) or nearly clear skin (PGA 1) at the end of Part A and of these, 9 remained at PGA 0/1 at the end of Part B.
Of the 30 patients who had reached a PASI-50 at the end of Part A and entered Part B, 10 had already achieved a PASI-75 response at week 16 in Part A. Of the remaining 20 patients, 9 achieved a PASI-75 or greater response during the post-treatment period. These data, combined with the durability data, suggest that longer dosing could lead to further deepening of the responses in some patients.
There were no drug related adverse events in Part B of the Phase 2 trial, with the additional finding of no flare or rebound following cessation of dosing (which are often seen with other therapies for psoriasis).
In February 2022, we also announced the results of immunological biomarker analyses from Part A of the Phase 2 trial in psoriasis. We had previously reported reductions in inflammatory cytokines in a Phase 1b trial of EDP1815 in mild and moderate psoriasis, and these data were replicated in the Phase 2 psoriasis trial, with high statistical significance.
Blood samples were taken from 96 patients at baseline and after 16 weeks of dosing with EDP1815 or placebo. The figures below show the changes in pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Each vertical bar represents the fold change up or down from 0 in ex vivo stimulated cytokine production between the baseline and week 16 samples from a patient. Three different stimuli were used on each sample and the results from all three stimuli are presented together in the figures, giving the aggregate N (sample) numbers shown in the figures.
Treatment with EDP1815 led to a statistically significant reduction in the release of cytokines compared to placebo: IL-6 (p=0.0003), IL-8 (p=0.0007), and TNF (p=0.0037). The effect observed for EDP1815 may be clearly seen by the deep tail of reduced cytokine production on the left of the distribution for each cytokine, which was absent in the placebo groups. There was no worsening compared to placebo on the right of the distributions, resulting in the overall significant difference between EDP1815 and placebo.
In addition, skin biopsies of active lesions were taken from a subset of patients in the trial. Six of the patients who received EDP1815 and achieved at least a PASI-50 response from baseline at week 16 had paired biopsies. RNAseq analysis of the biopsies showed reductions in transcript levels for psoriasis-relevant cytokines interleukin 23 (IL-23), interleukin 12b (IL-12b), and interleukin 17 (IL-17) in these lesions between baseline and week 16. The box plot below shows the median and interquartile ranges, as well as individual values of the cytokine expression levels in the skin, at baseline and week 16. These data suggest that EDP1815 reduced inflammation in the skin by modulating multiple proinflammatory cytokines.
We believe these data support the biology of the SINTAX and the development of a new potential class of medicine that is designed to act locally in the small intestine to affect inflammation throughout the body. In the Phase 2 trial, there was no observed distribution of EDP1815 outside the gut.
Based on these data, we currently intend to move EDP1815 towards registration trials in psoriasis, following the completion of meetings with health authorities.
Pediatric Investigation Plan for EDP1815 in Psoriasis
In February 2022, the EMA agreed to our PIP for EDP1815 in psoriasis, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council. The EMA agreement allows Evelo to include patients 12-17 years old in Phase 3 trials, conduct a single clinical trial in patients 2-5 years old and 6-11 years old after the adult MAA has been submitted, and develop a pediatric formulation suitable for administration to patients 2-11 years old. Furthermore, the EMA confirmed that juvenile toxicity studies are not required for EDP1815 and granted us a waiver from studying EDP1815 in patients less than 2 years old.
Phase 1b and Phase 2 clinical trials in atopic dermatitis
In 2021, we reported preliminary clinical data from two cohorts of patients with mild and moderate atopic dermatitis in a Phase 1b randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-escalating safety and tolerability trial of EDP1815. The primary endpoint was safety and tolerability. In the first readout, we reported positive clinical data in a cohort of patients with mild and moderate atopic dermatitis (n=24), randomized 2:1 to receive EDP1815 in capsules (8.0 x 1011 total cells) or placebo for 56 days. This was the same concentration of EDP1815 that was used as one of the doses in our Phase 2 trial in psoriasis. In the first Phase 1b trial cohort of patients with atopic dermatitis, EDP1815 was well-tolerated with no treatment-related adverse events of moderate or severe intensity, and no serious adverse events. Secondary endpoints included a range of established markers of clinical efficacy in atopic dermatitis, such as EASI, IGA* BSA, and SCORAD scores.
Table 1
The preliminary data showed consistent improvements in percentage change from baseline compared to placebo for all three clinical scores: EASI, IGA*BSA, and SCORAD. In January 2022, in connection with locking the database for the Phase 1b trial, we further analyzed these preliminary data and methodology used to report the SCORAD results from the first cohort of atopic dermatitis patients in the Phase 1b trial described above. In the course of such review, we determined that the initial calculation of the SCORAD values was incorrect and we recalculated the SCORAD values. The correct SCORAD values are shown in Table 1 above. The p-value change in SCORAD does not alter our prior belief that the SCORAD secondary endpoint showed consistent improvement in percentage change from baseline compared to placebo. In addition, 7 out of 16 (44%) patients treated with EDP1815 achieved an EASI-50 response by day 70, compared with 0% in the placebo group, showing sustained improvement in those patients responding to EDP1815. In addition to physician-reported clinical outcomes, patient-reported outcomes were also assessed. Treatment with EDP1815 resulted in clinically meaningful improvement in DLQI and POEM. These patient-reported outcomes capture the important impact of the disease on patients, including the domains of itch and sleep, both of which saw improvements in patients receiving EDP1815 in the trial. All five measures of itch within the “Pruritus-NRS, SCORAD, POEM, and DLQI showed greater improvements in the treated group at day 56 compared with placebo. We believe these results provide further evidence that modulating SINTAX has the potential to drive significant clinical benefit without the need for systemic exposure.
We reported data from a second cohort in the Phase 1b trial of 24 patients with moderate atopic dermatitis who were randomized in a 2:1 ratio, with 16 receiving a higher per capsule concentration formulation of EDP1815 (6.4 x 1011 total cells) and 8 receiving a matching placebo once daily for eight weeks. The primary objective was to assess the safety and tolerability of the higher per capsule concentration formulation of EDP1815 after eight weeks of dosing. The secondary objective was to assess the clinical improvement in patients with moderate atopic dermatitis.
All the patients used an emollient twice daily for at least seven consecutive days immediately prior to day 1 and continued to use the background emollient treatment twice daily throughout the trial. In this second cohort, EDP1815 was shown to be well-tolerated with no treatment-related adverse events of moderate or severe intensity and no serious adverse events through eight weeks of dosing. An initial improvement in mean percent change in EASI was observed at day 15 compared to placebo; however, the population mean change decreased over the remainder of the dosing period, and there was no overall difference from placebo at the end of the dosing period. Given the difference in clinical effects observed between the two cohorts in the Phase 1b trial, which were dosed with EDP1815 produced using different manufacturing processes, we are evaluating drug substance produced using both manufacturing processes in our Phase 2 atopic dermatitis trial.
In February 2022, we began dosing patients in a Phase 2 trial of EDP1815 in atopic dermatitis. The primary objective of this multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 trial is to show superiority of EDP1815, dosed for 16 weeks, over placebo. The trial will enroll patients with mild, moderate, and severe atopic dermatitis and will evaluate EDP1815 drug substance produced using two different manufacturing processes. The primary endpoint will be the percent of patients who achieve an EASI-50 response at week 16. Secondary endpoints will include several physician-reported outcomes, such as IGA and BSA, along with patient-reported outcomes such as DLQI, itch using the daily Pruritus-NRS, and POEM. Patients will be randomized into one of three cohorts. Each cohort will include approximately 100 patients randomized in a 3:1 ratio (75 to EDP1815 and 25 to placebo) for a total of 300 patients. Cohort 1 will explore a daily dose of 1.6 x 1011 total cells of EDP1815 or matching placebo administered as two capsules once daily. Cohorts 2 and 3 will explore a daily dose of 6.4 x 1011 total cells of EDP1815 or matching placebo administered as two capsules once daily or one capsule twice daily, respectively. The different dosages of drug (1.6 x 1011 total cells and 6.4 x 1011 total cells) are prepared from two different manufacturing processes. All patients will have the opportunity to join an open label extension trial once they complete 16 weeks of dosing. Patients in the open label extension trial will receive EDP1815 for a further 36 weeks. Topline results from 16 weeks of dosing are anticipated in the first half of 2023.
COVID-19
In March 2022, the Independent Data Monitoring Committee for the TACTIC-E clinical trial of EDP1815 for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 patients met for a scheduled review of data. No adverse signal was noted in the EDP1815 arm. However, we have concluded that the progressive mildness of the COVID-19 pandemic makes yielding an outcome for EDP1815 unlikely. No further patients will be recruited. The trial will report once all the data are complete. The TACTIC-E clinical trial was a Phase 2/3 randomized trial, sponsored by Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. The trial was investigating the safety and efficacy of certain experimental therapies in the prevention and treatment of life-threatening complications associated with COVID-19 in hospitalized individuals at early stages of the disease. Previously in 2021, due to recruitment issues, we closed a smaller US phase 2 trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of EDP1815 for the treatment of hospitalized patients with newly diagnosed COVID-19.
Scintigraphy Studies
We continue to evaluate EDP1815 to ensure optimum delivery of the drug substance in the small intestine. As part of the delivery optimization process, we are utilizing gamma scintigraphy imaging to assess delivery characteristics. An on-going Phase 1 single center clinical trial in healthy human volunteers is assessing the release characteristics of capsules of EDP1815 by gamma scintigraphy. In March 2022, results from the Phase 1 trial showed that a capsule with an improved release profile was able to deliver EDP1815 higher up in the small intestine. In 17 of the human volunteers studied, 15 (or 88%) showed that EDP1815 released in the jejunum, the upper part of the small intestine. Preclinical data, meanwhile, have shown that the higher that EDP1815 is released in the small intestine, the greater the observed effect. We currently intend to evaluate this capsule in patients in one or more suitable upcoming clinical trials.
We currently intend to evaluate EDP1815 in additional inflammatory disease indications. Potential indications include psoriatic arthritis, asthma, allergy, axial spondylarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
EDP1867 - a whole-microbe candidate for inflammatory diseases
EDP1867 is an investigational, non-live pharmaceutical preparation of a single strain of Veillonella parvula, isolated from the ileum of a human donor. It is made non-live by gamma-irradiation in the manufacturing process, which we believe makes it unable to colonize or persist in the gut, a central design feature of SINTAX medicines. EDP1867 is currently in clinical development, and we believe it has the potential to treat a wide range of inflammatory and neuroinflammatory diseases.
In preclinical studies, EDP1867 resolved multiple pathways of inflammation. This observed activity suggests a number of possible indications for the development of EDP1867, including Th2-dependent inflammation which underlies atopic diseases such as atopic dermatitis, asthma and perennial rhinitis.
Additionally, in October 2021, we presented further preclinical data for EDP1867 at ECTRIMS. In the relevant preclinical study, EDP1867 was tested in a relapsing-remitting autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model of neuroinflammation. Oral daily treatment with EDP1867 administered prophylactically or therapeutically reduced the severity of disease as demonstrated by a decreased mean maximum score and a decreased incidence of relapse compared to placebo. Treatment with EDP1867 reduced inflammation and demyelination in the spinal cord as shown in histopathological analysis. Transcriptional profiling of small intestine tissue confirmed that EDP1867 upregulated genes in lymphocyte pathways that resolve inflammation, as well as genes associated with intestinal homeostasis. We believe these data support the development of EDP1867 for the treatment of neuroinflammatory diseases.
We initiated our first Phase 1b clinical trial of EDP1867 in healthy volunteers and patients with moderate atopic dermatitis in February 2021 and expect to report interim data in the second quarter of 2022.
EDP2939 - an EV candidate for inflammatory diseases
EDP2939 is an investigational oral EV biologic being developed for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. In May 2021, we presented preclinical data for EDP2939 at the American Association of Immunologists Meeting. In the preclinical mechanism of action study, mice undergoing a delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction against keyhole limpet hemagglutinin (KLH) were treated with EDP2939, EDP2939 in combination with different blocking antibodies, or with placebo. These data suggest that the pharmacological activity of EDP2939 may require the stimulation of both the TLR2 receptor and IL-10 receptor signaling, in addition to lymphocyte homing from the systemic circulation to the intestinal lymphoid tissue. In-vitro, EDP2939 induced TLR2-dependent release of IL-10. Fluorescent biodistribution analysis showed that EDP2939 was not detected outside the gastrointestinal tract. We also did not observe any apparent adverse safety or tolerability issues in these preclinical studies. We believe these data suggest that treatment with EDP2939 could result in broad-based resolution of inflammation and the establishment of immune homeostasis. EDP2939 is the first EV product candidate we have nominated in our inflammation program. We anticipate initiation of clinical development in 2022, and expect data from a cohort of patients with psoriasis will be available in the second half of 2023.
EDP1908 - an EV candidate for oncology
In December 2020, we announced EDP1908 as our lead product candidate in oncology following presentation of preclinical data at the Society for Immunotherapy for Cancer meeting in November 2020. Preclinical data showed that orally administered EDP1908, an EV, resulted in superior tumor growth control versus either the parent microbe or anti-PD-1 therapy, with an observed dose-dependent reduction in tumor growth.
Collaborations
In March 2021, we announced a strategic collaboration to develop and commercialize our lead inflammation product candidate, EDP1815, in the Middle East, Turkey, and Africa with ALJ, a company focused on accelerating access to affordable modern medical care while addressing unmet medical needs in developing markets around the world.
Together, we and ALJ will work to address the significant disparity in access to medical care in the fastest-growing populations and growth economies of the developing world. Africa’s population is projected to reach 1.7 billion by 2030 and 2.5 billion by 2050.
Under the terms of the agreement, we received an upfront payment from ALJ. We will be primarily responsible for the development and manufacturing of EDP1815 worldwide, whilst ALJ will be primarily responsible for development, regulatory submissions and commercialization activities in the agreed-upon regions. ALJ and we will participate in a 50:50 profit share arrangement. See the notes, including Note 3, to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the commercialization and license agreement with ALJ.
Financing
We were incorporated and commenced operations in 2014. Since our incorporation, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our clinical and preclinical candidates, building our intellectual property portfolio and process development and manufacturing function, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of common and convertible preferred stock to our equity investors and borrowings under loan and security agreements with financial institutions.
Through December 31, 2021, we have received gross proceeds of $434.8 million through the issuance of our common stock, convertible preferred stock and borrowings under our loan and security agreements.
On July 19, 2019 we entered into the 2019 Credit Facility with K2HV providing for up to $45.0 million in potential debt financing, which was available in three tranches. As of December 31, 2020, we had drawn down on the first two tranches for proceeds of $30.0 million. The third tranche of $15.0 million expired in January 2021.
On June 16, 2021, the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date, we entered into the Amended Credit Facility with K2HV, pursuant to which (i) the existing $15.0 million third tranche commitment was replaced and superseded with a new $15.0 million fourth tranche commitment, which we drew down on June 16, 2021, (ii) K2HV may convert up to $5.0 million of outstanding principal of the Loans (as defined in the Amended Credit Facility) into shares of our common stock, (iii) the interest-only period is extended through February 28, 2023, with the first amortization payment on March 1, 2023, (iv) includes an election to adjust the amortization schedule to be based on a 30-month repayment period, and upon final payment or prepayment of the loans and we must pay a final payment equal to 4.8% of the aggregate original principal amount of the loans borrowed which we elected on December 22, 2021, and (v) at our election, we may prepay the loans, subject to a prepayment fee of 2% of the amount prepaid if such prepayment occurs no later than the 18-month anniversary of the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date, or if the prepayment occurs after the 18-month anniversary of the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date but prior to the maturity date, 1% of the amount prepaid. In connection with the Amended Credit Facility, we issued to K2 HealthVentures Equity Trust LLC, an affiliate of K2HV, a warrant to purchase up to 139,770 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $13.30 per share, subject to customary per share adjustments (the "Warrant”). See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt financing". All of the other terms and conditions of the Amended Credit Facility remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
In June 2020, we sold 13,800,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a public offering price of $3.75 per share, for gross proceeds of $51.8 million and net proceeds of $48.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commission and other offering expenses payable by us.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the June 2019 sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (the "2019 Sales Agreement"), we sold 1,232,131 shares of our common stock in “at-the-market” offerings under a registration statement on Form S-3 that we previously filed with the SEC with offering prices ranging between $4.25 to $11.15 per share for gross proceeds of $6.8 million and net proceeds of $6.6 million, net of commission and other offering expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement, we issued 139,734 shares of our common stock in “at-the-market” offerings sold under the same registration statement with offering prices ranging between $12.54 and $13.17 per share for gross proceeds of $1.8 million and net proceeds of $1.7 million, net of commission and other offering expenses.
On February 2, 2021, we sold 5,175,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, including the underwriters' exercise of their option to purchase 675,000 shares to cover over-allotment, generating gross proceeds of $77.6 million and net proceeds of $73.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, exclusive of other offering expenses payable by us.
On January 28, 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with ALJ Health Care & Life Sciences Company Limited ("ALJ Health Care"), pursuant to which on February 2, 2021, ALJ Health Care purchased $7.5 million of our common stock in a private placement at a purchase price of $15.00 per share. The sale of these 500,000 shares was not registered under the Securities Act.
On August 23, 2021, we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-259005) (the “2021 Shelf”) with the SEC in relation to the registration of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units of any combination thereof in the aggregate amount of up to $200 million for a period of up to three years from the date of its effectiveness on August 30, 2021.
We are a development stage company and have not generated any revenue. All of our product candidates are in early clinical or preclinical development. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and we continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 our net loss was $122.2 million and $93.7 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $414.7 million. We do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for the foreseeable future, if at all.
We expect that our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
•continue the ongoing clinical trials for EDP1815 and EDP1867;
•initiate additional clinical trials, including for EDP1815 and EDP 2939;
•initiate or advance the clinical development of additional product candidates;
•conduct research and continue preclinical development of potential product candidates;
•make strategic investments in manufacturing capabilities, including potentially planning and building our own manufacturing facility;
•maintain our current intellectual property portfolio and opportunistically acquire complementary intellectual property;
•increase research and development employees and employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense; and
•seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates.
In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution.
As a result, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our inability to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $68.4 million. We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2022. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Based on our current operating plan, we believe we do not have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand to support current operations for at least one year from the date of issuance of the financial statements appearing within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To finance our operations beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funding on acceptable terms, if at all. Due to the uncertainty in securing additional funding, and the insufficient amount of cash and cash equivalent resources at December 31, 2021, we have concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources".
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The outbreak has resulted in governments around the world implementing stringent measures to help control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions, business closures and curtailments, and school closures.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and for an extended period of time is expected to have, negative impacts on our operations and supply chain. Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative impacts will, in part, depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. We have endeavored to follow recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect our employees with particular measures in place for those working in our laboratories, such as staggered work shifts and flexible schedules, and telecommuting for office workers. We continue working with our CMOs to minimize delays and disruptions to scheduled manufacturing batch runs for our product candidates and to ensure conformity to product specifications.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and continues to impact our enrollment of new patients into, and the retention of existing patients in, our ongoing clinical trials, due primarily to lower patient participation. The pandemic likely will continue to impact enrollment and retention of patients in new and existing clinical trials. We continue to recruit individuals in line with the local and national guidelines of the clinical research sites. We are keeping in close contact with our CROs and clinical sites to provide support and guidance to ensure the safety of the patients in our clinical trials. We have prioritized our drug supply operations to secure the re-supply of patients currently enrolled in our clinical trials.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business and finances will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States, the United Kingdom and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States, the United Kingdom and other countries to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and may continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials and finances.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future, if at all. As discussed in Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements, we have entered into a collaboration agreement that will result in the recognition of $7.5 million of revenue upon the satisfaction of the performance obligation identified within the agreement. If our development efforts for our current product candidates or additional product candidates that we may develop in the future are successful and result in marketing approval, or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from such collaboration or license agreements.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have consisted primarily of research and development activities and general and administrative costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including investigative sites, external laboratories and CROs, that conduct research, preclinical activities and clinical trials on our behalf
•manufacturing process-development costs as well as technology transfer and other expenses incurred with CMOs that manufacture drug substance and drug product for use in our preclinical activities and any current or future clinical trials;
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in our research and development functions;
•expenses to acquire technologies to be used in research and development;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•the cost of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial materials;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors and our clinical investigative sites. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized, even when there is no alternative future use for the research and development. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our primary focus of research and development since inception has been building a platform to enable us to develop medicines based on an understanding of the gut-body network and to show potential clinical utility and develop the first set of clinical assets. Our platform and program expenses consist principally of costs, such as preclinical research, process development research, clinical and preclinical manufacturing activity costs, clinical development costs, licensing expense as well as an allocation of certain indirect costs, facility and office related expenses. We do not allocate personnel costs, which include salaries, discretionary bonus and stock-based compensation costs, as such costs are separately classified as research and development personnel costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in the foreseeable future as we continue our ongoing clinical trials for our product candidates, including EDP1815 and EDP1867, initiate additional clinical trials of other product candidates including EDP2939, continue to discover and develop additional product candidates, hire additional research and development personnel, build manufacturing capabilities and expand into additional therapeutic areas.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of, and obtain regulatory approval for, any of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales or licensing of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, including the uncertainty of:
•our ability to add and retain key research and development personnel;
•our ability to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for, and then successfully commercialize, our product candidates;
•our successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the costs associated with the development of our current product candidates and/or any additional product candidates that we identify in-house or acquire through collaborations;
•our ability to discover, develop and utilize biomarkers to demonstrate target engagement, pathway engagement and the impact on disease progression of our product candidates;
•our ability to establish an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
•our ability to establish and maintain agreements with CMOs and other entities for clinical trial supply and future commercial supply, if our product candidates are approved;
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone payments thereunder;
•our ability to obtain and maintain patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates if and when approved;
•our receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•our ability to commercialize products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•the continued acceptable safety profiles of the product candidates following approval.
A change in any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate. We expect our research and development expenses to increase at least over the next several years as we continue to implement our business strategy, advance our current programs, expand our research and development efforts, seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, identify and develop additional product candidates and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, pre-commercial, corporate and business development, and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services; insurance costs; administrative travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support the expected growth in our research and development activities and the potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also expect to continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including increased costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs and investor and public relations costs.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consisted primarily of interest expense at the stated rate on borrowings under our loan and security agreement, amortization of deferred financing costs and interest expense related to the accretion of debt discount associated with the loan and security agreement, offset by interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects the difference between the reacquisition cost of the new debt, inclusive of the fair value of the Warrant issued to purchase our common shares at $13.30 per share and lender fees, and the carrying amount of the existing debt. This is a non-cash item.
Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income, net primarily consists of government grants related to our operations in the United Kingdom, partially offset by foreign currency losses.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense primarily relates to tax expense at our UK subsidiary.
Since our inception in 2014, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $83.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $69.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $14.0 million was driven by higher personnel costs of $7.9 million for increases in clinical development and technical operations headcount that supported increased clinical program activities. Additionally, we recognized an increase of $6.9 million for higher inflammation program costs from the clinical trial progressions of EDP1815, EDP1867 and EDP2939, partially offset by the clinical completion of the EDP1815 Phase 2 Psoriasis program and the closeout of EDP1066. Lastly, there was a $1.9 million increased investment in our platform expenses to support our early stage and preclinical candidates. These increases were partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease in our oncology programs, primarily related to the wind-down of the EDP1503 clinical trials. Overall, we expect our research and development expenses will continue to increase in the foreseeable future as we continue to progress our clinical trials for our product candidates, including EDP1815 and EDP1867; initiate new clinical trials; expand into additional therapeutic areas; continue
discovery and development efforts for additional product candidates; hire additional research and development personnel; and seek to increase manufacturing capabilities.
General and Administrative Expenses (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses were $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $9.5 million was primarily driven by $7.4 million related to increases in our general and administrative and pre-commercial headcount, $1.2 million of additional consulting and professional fees, and $0.9 million of insurance, travel related, and other costs associated with a return to the office.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.4 million compared to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $5.0 million of expense was primarily driven by the $3.2 million loss on the extinguishment of debt, a $1.5 million increase in net interest expense as a result of the higher principal debt balance from the Amended Credit Facility, decreased interest income from lower cash and cash equivalent balances, and a reduction in foreign currency exchange gains.
Net Loss
The net loss was $122.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $93.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The additional $28.5 million of losses was primarily the result of the higher research and development and general and administrative expenses, the loss on the extinguishment of debt, increased net interest expense, and reduced foreign currency exchange gains.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from issuance of our common stock combined with proceeds from previous sales of our convertible preferred stock to our equity investors and borrowings under loan and security agreements. From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have received gross proceeds of $434.8 million from such transactions, including $45.0 million borrowed under the debt facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $68.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $414.7 million. We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2022.
We evaluated whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the audited consolidated financial statements are issued. We incurred net losses of approximately $122.2 million and $93.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have incurred losses and generated negative operating cash flows since our inception and anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. The transition to profitability is dependent upon the successful development, approval, and commercialization of our products and product candidates and the achievement of a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to fund operations and capital expenditures for at least the twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and we will need to obtain additional funding. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate revenue from product sales, we intend to pursue strategic partnerships, licensing arrangements and collaborations, and obtain additional funding through our available financing sources, which may include additional public offerings of common stock and private financing of debt or equity. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in pursuing any such partnerships, licensing arrangements or collaborations, or that any such financings will be obtained on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we will have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue our research and
development programs, future commercialization efforts, or operations. Our beliefs about our ability to fund operations is based on estimates that are subject to risks and uncertainties. If actual results are different from our estimates, we may need to seek additional funding, if it is available, sooner or on less desirable terms than would otherwise be expected.
On June 3, 2019, we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-231911) (the “Shelf”) with the SEC under which we can offer from time to time common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units of any combination thereof in an aggregate amount of up to $200.0 million over a period of up to three years from the date of its effectiveness on June 6, 2019. We also simultaneously entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, as sales agent, providing for the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate $50.0 million of our common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” ("ATM") offerings under the Shelf. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 139,734 shares of our common stock under the ATM with offering prices ranging between $12.54 and $13.17 per share for gross proceeds of $1.8 million and net proceeds of $1.7 million, net of commission and other offering expenses. As of December 31, 2021, there was $41.4 million of common stock remaining available for sale under the ATM.
On August 23, 2021, we filed the 2021 Shelf with the SEC in relation to the registration of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units of any combination thereof in the aggregate amount of up to $200 million for a period of up to three years from the date of its effectiveness on August 30, 2021.
On February 2, 2021, we sold 5,175,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, including the underwriters' exercise of their option to purchase 675,000 shares to cover over-allotment, generating gross proceeds of $77.6 million and net proceeds of underwriting discounts and commission of $73.0 million, exclusive of certain other offering expenses payable by us.
On January 28, 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with ALJ Health Care, pursuant to which on February 2, 2021, ALJ Health Care purchased $7.5 million of our common stock in a private placement at a purchase price of $15.00 per share. The shares sold were not registered under the Securities Act.
We currently have a contractual arrangement in place with one of our CMOs that will require us to spend an aggregate minimum amount of €1.5 million annually during each of 2022, 2023, and 2024.
We anticipate capital expenditures for 2022 to be about $5.2 million.
Debt financing
On July 19, 2019, we entered into the 2019 Credit Facility with K2HV providing for up to $45.0 million in potential debt financing, which was available in three tranches. As of December 31, 2020, we had drawn down on the first two tranches for proceeds of $30.0 million. The third tranche of $15.0 million expired in January 2021.
On June 16, 2021, the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date, we entered into the Amended Credit Facility with K2HV, pursuant to which: (i) the existing $15.0 million third tranche commitment was replaced and superseded with a new $15.0 million fourth tranche commitment, which we drew down on June 16, 2021, (ii) K2HV may convert up to $5.0 million of outstanding principal of the Loans (as defined in the Amended Credit Facility) into shares of our common stock, (iii) the interest-only period is extended through February 28, 2023, with the first amortization payment on March 1, 2023, (iv) includes an election to adjust the amortization schedule to be based on a 30-month repayment period, and upon final payment or prepayment of the loans and we must pay a final payment equal to 4.8% of the aggregate original principal amount of the loans borrowed which we elected on December 22, 2021, and (v) at our election, we may prepay the loans, subject to a prepayment fee of 2% of the amount prepaid if such prepayment occurs no later than the 18-month anniversary of the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date, or if the prepayment occurs after the 18-month anniversary of the Amended Credit Facility Effective Date but prior to the maturity date, 1% of the amount prepaid. In connection with the Amended Credit Facility, we issued to an affiliate of K2HV the Warrant to purchase up to 139,770 shares of our common stock. All of the other terms and conditions of the Amended Credit Facility remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
License and Manufacturing Agreements
See Part I, Item 1. “License and Manufacturing Agreements” for additional information about our license and manufacturing agreements.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $96.7 million. Our net loss of $122.2 million included the following more significant non-cash charges: $15.8 million of stock-based compensation expense; a $3.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt; $2.2 million of depreciation expense; and $1.8 million of lease expense. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities was $2.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $73.1 million, primarily due to our net loss of $93.7 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of: $8.5 million of stock-based compensation expense; $2.0 million of depreciation expense; and $2.0 million of lease expense. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities was $7.8 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1.5 million and $1.3 million, respectively, primarily due to the purchase of capital equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $97.5 million, primarily due to $81.8 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock, $14.8 million from the issuance of long-term debt under the Amended Credit Facility, and $1.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the exercise of options.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $65.5 million, primarily due to proceeds from the issuance of common stock totaling $55.0 million, issuance of long-term debt under our 2019 Credit Facility totaling $10.0 million, and proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the exercise of options totaling $0.5 million.
Funding Requirements
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $414.7 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may raise through a combination of the sale of equity, debt financings, or other sources, including potential collaborations.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing development activities related to the initiation of clinical studies and preclinical work on additional monoclonal microbial product candidates, which are still in development, and our follow-on therapeutics and other programs. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with increased personnel and operating as a public company. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•continue our clinical trials, including for EDP1815 and EDP1867;
•advance the clinical development of additional product candidates;
•conduct research and continue preclinical development of potential product candidates;
•make strategic investments in manufacturing capabilities, including potentially planning and building a commercial manufacturing facility;
•maintain our current intellectual property portfolio and opportunistically acquire complementary intellectual property;
•seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•potentially establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure and scale-up manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•add clinical, scientific, operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts and to support our operations as a public company; and
•experience any delays or encounter any issues with any of the above, including but not limited to failed studies or trials, complex results, safety issues or other regulatory or personnel challenges.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $68.4 million. We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2022. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to fund operations and capital expenditures for at least the twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and we will need to obtain additional funding. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors. Our forecast is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Due to the uncertainty in securing additional funding, and the insufficient amount of cash and cash equivalent resources at December 31, 2021, we have concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our product candidates, including EDP1815 and EDP1867, any additional product candidates or any follow-on programs, and because the extent to which we may enter into further partnerships, collaborations or licensing arrangements with third parties for the development of these product candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future capital requirements for our technology platform or our other programs will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress and results of our clinical trials, including of EDP1815 and EDP1867;
•the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies of our product candidates;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of preclinical development, including laboratory testing and studies, for any other potential product candidates;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies, including entering into licensing or collaboration arrangements for product candidates, although we currently have no additional commitments or agreements to complete any such acquisitions or investments in businesses.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete. We may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of products that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if ever. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funds to achieve our business objectives.
Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Additional debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and may require or involve the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute the ownership interest of existing stockholders. The terms of our Amended Credit Facility with K2HV preclude us from paying dividends on our equity securities without their consent. If we lack sufficient capital to expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be materially adversely affected.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, partnerships, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements which are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, in the United States of America. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in the accounting policies described below may have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements and, therefore, consider these to be our critical accounting policies. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•CROs in connection with performing research services on our behalf including, but not limited to, clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•investigative sites and other providers in connection with clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•other research and development service providers such as academic institutions and laboratory services providers in connection with discovery, preclinical and clinical development activities; and
•vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials and preclinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs, investigative sites, laboratories and other providers that conduct and manage those studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the fair value on the date of grant and recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue stock options and restricted stock awards with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method, adjusting for pre-vesting forfeitures in the period in which the forfeitures occur. We measure stock-based awards granted to consultants and non-employees based on the fair value of the award on the date of the grant. Compensation expense is recognized over the period during which services are rendered by such consultants and non-employees until completed.
As discussed in Note 2 (Significant Accounting Policies) to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading “New Accounting Pronouncements - Adopted during the current period”, we adopted ASU No. 2018-07, Stock-based Compensation: Improvements to Nonemployee Share-based Payment Accounting (Topic 718), on January 1, 2020. As a result, our accounting for nonemployee awards is now generally consistent with that of employee awards. Beginning on January 1, 2020, the measurement date for nonemployee awards is the date of grant without any subsequent changes in the fair value of the award.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Use of this model requires that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options, and our expected dividend yield. Prior to May 2018, we were a privately-held company with limited operating history and no company-specific historical and implied volatility information and accordingly, we estimate our expected volatility based on the historical volatility of a group of publicly traded peer companies. We expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our traded stock price. We use the simplified method prescribed by SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, to calculate the expected term of options granted to employees and directors. We base the expected term of options granted to consultants and non-employees on the contractual term of the options. We determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.