Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Evo Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination.
We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering that closed on February 11, 2021 (the “Closing Date”) and the sale of the private placement warrants that closed on the Closing Date, and from additional issuances of, if any, our capital stock and our debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
At December 31, 2021, we had current assets of $411,265 and current liabilities of $84,058. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We have reviewed, and continue to review, a number of opportunities to enter into our initial business combination with operating businesses, but we are not able to determine at this time whether we will complete our initial business combination with any of the target businesses that we have reviewed or with any other target business.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $7,955,328, of which $9,578,671 is related to the change in the fair value of the warrant liability. Our business activities from inception to December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our formation and completing our initial public offering, and since our initial public offering, our activity has been limited to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for our initial business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the closing of our initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial sale of founder shares, to our sponsor, Evo Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and the proceeds of a promissory note (the “Note”) from our sponsor, in the amount of $300,000. The Note was repaid upon the closing of the Public Offering.
The registration statement relating to our initial public offering was declared effective by the SEC on February 8, 2021. On February 9, 2021, the underwriters exercised their option to purchase additional units. Our initial public offering of 12,500,500 units, including 1,630,500 units pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of such option, closed on February 11, 2021. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 4,250,100 private placement warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, to our sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating proceeds of $4,250,100. On the Closing Date, we placed $125,005,000 of proceeds (including $4,375,175 of deferred underwriting discount) from the Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants into a U.S.-based trust account, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee (the “Trust Account”).
At December 31, 2021, we had cash held in a custodian account of $402,215 and working capital of $327,207.
We intend to raise additional funds through a working capital loan from our sponsor in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination and to meet the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or if we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our shares of Class A common stock upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination (including from our affiliates or affiliates of our sponsor).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. On February 8, 2021, we entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which we have agreed to pay our sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred expenses of $110,000 under this agreement.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2.0% ($2,500,100) was paid at the closing of the initial public offering and 3.5% ($4,375,175) was deferred. The deferred underwriting discount will be paid to the underwriters upon the completion of our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies/Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Net Income Per Common Share
Net income per share of common stock is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding warrants to purchase up to 10,500,350 shares of Class A common stock. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net income per share of common stock since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted net income per common share is the same as basic net income per common share for the periods.
Redeemable Shares of Class A Common Stock
All of the 12,500,500 shares of Class A common stock sold as parts of the units in our initial public offering contain a redemption feature. In accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification 480-10-S99-3A (“ASC 480”), “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. The Company classifies all shares of Class A common stock as redeemable.
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification 815 (“ASC 815”), “Derivatives and Hedging”, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as derivative liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the private placement warrants have been estimated using a Black-Scholes-Merton model and the fair value of public warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering have been measured based on the listed market price of such public warrants.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.