ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that have been made pursuant to the provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations, estimates, and projections about Evolving Systems’ industry, management’s beliefs, and certain assumptions made by management. Forward-looking statements include our expectations regarding product, services and revenue. In some cases, words such as “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends”, “plans”, “believes” or “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth in this section and in “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
On December 31, 2021, the Company closed on the terms of the Equity Purchase Agreement (the “Equity Purchase Agreement”) and two Software Purchase Agreements (the “Software Purchase Agreements” and, together with the Equity Purchase Agreement and the other transaction documents described therein, the “Purchase Agreements”) dated as of October 15, 2021, with subsidiaries and affiliates of PartnerOne Capital, Inc. (the “Purchasers”). The Purchase Agreements provided for the sale and transfer of substantially all of the Company’s operating subsidiaries and all of its assets that provided real-time digital engagement solutions and
services in the areas of real-time analytics, customer acquisition and activation, customer value management and loyalty for the telecom industry to the Purchasers for an aggregate purchase price of $40 million (subject to adjustment as set forth in the Equity Purchase Agreement). The Purchase Agreements included customary terms and conditions, including an adjustment to the purchase price based on the Company’s cash and cash equivalents on hand as of the closing date and provisions that require the Company to indemnify the Purchasers for certain losses that it incurs as a result of a breach by the Company of its representations and warranties in the Purchase Agreements and certain other matters. The Company received cash proceeds of $36.0 million and may receive up to an additional $2.5 million in consideration pursuant to the terms of an escrow agreement entered into in connection with the Equity Purchase Agreement.
Simultaneously with the approval by the board of directors of the Company to execute the Purchase Agreements, the board formed a subcommittee of the board (the “Investment Committee”) to evaluate options to maximize the value of the Company’s assets, which, following the closing of the transactions contemplated under the Purchase Agreements, will consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents. The board of directors has authorized the Investment Committee to retain such counsel, experts, consultants or other professionals as the Investment Committee shall deem appropriate from time to time to aid the Investment Committee in the performance of its duties.
Following the sale of its assets in real-time digital engagement solutions and services in December 2021, the Company has decided to evaluate new areas of business and is currently a research and development organization with two initial areas of product focus, each of which are in a research-oriented pre-release mode. The two areas of focus are in the application of self-learning algorithms as well as the symbolic tagging and organizing of physical objects. Additionally, the Company maintains an extensive background in mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) activity. The Company plans to use cash assets, and network of relationships to seek opportunities to acquire partners either for more generic partnership or for M&A activities.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
We reported a net loss from continuing operations of $3.4 million and $2.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
COVID-19
Evolving Systems provided software solutions and services throughout the world. The COVID-19 global outbreak caused instability and volatility in multiple markets where our clients conduct business. We leveraged our ability to provide support remotely resulting in limited effect on our day to day operations. The inability to travel had delayed interactions with our clients on projects and in the traditional modes of sales development as well as limited our interactions with prospective M&A targets.
NASDAQ
On December 9, 2021, we received a letter from the NASDAQ regarding the Equity Purchase Agreement and the two Software Purchase Agreements entered into by the Company pursuant to which we sold all of our assets. The staff requested certain information from the Company regarding its on-going business. We provided a response to the staff on January 7, 2022. We received a follow up request from the NASDAQ for additional information and we provided a response to the staff on February 15, 2022.
GOING CONCERN
We believe our current liquidity and funds from the Purchase Agreements will be sufficient to fund operations and meet the Company’s cash needs for future working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements. In making this assessment, we considered our $39.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and our $37.7 million in working capital at December 31, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations in comparative format:
Expenses from Continuing Operations
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist principally of employee-related costs for the following departments: finance, human resources, and certain executive management; facilities costs; and professional and legal fees. General and administrative expenses increased $0.5 million, or 20% to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $0.5 million is due to $0.4 million increase of incentive compensation related to the completion of the Purchase Agreements and $0.2 million increase in employee costs related to additional staff.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation of long-lived property and equipment. Depreciation expense remained constant at less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Non Operating Income and Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense related to financing and remained constant at less than $0.1 million in interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Income,net
There was other expense of less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Other income was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was the result of litigation settlement costs recorded as a liability in relation to the lawsuit filed by a former CEO of the Company (see Note 10 to the financial statements for additional information) offset by income recorded for the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan.
Income Taxes
We recorded no net income tax expense from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively.
Tax expense from discontinued operations of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisting of $3.4 million income tax expense from gain from sale of discontinued operations in the US and one UK subsidiary related to sale of software rights and profits, $0.3 million income tax expense incurred by our Indian based operations, and $0.3 million of foreign taxes paid for with holdings of local taxes that could not be used as a tax credit offset by Research and Development credits from our U.K. based operations of $0.5 million. Tax expense from discontinued operations of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting of $0.2 million in the U.S, $0.3 million current income tax expense incurred by our Indian based operations, $0.2 million income tax expense from one UK subsidiary, and $0.8 million of foreign taxes paid for with holdings of local taxes that could not be used as a tax credit offset by Research and Development credits from our U.K. based operations of $0.3 million, a deferred tax benefit of $0.2 million related to the US Company's utilization of foreign tax credits, and $0.3 million deferred tax benefit from losses incurred by our other UK and European subsidiaries.
We use a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had no liability for unrecognized tax benefits. We do not believe there will be any material changes to our unrecognized tax positions over the next twelve months.
Discontinued Operations
On December 31, 2021, the Company closed on the terms for the sale and transfer of substantially all of the Company’s operating subsidiaries and all of its assets. The financial results of discontinued operations primarily reflect the results of our foreign operating subsidiaries conducting business as provider of real-time digital engagement solutions and services of software solutions and services to the wireless carriers throughout the world. This included the Company’s portfolio of solutions and services for real-time analytics, customer acquisition and activation, customer value management and loyalty for the telecom industry promoting partnerships into retail and financial services.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Our working capital position increased by $32.2 million to $37.7 million as of December 31, 2021 from $5.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is related to the increase in cash and cash equivalents related to the proceeds from the sale of assets, partially offset by the disposal of assets sold.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically financed operations through cash flows from operations and bank borrowings. On December 31, 2021, the Company closed on the terms of the Purchase Agreements. Following the sale of its assets in December 2021, the Company is currently conducting research and development in two initial areas of product focus, each of which are in research-oriented pre-release mode. The two areas of focus are in the application of self-learning algorithms as well as the symbolic tagging and organizing of physical objects. At December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was $39.4 million in cash and cash equivalents. Our anticipated uses of cash in the future will be to fund the expansion of our business through both organic growth as well as possible acquisition activities. Other uses of cash may include capital expenditures and technology expansion.
On April 15, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of $0.3 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable after a period of eight to twenty-four weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible
purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. We have met the conditions of the PPP Loan forgiveness program. As authorized by section 1106 of the CARES Act, United States Small Business Administration (“SBA”) has forgiven the full amount of PPP loan on May 20, 2021. We recorded the forgiveness amount as other income. We had used the loan proceeds for purposes consistent with the PPP, including paying for Company wages.
On October 15, 2019, the Company’s former Chief Executive Officer filed a lawsuit in the Superior Court of New Jersey against us. That suit sought $3.5 million for claims of libel, harm of lost employment opportunities, severance payments and benefits that he would have been entitled to receive had he been terminated without cause. The Company engaged legal counsel through its insurance carrier. The Company decided that it was prudent to avoid further legal fees and disruption to the business caused by an on-going litigation claim. Therefore, to resolve amicably and discontinue disputes regarding all claims arising from the lawsuit and with the denial of every allegation and of wrongdoing, in June 2021, a settlement and mutual general release was agreed to that included payment of $0.6 million by the Company. Our insurance carrier has agreed to contribute $0.3 million toward the settlement. We had recorded a liability in the amount of $0.3 million as of June 30, 2021 such amount is included in other income, net, in our statement of operations. The settlement liability was paid in full in July 2021.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.8 million due to net income of $17.4 million plus a decrease in unbilled work-in progress of $0.4 million, a decrease in prepaid and other assets of $0.2 million, a decrease in income tax receivable of $0.3 million, an increase in income taxes payable of $2.1 million, and an increase in unearned revenue of $1.0 million, partially offset by noncash charges of $18.8 million, an increase in contract receivable of less than $0.2 million, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $0.2 million, and a decrease of $0.4 million in lease obligations - operating leases. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.4 million primarily due to the net income of $0.6 million plus noncash charges of $1.4 million, a decrease in contract receivable of $1.3 million, and a decrease of $0.7 million in income tax receivable as refunds were collected. These were partially offset by the increase in unbilled work-in-progress of $2.1 million, a $0.2 million increase in prepaid and other assets, and decrease in unearned revenue of $0.4 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $34.8 million was primarily due to proceeds from the sale of business. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.3 million was due to the purchase of computer equipment and software.
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the final principal payments on our term loan. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to principal payments on our term loan offset by the proceeds received with the Payroll Protection Program.
We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In making this assessment we considered the following:
● Our cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2021 of $39.4 million; and
● Our working capital balance at December 31, 2021 of $37.7 million
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment or use of complex estimates.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Discontinued Operations
A business component whose operations are discontinued is reported as discontinued operations if the cash flows of the component have been eliminated from the ongoing operations of the Company and represents a strategic shift that had a major impact on the Company. The results of discontinued operations are aggregated and presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of operations. Additionally, the carrying amounts of the assets and liabilities for the entities sold have been reclassified in the consolidated balance sheets.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by applying a fair-value-based measurement method to account for stock-based payment transactions with employees, non-employees and directors. We record compensation costs associated with the vesting of unvested options on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Stock-based compensation is a non-cash expense because we settle these obligations by issuing shares of our common stock instead of settling such obligations with cash payments. We use the Black-Scholes model to estimate the fair value of each option grant on the date of grant. This model requires the use of estimates for expected term of the options and expected volatility of the price of our common stock. We recognize forfeitures as they occur rather than estimating them at the time of the grant.
Income Taxes
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating losses and tax credit carry-forwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to be applied to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We reduce deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that these benefits will not be realized.
We use a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities.