ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
This “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“MD&A”) is intended to provide an understanding of our financial condition, cash flow, liquidity and results of operations. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K and the Risk Factors included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K, as well as other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
The comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K are included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Company background
We are a leading payments technology and services provider offering an array of payment solutions to merchants ranging from small and mid-size enterprises to multinational companies and organizations across the Americas and Europe. As a fully integrated merchant acquirer and payment processor across more than 50 markets and 150 currencies worldwide, we provide competitive solutions that promote business growth, increase customer loyalty, and enhance data security in the markets we serve.
Founded in 1989 as an individually owned, independent sales organization in the United States, we have transformed into a publicly traded company that today derives approximately 60% of its revenues from markets outside of the United States. Our revenue consists primarily of transaction and volume based fees, as well as fixed fees for certain services we perform.
We classify our business into two segments: the Americas and Europe. The alignment of our segments is designed to establish lines of business that support the various geographical markets we operate in and allow us to further globalize our solutions while working seamlessly with our teams across these markets. In both of our segments, we provide our customers with merchant acquiring solutions, including integrated solutions for retail transactions at the physical and virtual POS, as well as B2B transactions. Refer to Part I, Item 1 “Business” contained in Part I of this Annual Report for information related to our operating segments and sales distribution channels.
We plan to continue to grow our business and improve our operations by expanding market share in our existing markets and entering new markets. In our current markets, we seek to grow our business through broadening our distribution network, leveraging our innovative payment technology solutions and direct sales force, and acquiring additional merchant portfolios and tech-enabled businesses. We seek to enter new markets through acquisitions and partnerships in Latin America, Europe, and certain other markets.
Executive overview
We delivered solid financial performance in the year ended December 31, 2021, as demonstrated by the highlights below:
● Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $496.6 million, an increase of 13.1% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, increased card adoption, sales-related activity, including the expansion of our tech-enabled partners, and the recovery from COVID-19.
● Americas segment profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $135.1 million, 27.4% higher than the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increase in revenue, growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, and sales-related activity, including the expansion of tech-enabled partners, which was partially offset by the normalization of employee compensation expenses that were
reduced in 2020 in reaction to the onset of the pandemic. By the end of 2020, base salaries were returned to pre-pandemic levels and no employees remained on furlough.
● Europe segment profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $63.6 million, 2.8% lower than the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a gain of $17.6 million recognized from our investment in Visa Series A preferred stock in 2020, which decreased the year over year growth rate by 35.2%, and the normalization of employee compensation expenses that were reduced in 2020 in reaction to the onset of the pandemic. By the end of 2020, base salaries were returned to pre-pandemic levels and no employees remained on furlough. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in segment profit due to the increase in revenue, growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, and sales-related activity, including the expansion of tech-enabled partners.
● We processed approximately 4.2 billion transactions in the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 17.9% from the year ended December 31, 2020.
COVID-19
Global economic conditions may continue to be volatile as long as COVID-19 (and its variants) remains a public health threat, which volatility could negatively impact our business. Due to the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy, certain of our vendors have indicated that they may be exposed to potential incidents of supply chain disruption, constraint, or other difficulties, including as it relates to their ability to meet the POS terminal delivery needs for our merchants. While we are seeking to mitigate the impact of any such potential incidents, including, in some cases, by entering into terminal purchase agreements with vendors which provides us with prioritized allocation of their available supply, disruption in the delivery of POS terminals in the future could impact our ability to service our merchants or add new merchants.
The ongoing impact of the pandemic on our business will largely depend on the progression of the vaccine rollout, the emergence of, and response to, virus variants, improvements in global supply chain outlook, and the extent of government restrictions across our markets. Although volatile, we began to see signs of economic recovery in 2021 that positively impacted our operating results. We are confident in our continued ability to manage through the challenges posed by the pandemic. Longer term, we believe the pandemic will serve as a catalyst for greater utilization of digital payments, a trend we are continuing to see in our markets.
Factors impacting our business and results of operations
In general, our revenue is impacted by factors such as global consumer spending trends, foreign exchange rates, the pace of adoption of commerce-enablement and payment solutions, acquisitions and dispositions, types and quantities of products and services provided to merchants, timing and length of contract renewals, new merchant wins, retention rates, mix of payment solution types employed by consumers, and changes in card network fees, including interchange rates and size of merchants served. In addition, we may pursue acquisitions from time to time. These acquisitions could result in redundant costs, such as increased interest expense resulting from indebtedness incurred to finance such acquisitions, or could require us to incur additional costs as we restructure or reorganize our operations following these acquisitions.
Seasonality
We have experienced in the past, and expect to continue to experience, seasonality in our revenues as a result of consumer spending patterns. Historically, in both the Americas and Europe, our revenue has been strongest in our fourth quarter and weakest in our first quarter as many of our merchants experience a seasonal lift during the traditional vacation and holiday months. Operating expenses do not typically fluctuate seasonally.
Foreign currency translation impact on our operations
We present our financial statements in U.S. dollars and have a significant proportion of net assets and earnings in non-U.S. dollar currencies. Accordingly, we are exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk arising from transactions in the
normal course of business. It is difficult to predict the future fluctuations of foreign currency exchange rates and how those fluctuations will impact our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income in the future. As a result of the relative size of our international operations, these fluctuations may be material on individual balances. Our revenues and expenses from our international operations are generally denominated in the local currency of the country in which they are derived or incurred. Therefore, the impact of currency fluctuations on our operating results and margins is partially mitigated.
Financial institution partners
We maintain referral partnerships with a number of leading financial institutions, including Deutsche Bank USA, Deutsche Bank Group, Grupo Santander, PKO Bank Polski, Bank of Ireland, Raiffeisenbank, Moneta, Citibanamex, Sabadell, BCI, and Liberbank, among others. We commenced operations in Chile through our joint venture with BCI at the end of the second quarter in 2021. Our pending joint venture and exclusive referral relationship with the National Bank of Greece is expected to be completed in the second half of 2022, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary conditions.
In November 2021, the Company and the Bank of Ireland entered into an agreement to extend the parties’ commercial alliance. Under the partnership, EVO and the bank will continue to provide payment services to merchants throughout Ireland and the United Kingdom and the bank will continue to exclusively refer its merchants to the Company.
We rely on our various financial institution relationships to grow and maintain our business. These relationships are structured in various ways, such as commercial alliance relationships and joint ventures. We enter into long-term relationships with our bank partners where these partners typically provide exclusive merchant referrals and credit facilities to support the settlement process. Our relationships with our financial institution partners may be impacted by, among other things, consolidations and other transactions in the banking and payments industries.
In January 2022, Citigroup Inc. announced its decision to exit the consumer, small-business and middle-market banking operations of Citibanamex, our financial institution partner in Mexico. The details of the proposed transaction are unknown, including structural complexity and anticipated timing of the consummation. While our long term, exclusive commercial agreement with Citibanamex remains in place, at this time, we cannot estimate the potential impact of this development to our referral relationship with Citibanamex or our Mexican business.
One of our Spanish financial institution referral partners, Banco Popular, was acquired by Santander in June 2017. As reported previously and reflected in our previous years’ financial statements, Santander’s acquisition of Banco Popular has adversely impacted our business in Spain. Revenues from this channel have declined significantly due primarily to reduced merchant referrals following the acquisition and the bank’s failure to perform certain of its other obligations under our agreements. See Note 19, “Commitments and Contingencies,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Increased regulations and compliance
We, our partners, and our merchants are subject to various laws and regulations that affect the electronic payments industry in the many countries in which our services are used, including numerous laws and regulations applicable to banks, financial institutions, and card issuers. A number of our subsidiaries in our Europe segment hold a PI license, allowing them to operate in the EU member states in which such subsidiaries do business. As a PI, we are subject to regulation and oversight, which include, among other obligations, a requirement to maintain specific regulatory capital and adhere to certain rules regarding the conduct of our business, including PSD2.
PSD2 contains a number of additional regulatory mandates, such as provisions relating to SCA, which aim to increase the security of electronic payments by requiring multi-factor user authentication. Failure to comply with SCA requirements may result in fines from card networks as well as declined payments from card issuers. The EU has also enacted legislation relating to the offering of DCC services, which went into effect in April 2020. These new rules require additional disclosures of foreign exchange margins in connection with our DCC product offerings.
We are currently operating in the United Kingdom within the scope of its temporary permissions regime pending approval of our application for a stand alone PI license. In addition, we continue to closely monitor the impact of Brexit on our operations as further details emerge regarding the post-Brexit regulatory landscape.
Key performance indicators
Transactions Processed
Transactions processed refers to the number of transactions we processed during any given period of time and is a meaningful indicator of our business and financial performance, as a significant portion of our revenue is driven by the number and/or value of transactions we process. In addition, transactions processed provides a valuable measure of the level of economic activity across our merchant base. In our Americas segment, transactions include acquired Visa and Mastercard credit and signature debit, American Express, Discover, UnionPay, JCB, PIN-debit, electronic benefit transactions, and gift card transactions. In our Europe segment, transactions include acquired Visa and Mastercard credit and signature debit, other card network merchant acquiring transactions, and ATM transactions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we processed approximately 4.2 billion transactions, which included approximately 1.1 billion transactions in the Americas and approximately 3.1 billion transactions in Europe. This represents an increase of 9.5% in the Americas and an increase of 21.1% in Europe for an aggregate increase of 17.9% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Transactions processed in the Americas and Europe accounted for 25.4% and 74.6%, respectively, of the total transactions we processed for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The increase in the transactions processed during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily driven by the growth in our merchant portfolio, increased card adoption, sales-related activity, including the expansion of our tech-enabled partners, and the recovery from COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we processed approximately 3.6 billion transactions, which included approximately 1.0 billion transactions in the Americas and approximately 2.6 billion transactions in Europe. This represents a decrease of 9.5% in the Americas and an increase of 1.8% in Europe for an aggregate decrease of 1.6% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Transactions processed in the Americas and Europe accounted for 27.0% and 73.0%, respectively, of the total transactions we processed for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of operations in dollars and as a percentage of revenue for the period presented.
Revenue
Revenue was $496.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $57.5 million, or 13.1% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Americas segment revenue was $307.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $32.0 million, or 11.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Europe segment revenue was $189.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $25.6 million, or 15.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in both Americas and Europe segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, increased card adoption, sales-related activity, including the expansion of our tech-enabled partners, and the recovery from COVID-19.
Operating expenses
Cost of services and products
Cost of services and products was $75.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $8.6 million, or 10.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the decline in merchant loss reserves and third-party costs as we work to further leverage our proprietary processing technology.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $266.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $15.4 million, or 6.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the normalization of employee compensation expenses that were reduced in 2020 in reaction to the onset of the pandemic.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization was $83.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $2.5 million, or 3.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by lower amortization due to the accelerated amortization method of merchant contract portfolios acquired in prior periods.
Impairment of intangible assets
There was no impairment of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $0.8 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The 2020 impairment charge primarily related to the retirement of certain trademarks driven by an internal reorganization.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $7.0 million, or 23.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to lower variable interest rates as well as the paydown of our revolving credit facility and a portion of the outstanding balance on the first lien term loan in 2020.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense represents federal, state, local and foreign taxes based on income in multiple domestic and foreign jurisdictions. Historically, as a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, EVO, LLC’s income was not subject to corporate tax in the United States, but only on income earned in foreign jurisdictions. In the United States, our members were taxed on their proportionate share of income of EVO, LLC. However, following the Reorganization Transactions, we incur corporate tax on our share of taxable income of EVO, LLC. Our income tax expense reflects such U.S. federal, state and local income tax as well as taxes payable in foreign jurisdictions by certain of our subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a tax expense of $22.0 million, which included a tax benefit of $1.5 million primarily related to the true up of the deferred taxes due to an increase in the state effective tax rate offset by a valuation allowance recorded to reduce the deferred tax assets not expected to be realized in Spain. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a tax expense of $13.1 million, which included a tax benefit of $2.6 million from a release of the U.S. interest limitation valuation allowance.
Segment performance
Americas segment profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $135.1 million, compared to $106.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 27.4%. The increase was primarily due to the increase in revenue, growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, and sales-related activity, including the expansion of tech-enabled partners, which was partially offset by the normalization of employee compensation expenses that were reduced in 2020 in reaction to the onset of the pandemic. By the end of 2020, base salaries were returned to pre-pandemic levels and no employees remained on furlough. Americas segment profit margin was 44.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 38.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Europe segment profit was $63.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $65.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 2.8%. The decrease was primarily due to a gain of $17.6 million recognized from our investment in Visa Series A preferred stock in 2020, which decreased the year over year growth rate by 35.2%, and the normalization of employee compensation expenses that were reduced in 2020 in reaction to the onset of the pandemic. By the end of 2020, base salaries were returned to pre-pandemic levels and no employees remained on furlough. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in profit due to the increase in revenue, growth in our merchant portfolio, processing volumes, and transactions, and sales-related activity, including the expansion of tech-enabled partners. Europe segment profit margin was 33.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 39.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Corporate expenses not allocated to a segment were $35.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $34.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K are included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Overview
We have historically funded our operations primarily with cash flow from operations and, when needed, with borrowings, including under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities. Our principal uses for liquidity have been debt service, capital expenditures, working capital, and funds required to finance acquisitions.
We expect to continue to use capital to innovate and advance our products as new technologies emerge and to accommodate new regulatory requirements in the markets in which we operate. We expect these strategies to be funded primarily through cash flow from operations and borrowings from our Senior Secured Credit Facilities. Short-term liquidity needs will primarily be funded through the revolving credit facility portion of our Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
To the extent that additional funds are necessary to finance future acquisitions, and to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute on our strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through additional indebtedness, equity, or debt issuances, or both.
As of December 31, 2021, our capacity under the revolving credit facility portion of our Senior Secured Credit Facilities was $200.0 million, with availability of $198.6 million for additional borrowings and utilization of $1.4 million in standby letters of credit.
We have structured our operations in a manner to allow for cash to be repatriated through tax-efficient methods using dividends from foreign jurisdictions as our main source of repatriation. We follow local government regulations and contractual restrictions on cash as well as how much and when dividends can be repatriated. As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents of $410.4 million includes cash in the United States of $151.4 million and $259.0 million in foreign jurisdictions, respectively. Of the United States cash balances, $43.0 million is available for general purposes, and the remaining $108.4 million is considered merchant reserves and settlement-related cash and is therefore unavailable for our general use. Of the foreign cash balances, $132.5 million is available for general purposes, and the remaining $126.5 million is considered merchant reserves and settlement-related cash and is therefore unable to be repatriated. Refer to Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on our cash and cash equivalents.
We do not intend to pay cash dividends on our Class A common stock in the foreseeable future. EVO, Inc. is a holding company that does not conduct any business operations of its own. As a result, EVO, Inc.’s ability to pay cash dividends on its common stock, if any, is dependent upon cash dividends and distributions and other transfers from EVO, LLC. The amounts available to EVO, Inc. to pay cash dividends are subject to the covenants and distribution restrictions in our Senior Secured Credit Facilities. Further, EVO, Inc. may not pay cash dividends to holders of Class A common stock unless it concurrently pays full participating dividends to holders of the Preferred Stock on an “as converted” basis.
In connection with our IPO, we entered into the Exchange Agreement with certain of the Continuing LLC Owners, under which these Continuing LLC Owners have the right, from time to time, to exchange their units in EVO, LLC and related Class D common shares of EVO, Inc. for shares of our Class A common stock or, at our option, cash. If we choose to satisfy the exchange in cash, we anticipate that we will fund such exchange through cash from operations, funds available under the revolving portion of our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, equity, or debt issuances or a combination thereof.
In addition, in connection with the IPO, we entered into the TRA with the Continuing LLC Owners. Payments required under the TRA are generally funded by taxable income and represent the tax benefit from the step-up in tax basis that is passed on to the TRA holders. Although the actual timing and amount of any payments that may be made under the TRA will vary, we expect that the payments we will be required to make to the Continuing LLC Owners will be significant. Any payments made by us to non-controlling LLC owners under the TRA will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us and, to the extent that we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest in accordance with the terms of the TRA until paid by us. Refer to Note 5, “Tax Receivable Agreement,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on the TRA.
The following table sets forth summary cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $103.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $12.4 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $116.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to changes in working capital, including the timing of settlement-related assets and liabilities. Excluding the impact of settlement-related assets and liabilities, net cash provided by operating activities increased $71.3 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $74.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $48.7 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the acquisitions, higher capital expenditures, and the acquisition of intangible assets.
Capital expenditures were $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $12.9 million compared to $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the higher POS terminal purchases and software licenses related to our European payment processing platform.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $34.2 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a change in net activity of long-term debt and proceeds from the issuance of Preferred Stock in 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The discussion of cash flow activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K are included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
The Company (through its subsidiary EPI) entered into the Restatement Agreement in November 2021 to amend and restate our senior secured credit facilities (as amended and restated by the Restatement Agreement, the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”). The Senior Secured Credit Facilities are comprised of a $200.0 million revolving credit facility maturing in November 2026, and a $588.0 million term loan maturing in November 2026. In addition, our Senior Secured Credit Facilities also provide us with the option to access incremental credit facilities, refinance the loans with debt incurred outside our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, and extend the maturity date of the revolving loans and term loans, subject to certain limitations and terms. In connection with the Senior Secured Credit Facilities refinanced under the Restatement Agreement, a loss of $5.7 million was presented within other (expense) income in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income for the year ended December 31, 2021. The total loss of $5.7 million includes a debt extinguishment loss of $2.2 million and a loss of $3.5 million related to unamortized deferred financing costs.
Borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities bear interest at an annual rate equal to, at EPI’s option, (a) a base rate, plus an applicable margin or (b) LIBOR, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin for base rate loans ranges from 0.75% to 1.75% per annum and for LIBOR loans ranges from 1.75% to 2.75% per annum, in each case based upon achievement of certain consolidated leverage ratios. In addition to paying interest on outstanding principal, EPI is required to pay a commitment fee to the lenders in respect of the unutilized revolving commitments thereunder ranging from 0.25% to 0.375% per annum based upon achievement of certain consolidated leverage ratios. The Senior Secured Credit Facilities include provisions that provide for the eventual replacement of LIBOR as a reference rate with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (as defined in the credit agreement) or otherwise an alternate benchmark rate that has been selected by the administrative agent and EPI and not objected to by a majority of the lenders.
The Senior Secured Credit Facilities require prepayment of outstanding loans, subject to certain exceptions, with: (1) 100% of the net cash proceeds of non-ordinary course asset sales or other dispositions of assets (including casualty events) by EPI and its restricted subsidiaries, subject to reinvestment rights and certain other exceptions (subject to step-downs to 50% and 0% based on achievement of certain consolidated leverage ratios), and (2) 50% of the excess cash flow (subject to certain exceptions and step-downs to 25% and 0% based on achievement of certain consolidated leverage ratios).
EPI may voluntarily repay outstanding loans under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities at any time without a premium.
All obligations under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities are unconditionally guaranteed by most of EPI’s direct and indirect, wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.
● a first-priority lien on the capital stock owned by EPI or by any guarantor in each of EPI’s or their respective subsidiaries (limited, in the case of capital stock of foreign subsidiaries and first tier domestic subsidiaries substantially all the assets of which are the capital stock of foreign subsidiaries, to 65% of the voting stock and 100% of the non-voting stock of such subsidiaries); and
● a first-priority lien on substantially all of EPI’s and each guarantor’s present and future intangible and tangible assets (subject to customary exceptions).
The Senior Secured Credit Facilities contain a number of significant negative covenants. These covenants, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, EPI and its restricted subsidiaries ability to:
● incur indebtedness;
● create liens;
● engage in mergers or consolidations;
● make investments, loans and advances;
● pay dividends and distributions and repurchase capital stock;
● sell assets;
● engage in certain transactions with affiliates;
● enter into sale and leaseback transactions;
● make certain accounting changes; and
● make prepayments on junior indebtedness.
The Senior Secured Credit Facilities also contain a financial covenant that requires EPI to remain under a maximum consolidated leverage ratio determined on a quarterly basis with step-downs over time. The Borrower may elect to increase the maximum consolidated leverage ratio with which it must comply by 0.5x up to two times during the term upon the consummation of a “material acquisition.”
In addition, the Senior Secured Credit Facilities contain certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. If an event of default occurs, the lenders under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due thereunder and exercise of remedies on the collateral.
Refer to Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Lines of Credit,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on our long-term debt and settlement lines of credit.
Settlement lines of credit
We have specialized lines of credit which are restricted for use in funding settlement. The settlement lines of credit generally have variable interest rates and are subject to annual review. As of December 31, 2021, we had $8.0 million outstanding under these lines of credit with additional capacity of $142.6 million to fund settlement.
Contractual obligations
Our purchase obligations consists of agreements to purchase goods and services, including POS terminals, software licenses, and software maintenance support, entered into in the ordinary course of business.
We lease certain facilities under non-cancellable operating lease arrangements that expire at various dates in the future. As of December 31, 2021, the value of our obligations under operating leases was $43.8 million. Refer to Note 7, “Leases,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Our tax receivable agreement requires us to make payments to the Continuing LLC Owners in the amount equal to 85% of the applicable cash tax savings, if any. Refer to Note 5, “Tax Receivable Agreement,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Inflation
While inflation may impact our revenue and expenses, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. However, there can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the periods described is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments in certain circumstances that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and contingencies as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our assumptions and estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical information and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have provided a summary of our significant accounting policies, as well as a discussion of our evaluation of the impact of recent accounting pronouncements in Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to the accompanying
consolidated financial statements. The following discussion pertains to accounting policies management believes are most critical to the portrayal of our historical financial condition and results of operations and that require significant, difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. Other companies in similar businesses may use different estimation policies and methodologies, which may impact the comparability of our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows to those of other companies.
Revenue recognition
Our primary revenue source consists of fees for payment processing services and revenue from the sale and rental of electronic POS equipment. Payment processing service revenue is primarily based on a percentage of transaction value or on a specified amount per transaction or related services.
When third parties are involved in the Company’s merchant acquiring arrangements and processing services, we apply judgment to determine whether we are acting as a principal or an agent of the third party. We follow the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which states that the determination of whether an entity should recognize revenue based on the gross amount billed to a customer or the net amount retained is a matter of judgment that depends on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement. To determine whether we are acting as a principal or an agent, we assess indicators including: 1) whether we or the third party is primarily responsible for fulfillment; 2) which party has discretion in establishing pricing for the service; and 3) other considerations deemed to be applicable to the specific situation.
Refer to Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” and Note 2, “Revenue,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Goodwill and intangible assets
We evaluate our goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently, if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Our reporting units are consistent with our segments: the Americas and Europe.
Factors we consider in the qualitative assessment include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, changes in certain costs, overall financial performance of each reporting unit, and other relevant entity-specific events. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment or if we determine, on the basis of qualitative factors, that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test would be required.
The quantitative impairment test involves a comparison of the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using both an income approach and a market approach. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Cash flow projections are based on our estimates of revenue growth rates, operating margins, and other factors, such as working capital and capital expenditures. The discount rate is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risks associated with business specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable publicly traded companies with characteristics similar to the reporting unit. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves judgment and the use of significant estimates and assumptions, which include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk adjusted discount rates, and the selection of appropriate market multiples.
Finite-lived intangible assets include merchant contract portfolios and customer relationships, marketing alliance agreements, trademarks, internally developed and acquired software, and non-competition agreements.
The acquired intangible assets were recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. Determination of the fair value of our acquired merchant contract portfolios, customer relationships, marketing alliance agreements, and acquired software involves significant estimates and assumptions related to revenue growth rates, discount rates, merchant attrition rates, and expected merchant referrals from our referral partners. Determination of the fair value of our acquired
trademarks involves significant estimates and assumptions related to revenue growth rates, royalty rates, and discount rates.
We also develop software that is used in providing services to our customers. Capitalization of internal-use software occurs when we have completed the preliminary project stage. Costs incurred during the preliminary project stage are expensed as incurred.
Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from 2 to 21 years using either accelerated or straight-line method. Determination of estimated useful lives of intangible assets requires significant judgment. The useful lives for customer-related intangible assets are based primarily on forecasted cash flows, which include estimates for the revenues, expenses, and customer attrition associated with the assets. The useful lives of contract-based intangible assets are based on the terms of the agreements. The useful lives of trademarks are based on our assumptions regarding the period of time during which a significant portion of the economic value of such assets is expected to be realized. The useful lives of internally developed and acquired software are based on various factors, including analysis of potential obsolescence due to new technology, competition, and other economic factors. We regularly evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the useful lives of finite-lived intangible assets may warrant revision.
Finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated from use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the total of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets.
Refer to Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” and Note 9, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Income taxes
EVO, LLC is considered a pass-through entity for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. As a pass-through entity, taxable income or loss is passed through to and included in the taxable income of its members.
EVO, Inc. is subject to U.S. federal, state, and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of taxable income of EVO, LLC and is taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. In addition to incurring actual tax expense, we also may make payments under the TRA. We account for the income tax effects and corresponding TRA effects resulting from future taxable purchases of LLC Interests of the Continuing LLC Owners or exchanges of LLC Interests for Class A common stock at the date of the purchase or exchange by recognizing an increase in our deferred tax assets based on enacted tax rates at that time. Further, we evaluate the likelihood that we will realize the benefit represented by the deferred tax assets and, to the extent that we estimate that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefit, we reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets with a valuation allowance. The amounts to be recorded for both the deferred tax assets and the liability for our obligations under the TRA are estimated at the time of any purchase or exchange and are recorded as an increase to shareholders’ equity; the effects of changes in any of our estimates after this date are included in net earnings. Similarly, the effects of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates are included in net earnings.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that it is expected that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. The Company evaluates the realizability of the deferred tax assets, and to the extent that the Company estimates that it is more likely than not that a benefit will not be realized, the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets is reduced with a valuation allowance. As a part of this evaluation, the Company assesses all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations (including cumulative losses in recent years), to determine whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize existing deferred tax assets.
The Company has identified objective and verifiable negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses on an unadjusted basis in certain jurisdictions over the preceding twelve quarters ended December 31, 2021. The Company evaluated both
its actual forecasts of future taxable income and its historical core earnings by jurisdiction over the prior twelve quarters, adjusted for certain nonrecurring items. On the basis of this assessment, and after considering future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, and its actual forecasts of future taxable income, the Company determined that valuation allowances are needed in certain European jurisdictions to reduce the carrying amount of deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In the United States jurisdiction, however, the Company concluded that its indefinite lived deferred tax assets will be realizable and recorded no valuation allowance. In arriving at this determination, the Company considered both (i) historical core earnings, after adjusting for certain nonrecurring items, and (ii) the projected future profitability of its core operations and the impact of enacted changes in the application of the interest expense limitation rules beginning in 2022.
In the United States jurisdiction, the Company’s future taxable income projections are derived from historical core operations adjusted for certain non-recurring items, which indicate that the Company will move out of a period of cumulative losses as taxable loss periods are replaced by taxable income periods. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if the Company’s estimates of the projected future profitability of its core operations are reduced by a level significantly different than the Company’s historical revenues and expenses adjusted for certain nonrecurring items. As a secondary measure, the Company compares its adjusted historical core earnings to its actual forecast to ensure that adjusted core earnings are realizable. The Company also evaluates the realizability of the deferred tax assets, and to the extent that the Company estimates that it is more likely than not that a benefit will not be realized, the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets would be offset with a valuation allowance and the related TRA liability would be reduced. The future taxable income projections are subject to a high degree of uncertainty and could be impacted, both positively and negatively, by changes in our business or the markets in which we operate. A change in the assessment of the realizability of its deferred tax assets could materially impact our results of operations.
Refer to Note 5, “Tax Receivable Agreement,” and Note 12, “Income Taxes,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Redeemable non-controlling interest in eService
Redeemable non-controlling interest (“RNCI”) in eService relates to the portion of equity in our consolidated subsidiary in Poland, not attributable, directly or indirectly, to us, which is realizable upon the occurrence of an event that is not solely within our control. We adjust the RNCI at each balance sheet date to reflect our estimate of the maximum redemption amount with changes recognized as an adjustment to our additional paid-in capital or, in the absence of additional paid-in capital, to shareholders’ deficit. Such estimate is based on projected operating performance of the subsidiary and the key assumptions used in estimating the fair value include, but are not limited to, revenue growth rates and weighted-average cost of capital.
Refer to Note 17, “Redeemable Non-controlling Interests,” for further information.
New accounting pronouncements
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements, and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, if any, refer to Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.