Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 1. Business” and our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information included in our other filings with the SEC.
Overview
Everi is a leading supplier of imaginative entertainment and trusted technology solutions for the casino and digital gaming industry. Everi’s mission is to lead the gaming industry through the power of people, imagination and technology. Focused on player engagement and assisting our casino customers operate more efficiently, the Company develops entertaining game content and gaming machines, gaming systems and services for land-based and iGaming operators. The Company is also a preeminent and comprehensive provider of trusted financial technology solutions that power the casino floor while improving operational efficiencies and fulfilling regulatory compliance requirements, including products and services that facilitate convenient and secure cash and cashless financial transactions, self-service player loyalty tools and applications, and regulatory and intelligence software.
Everi reports its financial performance, and organizes and manages its operations, across the following two business segments: (i) Games and (ii) Financial Technology Solutions (“FinTech”).
Everi Games provides gaming operators with gaming technology and entertainment products and services, including: (i) gaming machines, primarily comprising Class II and Class III slot machines placed under participation or fixed-fee lease arrangements or sold to casino customers; (ii) providing and maintaining the central determinant systems for the video lottery terminals (“VLTs”) installed in the State of New York and similar technology in certain tribal jurisdictions; and (iii) business-to-business (“B2B”) digital online gaming activities.
Everi FinTech provides gaming operators with financial technology products and services, including: (i) financial access and related services supporting digital, cashless and physical cash options across mobile, assisted and self-service channels; (ii) loyalty and marketing software and tools, regulatory and compliance (“RegTech”) software solutions, other information-related products and services, and hardware maintenance services; and (iii) associated casino patron self-service hardware that utilizes our financial access, software and other services. Our services operate as part of an end-to-end security suite to protect against cyber-related attacks and maintain the necessary secured environments to maintain compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. These solutions include: access to cash and cashless funding at gaming facilities via Automated Teller Machine (“ATM”) debit withdrawals, credit card financial access transactions, and point of sale (“POS”) debit card purchases at casino cages, kiosk and mobile POS devices; accounts for the CashClub Wallet, check warranty services, self-service ATMs and fully integrated kiosk and maintenance services; self-service loyalty tools and promotion management software; compliance, audit, and data software; casino credit data and reporting services; marketing and promotional offering subscription-based services; and other ancillary offerings.
With respect to our FinTech business, we have made the following updates to certain of our financial statement descriptions, where applicable: (i) “Cash access services” has become “Financial access services”; (ii) “ATM” has been renamed “Funds dispensed”; (iii) “Equipment” has been changed to “Hardware”; and (iv) “Information services and other” has been revised to “Software and other.” These naming convention changes better represent how our business has evolved.
Impact of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, temporarily lowered equity market valuations, created significant volatility in the financial markets, increased unemployment levels, and caused temporary, and in certain cases, permanent closures of many businesses. The initial impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic have begun to subside with certain aspects of the global economy, equity market valuations, and increased unemployment levels showing signs of recovery. The gaming industry was not immune to these factors as our casino customers closed their gaming establishments in the first quarter of 2020, with many beginning to reopen their operations over the remainder of 2020 and throughout 2021. As a result, our operations experienced significant disruptions in the first three quarters of 2020. At the immediate onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we were affected by various measures, including, but not limited to: the institution of social distancing and sheltering-in-place requirements in many states and communities where we operate, which significantly impacted demand for our products and services, and resulted in office closures, the furlough of a majority of our employees, the implementation of temporary base salary reductions for our employees and the implementation of a work-from-home policy.
Since the onset of COVID-19, we have implemented measures to mitigate our exposure throughout the global pandemic. While there may be further uncertainty facing our customers as a result of COVID-19, we continue to evaluate our business strategies and the impacts of the global pandemic on our results of operations and financial condition and make business decisions to
mitigate further risk. While gaming industry conditions have improved significantly in 2021 compared to 2020, it is unclear if the customer volumes experienced will continue to exceed pre-COVID levels. Resurgences of COVID-19 and its variants could result in reduced patron demand for gaming and could also result in new closures of casinos by the various governmental and regulatory agencies overseeing our customers, or even by the casino operators themselves, in an effort to contain the COVID-19 global pandemic, or mitigate its impact and the effect of vaccines on these matters.
As of December 31, 2021, excluding the few casinos that have permanently closed, there are only a minimal number of customer sites, located primarily in Canada and other international markets, whose operations still remain closed. Our revenues, cash flows, and liquidity for the fourth quarter of 2021 exceeded the fourth quarter of 2020, which were significantly impacted by the effects of COVID-19. At the onset of the pandemic, our customers implemented protocols intended to protect their patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure and re-establish customer confidence in the gaming and hospitality industry. These measures included enhanced sanitization, limitations on public gathering and casino capacity, patron social distancing requirements, and limitations on casino operations and amenities, which have limited the number of patrons that are able or who desire to attend these venues. This has also impacted the pace at which demand for our products and services rebounds.
With some limitations still in effect, we expect that demand and supply for our products and services may be tempered in the short-term, to the extent gaming activity decreases at our customers’ locations or fails to increase at expected rates and to the extent our customers decide to continue to restrict their capital spending as a result of uncertainty in the industry, or supply chain disruptions that might impact customer deliveries or otherwise. As a result, we continue to monitor and manage liquidity levels and we may, from time to time, evaluate available capital resource alternatives on acceptable terms to provide additional financial flexibility.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic also exacerbates the risks disclosed in the Annual Report, including, but not limited to: our ability to comply with the terms of our indebtedness; our ability to generate revenues, earn profits and maintain adequate liquidity; our ability to service existing and attract new customers and maintain our overall competitiveness in the market; the potential for significant fluctuations in demand for our products and services; overall trends in the gaming industry impacting our business; and potential volatility in our stock price, among other concerns such as cybersecurity exposure.
Additional Items Impacting Comparability of Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Our Financial Statements included in this report reflect the following additional items impacting the comparability of results of operations:
•In 2021, we decreased our valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets by approximately $67.9 million, of which $63.5 million was released during the fourth quarter of 2021, due to the removal of the full valuation allowance on our federal and certain states deferred tax assets.
•During the third quarter of 2021, we completed a refinancing of our prior credit facilities and entered into a credit agreement and a letter of credit (the “New Credit Agreement”). The New Credit Agreement provides for: (i) a seven-year $600 million senior secured term loan due 2028 issued at 99.75% of par (the “New Term Loan”); and (ii) a $125 million senior secured revolving credit facility due 2026, which was undrawn at closing (the “New Revolver” and together with the New Term Loan, the “New Credit Facilities”). The fees associated with the New Credit Facilities were approximately $13.9 million, which included discounts of approximately $1.5 million.
• During the third quarter of 2021, we completed a refinancing of our 7.50% senior unsecured notes due in 2025 (the “2017 Unsecured Notes”) with an offering of $400 million in aggregate principal, issued at par, of 5.00% senior unsecured notes due 2029 (the “2021 Unsecured Notes”). The fees associated with the 2021 Unsecured Notes included debt issuance costs of approximately $5.9 million.
• During the third quarter of 2021, in connection with these refinancing and repayment activities, the total fees were approximately $40.6 million, comprised of approximately $20.8 million of early redemption penalties and make-whole interest associated with the prior debt instruments and approximately $19.8 million of capitalized debt issuance costs attributable to the new debt instruments.
• During the third quarter of 2021, in connection with these refinancing and repayment activities, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $34.4 million, comprised of cash charges of approximately $20.8 million for prepayment penalties and make-whole interest and non-cash charges of approximately $13.6 million related to the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and discounts associated with the prior credit facility (the “Prior Term Loan”), the prior incremental term loan facility (the “Prior Incremental Term Loan”) and the 2017 Unsecured Notes.
As a result of these events, together with the impacts of COVID-19, our results of operations and earnings per share in the periods covered by our Financial Statements may not be directly comparable.
Trends and Developments Impacting our Business
Our strategic planning and forecasting processes include the consideration of economic and industry wide trends that may impact our Games and FinTech businesses. Below we have identified a number of trends that could have a material impact on our business:
•Casino gaming is dependent upon discretionary consumer spending, which is typically the first type of spending that is restrained by consumers when they are uncertain about their jobs and income. Global economic uncertainty in the marketplace may have an impact on casino gaming, gaming establishment capital budgets, and ultimately the demand for new gaming equipment, which impacts both of our segments.
•The total North American installed slot base was slightly lower at the end of 2020 than for 2019, due to reduced capital spending and equipment removals by casino operators due to the impact of COVID-19 restrictions and casino closures. The total base had previously increased in both 2019 and 2018. In 2021, the North American installed base increased modestly compared to 2020 and we expect slight to moderate growth in the forward replacement cycle for slot machines in 2022 and in the total installed base compared to 2021, which could have a positive impact on our Games segment while new machine demand associated with new casino openings and major expansions is likely to be relatively flat year-over-year in 2022.
•We face continued competition from competitors in the gaming financial access market, as well as from larger gaming equipment manufacturers and systems providers. This competition continues to contribute to ongoing pricing pressure for both our Games and FinTech businesses.
•Concerns related to COVID-19 have increased interest in self-service and cashless alternatives by casino operators and casino patrons. With the introduction of our cashless, touchless CashClub Wallet solution, this could have a positive impact on our FinTech segment, but could also result in added competition from new competitors.
•Disruption of global supply chains experienced in 2021 related to COVID-19 may negatively impact the anticipated increase in sales of gaming equipment in the beginning of 2022. No material worsening of supply chain disruption is expected and improvements could have a positive impact on our ability to maintain year over year growth in sales of gaming equipment.
•Transaction processing and related fees have increased in recent years. We expect the financial services and payments industry to respond to these changes, including in ways that may negatively impact our FinTech business in the future.
•Governmental and regulatory oversight on cash transactions, financial services, and payments processing may provide continued motivation for gaming establishments to consider additional products and services that facilitate regulatory compliance and operational efficiencies.
•We derive a significant portion of our revenue from Native American tribal customers, and our ability to effectively operate in Native American gaming markets is vulnerable to legal and regulatory uncertainties, including the ability to enforce contractual rights on Native American land.
•Casino operators continue to broaden their appeal by focusing on investments in non-gaming amenities for their facilities, which could impact casino operator’s capital allocations for games and payment solution products and services that impact both of our operating segments.
•Inflation has increased significantly over prior years, including as a result of recovery from the negative impacts of COVID-19. This is placing pressure on competitive wages, and will likely lead to increases in wages and other costs incurred to develop produce and ship our products.
Operating Segments
We report our financial performance within two operating segments: (i) Games; and (ii) FinTech. For additional information on our segments see “Item 1. Business” and “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 18 - Segment Information” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents our Results of Operations as reported for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 (amounts in thousands)*:
* Rounding may cause variances.
(1) Exclusive of depreciation and amortization.
* Rounding may cause variances.
We continued to experience a certain level of recovery from the global pandemic for the year ended December 31, 2021, and as a result, our revenues, costs and expenses were stronger than expected in the current year, as compared to the prior year, which were negatively impacted at the onset of COVID-19. As of December 31, 2021, excluding the few casinos that have permanently closed, there are only a minimal number of customer sites, located primarily in Canada and other international markets, whose operations still remain closed.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased by approximately $276.7 million, or 72%, to approximately $660.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to the higher Games and FinTech revenues described below.
Games revenues increased by approximately $176.4 million, or 88%, to approximately $376.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to contributions from our gaming operations revenues that included: (i) an increase in both the total number of units in our installed base and the average daily win per unit, particularly associated with a greater mix of premium units; (ii) an increase in our New York Lottery results as business reopened in late 2020 and operating restrictions to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 were reduced; and (iii) greater B2B digital and interactive results as we began to provide our services to new markets. In addition, we had an increase in the number of machines sold with a higher average selling price per unit from our gaming equipment revenues.
FinTech revenues increased by approximately $100.3 million, or 55%, to approximately $283.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to contributions that included: (i) an increase in both transaction and dollar volumes in base, new and renewed business from our financial access services revenues; (ii) higher software sales and support related service fees attributable to our compliance, Central Credit, kiosk and loyalty solutions from our software and other revenues; and (iii) an increase in unit sales of both our kiosk and loyalty equipment with a mix of more higher priced loyalty equipment sold from our hardware revenues.
Costs and Expenses
Total costs and expenses increased by approximately $73.8 million, or 19%, to approximately $462.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to higher Games and FinTech costs and expenses described below.
Games cost of revenues increased by approximately $40.4 million, or 98%, to approximately $81.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to the additional variable costs associated with the higher unit sales from our gaming equipment and systems revenues.
FinTech cost of revenues increased by approximately $9.2 million, or 37%, to approximately $33.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to the additional variable costs associated with the higher unit sales from our hardware revenues, partially offset by reduced warranty expense from our check warranty solutions from our financial access services.
Operating expenses increased by approximately $36.4 million, or 24%, to approximately $188.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to higher payroll and related expenses to support our Games and FinTech businesses. In addition, the increase was associated with the prior year as many of the Company’s employees were still on furlough, and those that remained were on reduced pay levels during that time period. This increase in operating expenses was partially offset by the recovery of a settlement from a dispute with an insurance carrier for a payment associated with the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act legal matter of approximately $1.9 million, which was offset by approximately $0.8 million of additional legal fees related to the settlement and collection of this recovery for our FinTech segment.
Research and development expense increased by approximately $11.1 million, or 40%, to approximately $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to higher payroll and related expenses, consulting fees, certification charges and testing costs from our Games and FinTech segments.
Depreciation expense decreased by approximately $6.0 million, or 9%, to approximately $61.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily associated with certain of our fixed assets that were fully depreciated in our Games segment.
Amortization expense decreased by approximately $17.3 million, or 23%, to approximately $58.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to certain intangible assets recorded in connection with the acquisition of the Games business being fully amortized.
Primarily as a result of the factors described above, our operating income increased by approximately $202.9 million, or 3,747%, and resulted in an operating income of approximately $197.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. The operating income margin was 30% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an operating loss margin of 1% for the prior year.
Interest expense, net of interest income, decreased by approximately $12.5 million, or 17%, to approximately $62.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to lower debt balances and more favorable variable interest rates in effect for certain of our debt instruments and a reduction in the LIBOR floor on our Prior Term Loan as a result of a repricing transaction in February 2021, a refinancing of the 2017 Unsecured Notes in July 2021 with the issuance of our 2021 Unsecured Notes and entering into the New Term Loan in August 2021.
Loss on extinguishment of debt increased by $26.9 million, or 361%, to approximately $34.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to increased loss from the refinancing of our 2017 Unsecured Notes in July 2021 and entering into our New Term Loan in August 2021.
Income tax benefit increased by $46.1 million, or 802%, to approximately $51.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected an effective income tax rate of negative 51.4%, which was less than the statutory federal rate of 21.0%, primarily due to a decrease in our valuation allowance as we removed the full valuation allowance on our federal and certain states deferred tax assets. For additional information, refer to “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 17 - Income Taxes”.
Primarily as a result of the factors described above, we had net income of approximately $152.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a prior year net loss of approximately $81.7 million.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019:
The following table presents our Results of Operations as reported for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (amounts in thousands)*:
* Rounding may cause variances.
(1) Exclusive of depreciation and amortization.
* Rounding may cause variances.
Total Revenues
Total revenues decreased by approximately $149.6 million, or 28%, to approximately $383.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and the closure of many casino properties for a portion of the year. Games revenues decreased by approximately $82.8 million, or 29%, to approximately $200.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. We had: (i) a decline in the sale of gaming machines included in our gaming equipment and systems revenues; and (ii) a decrease in the average daily win per unit as a result of units being deactivated for a prolonged period of time on a higher installed base of leased games largely reflecting greater demand for our premium units included in our gaming operations revenues. FinTech revenues decreased by approximately $66.7 million, or 27%, to approximately $183.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. We had: (i) a decline in the dollar and transaction volumes included in our financial access services revenues; and (ii) a decrease in the sale of full service kiosks, partially offset by an increase in our loyalty kiosks included in our hardware revenues.
Costs and Expenses
Total costs and expenses decreased by approximately $50.1 million, or 11%, to approximately $389.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and the closure of many casino properties for a portion of the year. Games cost of revenues decreased by approximately $30.6 million, or 43%, to approximately $41.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. We had a reduction in the variable costs included in our gaming and equipment systems cost of revenues as a result of the decline in the sale of machines. FinTech cost of revenues decreased by approximately $16.0 million, or 39%, to approximately $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. We had a reduction in the variable costs primarily as a result of: (i) a decline in the dollar and transaction volumes included in our financial access services cost of revenues; and (ii) a decrease in the sale of full-service kiosks, partially offset by an increase in our loyalty kiosks included in our hardware revenues.
Operating expenses decreased by approximately $9.6 million, or 6%, to approximately $152.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to lower payroll and related expenses and trade show-related costs from actions taken in response to COVID-19 for both our Games and FinTech operating segments. In addition, our legal expenses were lower as a result of the litigation costs we incurred in the prior year in connection with our FACTA matter related to our FinTech operating segment.
Research and development decreased by approximately $4.6 million, or 14%, to approximately $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to lower payroll and related costs included in our Games segment in light of actions taken in response to COVID-19, partially offset by higher payroll and related costs included in our FinTech segment primarily as a result of the acquisition of certain assets in connection with our loyalty solutions in the prior year as costs for research and development consist primarily of salaries and benefits, consulting fees, certification and testing costs.
Depreciation increased by approximately $4.3 million, or 7%, to approximately $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to an increase in the installed base of lease gaming machines placed in service included in our Games segment.
Amortization increased by approximately $6.4 million, or 9%, to approximately $75.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the release of new game themes included in our Games segment and the intangible assets acquired in the prior year in connection with the loyalty business included in our FinTech segment.
Primarily as a result of the factors and responsive actions taken, described above, in light of COVID-19 and the closure of many casino properties for a portion of the year, operating income decreased by approximately $99.4 million, or 106%, and resulted in an operating loss of approximately $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. The operating loss margin was 1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an operating income margin of 18% for the prior year.
Interest expense, net of interest income, decreased by approximately $3.3 million, or 4%, to approximately $74.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily due to lower debt balances with respect to certain of our instruments and more favorable variable interest rates in effect for certain of our debt instruments; partially offset by: (i) the amortization of debt issuance costs incurred in connection with the Fourth Amendment to the existing Credit Agreement and entering into the Incremental Term Loan Credit Agreement; (ii) the additional Incremental Term Loan debt incurred with less favorable variable interest rates in effect; (iii) an adjustment to, and the associated accretion of, interest related to the acquisition of certain assets from Atrient and MGT in the prior year; and (iv) a reduction in interest income earned.
Loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of the redemption and repurchase transactions related to the 2017 Unsecured Notes.
Income tax benefit increased by $5.2 million, or 1001%, to approximately $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected an effective income tax rate of 6.6%, which was less than the statutory federal rate of 21.0%, primarily due to an increase in our valuation allowance as a result of the book loss incurred during the year, partially offset by certain indefinite lived deferred tax assets that may be offset against our indefinite lived deferred tax liabilities. The income tax benefit reflected an effective income tax rate of negative 3.3% for the prior year, which was less than the statutory federal rate of 21.0%, primarily due to a partial decrease in our valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and a research credit.
Primarily as a result of the factors and responsive actions taken, described above, in light of COVID-19, our net income decreased by approximately $98.2 million, or 595%, as compared to the prior year, and resulted in a net loss of approximately $81.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in our Financial Statements. The SEC has defined critical accounting estimates as those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations of the registrant. Based on this definition, we have identified our critical accounting policies as those addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies that involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions. Refer to “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of these policies. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, based upon information presently available; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Income Taxes
Deferred Tax Assets. Our deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our Financial Statements or income tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and their respective tax bases using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on the income tax provision or benefit and deferred tax assets and liabilities for a change in rates is recognized in the Statements of Operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
When measuring deferred tax assets, certain estimates and assumptions are required to assess whether a valuation allowance should be established by evaluating both positive and negative factors in accordance with accounting guidance. This evaluation requires that we exercise judgment in determining the relative significance of each factor. The assessment of the valuation allowance involves significant estimates regarding future taxable income and when it is recognized, the amount and timing of taxable differences, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of tax-planning strategies. A valuation allowance is established based on the weight of available evidence, including both positive and negative indicators, if it is more likely than not that a portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Greater weight is given to evidence that is objectively verifiable, most notably historical results. If we report a cumulative loss from continuing operations before income taxes for a reasonable period of time, this form of negative evidence is difficult to overcome. In that case, we include certain aspects of our historical results in our forecasts of future taxable income, as we do not have the ability to solely rely on forecasted improvements in earnings to recover deferred tax assets. When we report a cumulative loss position, to the extent our results of operations improve, such that we have the ability to overcome the more likely than not accounting standard, we may be able to reverse the valuation allowance in the applicable period of determination. In addition, we rely on deferred tax liabilities in our assessment of the realizability of deferred tax assets if the temporary timing difference is anticipated to reverse in the same period and jurisdiction and the deferred tax liabilities are of the same character as the temporary differences giving rise to the deferred tax assets.
Based on an evaluation of the then-available positive and negative evidence, we determined it was appropriate to establish a full valuation allowance on our federal and states deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2016. At that time, and in subsequent quarters, negative evidence, including three years of cumulative losses, outweighed the positive evidence. However, as of December 31, 2021, our U.S. operations emerged from a three-year cumulative loss position. Our U.S. federal and state operating businesses had deferred tax asset valuation allowances of approximately $68.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Based on our most recent analysis as of December 31, 2021, we decreased our valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets by approximately $67.9 million, of which $63.5 million was released during the fourth quarter of 2021, due to the removal of the full valuation allowance on our federal and certain states deferred tax assets in 2021. The significant positive evidence in our analysis included: improvements in profitability, product mix, capital levels, credit metrics, a stabilizing economy and future longer-term forecasts showing sustained profitability. We believe the positive evidence now outweighs the negative evidence as of December 31, 2021 and it is more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will be realized. Refer to “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 17 - Income Taxes” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion.
There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of our measurement of deferred tax assets as of the time of evaluation will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. If our assumptions regarding business plans, competitive environments, anticipated growth rates, or expectations of results of operations and financial condition are not correct, we may be required to record a valuation allowance in future periods, whether in connection with our next annual measurement, or earlier, in the event an indicator of strong negative evidence is present at such time during the year.
Uncertain Tax Positions. We also follow GAAP to account for uncertainty in income taxes as recognized in our Financial Statements. The accounting standard creates a single model to address uncertainty in income tax positions and prescribes the minimum recognition threshold a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in our Financial Statements. The standard also provides guidance on derecognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition.
Under this standard, we may recognize tax benefits from an uncertain position only if it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the issue. The amount recognized is the largest benefit that we believe has greater than a 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Actual income taxes paid may vary from estimates depending upon changes in income tax laws, actual results of operations, and the final audit of tax returns by taxing authorities. Tax assessments may arise several years after tax returns have been filed.
We analyzed filing positions in the federal, state, and foreign jurisdictions in which we are required to file income tax returns, as well as the open tax years in these jurisdictions. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded approximately $2.2 million of unrecognized tax benefits, all of which would impact our effective tax rate, if recognized. We do not anticipate that our unrecognized tax benefits will materially change within the next 12 months. The Company has not accrued any penalties and interest for its unrecognized tax benefits. Other than the unrecognized tax benefit recorded, we believe that our income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained upon audit, and we do not anticipate other adjustments that will result in a material change to our financial position. We may, from time to time, be assessed interest or penalties by tax jurisdictions, although any such assessments historically have been minimal and immaterial to our financial results. Our policy for recording interest and penalties associated with audits and unrecognized tax benefits is to record such items as a component of income tax in our Statements of Operations. Refer to “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 17 - Income Taxes” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion.
Goodwill
We had approximately $682.7 million of goodwill, of which approximately $449.0 million was generated by our Games reporting unit, on our Balance Sheets at December 31, 2021 resulting from acquisitions of other businesses. We test for impairment annually on a reporting unit basis, at the beginning of our fourth fiscal quarter, or more often under certain circumstances. Our reporting units are identified as operating segments or one level below and we evaluate our reporting units at least annually. Refer to “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 10 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion.
The annual evaluation of goodwill requires the use of different assumptions, estimates, or judgments in the goodwill impairment testing process, such as: the methodology, the estimated future cash flows of our reporting units, the discount rate used to present value such cash flows, and the market multiples of comparable companies. Management performs its annual forecasting process, which, among other factors, includes reviewing recent historical results, company-specific variables, and industry trends. This process is generally fluid throughout each year and considered in conjunction with the annual goodwill impairment evaluation. Changes in forecasted operations can materially affect these estimates, which could materially affect our results of operations. Our estimates of fair value require significant judgment and are based on assumptions we determined to be reasonable; however, they are unpredictable and inherently uncertain, including: estimates of future growth rates, operating margins, results of operations and financial condition, and assumptions about the overall economic climate as well as the competitive environment for our reporting units.
There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of our goodwill testing as of the time of testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. If our assumptions regarding business plans, competitive environments, anticipated growth rates, or expectations of results of operations and financial condition are not correct, we may be required to record goodwill impairment charges in future periods, whether in connection with our next annual impairment testing process, or earlier, in the event an indicator of impairment is present at such time during the year.
Recent Accounting Guidance
For a description of our recently adopted accounting guidance and recent accounting guidance not yet adopted, see “Part II - Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Guidance” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
The following table presents selected information about our financial position (in thousands):
(1)Non-GAAP measure. In order to enhance investor understanding of our cash balance, we are providing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K Net Cash Position and Net Cash Available, which are not measures of our financial performance or position under GAAP. Accordingly, these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for GAAP measures, and should be read in conjunction with our balance sheets prepared in accordance with GAAP. We define our (i) Net Cash Position as cash and cash equivalents plus settlement receivables less settlement liabilities; and (ii) Net Cash Available as Net Cash Position plus undrawn amounts available under our Revolving Credit Facility. Our Net Cash Position and Net Cash Available change substantially based upon the timing of our receipt of funds for settlement receivables and payments we make to customers for our settlement liabilities. We present these non-GAAP measures as we monitor these amounts in connection with forecasting of cash flows and future cash requirements, both on a short-term and long-term basis.
Issuance of Common Stock
In December 2019, we filed with the SEC an automatic shelf registration statement for an undetermined amount of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, and/or units that the Company may offer and sell in one or more offerings on terms to be decided at the time of sale, which will expire on December 4, 2022.
In December 2019, we then issued and sold 11,500,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to a prospectus supplement under the automatic shelf registration statement, for which the aggregate net proceeds of approximately $122.4 million were utilized to pay down and reprice a portion of our existing indebtedness.
Cash Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our cash balance, cash flows and line of credit are expected to be sufficient to meet our recurring operating commitments and to fund our planned capital expenditures on both, a short- and long-term basis. Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 included cash in non-U.S. jurisdictions of approximately $17.5 million. Generally, these funds are available for operating and investment purposes within the jurisdiction in which they reside, and we may from time to time consider repatriating these foreign funds to the United States, subject to potential withholding tax obligations, based on operating requirements.
We expect that cash provided by operating activities will be sufficient for our operating and debt servicing needs during the foreseeable future on both a short- and long-term basis. In addition, we have sufficient borrowings available under our senior secured revolving credit facility to meet further funding requirements. We monitor the financial strength of our lenders on an ongoing basis using publicly available information. Based upon available information, we believe our lenders should be able to honor their commitments under the New Credit Agreement (defined in “Note 12 - Long-Term Debt”).
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash flows provided by operating activities increased by approximately $355.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily attributable to net income earned and changes in working capital, most notably associated with settlement activities from our FinTech segment, partially offset by loss on extinguishment of debt incurred during the year ended December 30, 2021. Cash flows provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $48.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily attributable to the impact of COVID-19 on our Games and FinTech segments, as well as changes in working capital and non-cash adjustments from our Games and FinTech segments.
Cash flows used in investing activities increased by approximately $57.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily attributable to an increase in capital expenditures in our Games and FinTech segments. In addition, this increase was due to placement fees from our Games segment. Cash flows used in investing activities decreased by approximately $72.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily attributable to our response to the impact of COVID-19, for which we reduced our capital expenditures in both our Games and FinTech segments, and the impact of the acquisition of certain loyalty related assets in our FinTech segment in the prior year.
Cash flows used in financing activities increased by approximately $203.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily attributable to the refinancing of our 2017 Unsecured Notes in July 2021 and entering into our New Term Loan in August 2021 and incurring fees associated with these transactions. In addition, we made a final earnout payment during the current period with respect to the Atrient transaction. Cash flows provided by financing activities decreased by approximately $62.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. This was primarily attributable to the repayments of borrowings under our 2017 Unsecured Notes and Senior Secured Credit Facilities during the period and the secondary equity offering in the prior year, partially offset by the proceeds from the Incremental Term Loan.
Capital Expenditures
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash spent for capital expenditures, excluding placement fees, totaled $104.7 million, of which $81.7 million and $23.0 million was related to our Games and FinTech segments, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash spent for capital expenditures totaled $76.4 million, of which $62.6 million and $13.8 million, was related to our Games and FinTech segments, respectively. We paid approximately $31.5 million, $3.1 million, and $17.7 million in placement fees for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. In September 2021, we entered into a placement fee agreement with a customer for certain of its locations for approximately $28.9 million, which we settled in October 2021. There were no material imputed interest amounts recorded in connection with these payments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the payments made included approximately $0.6 million of imputed interest.
Long-Term Debt
At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $599 million of borrowings outstanding under the New Term Loan and there were no borrowings outstanding under the New Revolver. We had $125 million of additional borrowing availability under the
New Revolver as of December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $400 million outstanding under our 2021 Unsecured Notes.
For additional information regarding our credit agreement and other debt as well as interest rate risk see “Contractual Obligations” in this Item 7 below, “Part II,