Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion of our historical performance, financial condition and future prospects in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements as a result of various risk factors, including those that may not be in the control of management. For further information on items that could impact our future operating performance or financial condition, see the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We conduct substantially all of our activities through our subsidiary, EWC Ventures, LLC and its subsidiaries. We operate on a fiscal calendar that results in a given fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. Our fiscal quarters are composed of 13 weeks each, except for 53-week fiscal years for which the fourth quarter will be composed of 14 weeks.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 25, 2021 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 is presented in the following sections. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 25, 2020 compared to the year ended December 28, 2019 can be found in our prospectus dated August 4, 2021, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") on August 6, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (referred to herein as the “Prospectus”).
Overview
We are the largest and fastest-growing franchisor and operator of out-of-home (“OOH”) waxing services in the United States by number of centers and system-wide sales. We delivered over 20 million waxing services in 2021 and over 13 million waxing services in 2020 generating $797 million and $469 million of system-wide sales, respectively, across our highly-franchised network. We have a leading portfolio of centers operating in 853 locations across 44 states as of December 25, 2021. Of these locations, 848 are franchised centers operated by franchisees and five are corporate-owned centers.
The European Wax Center brand is trusted, efficacious and accessible. Our culture is obsessed with our guest experience and we deliver a superior guest experience relative to smaller chains and independent salons. We offer guests high-quality, hygienic waxing services administered by our licensed, EWC-trained estheticians (our “wax specialists”), at our accessible and welcoming locations (our “centers”). Our technology-enabled guest interface simplifies and streamlines the guest experience with automated appointment scheduling and remote check-in capabilities, ensuring guest visits are convenient, hassle-free, and consistent across our network of centers. Our well-known, pre-paid Wax Pass program makes payment easy and convenient, fostering loyalty and return visits. Guests view us as a non-discretionary part of their personal-care and beauty regimens, providing us with a highly predictable and growing recurring revenue model.
Our asset-light franchise platform delivers capital-efficient growth, significant cash flow generation and resilience through economic cycles. Our centers are 99% owned and operated by our franchisees who benefit from superior unit-level economics, with mature centers generating annual cash-on-cash returns in excess of 60%.
In partnership with our franchisees, we fiercely protect our points of differentiation that attract new guests, build meaningful relationships and promote lasting retention. Our net promoter score (“NPS”) demonstrates our guests’ devotion to our brand. We are so confident in our ability to delight that we have always offered all of our guests their first wax free.
Hair removal solutions are consistently in demand, given the recurring nature of hair growth. The OOH waxing market is the fastest-growing hair removal solution in the United States, defined by a total addressable market of $18 billion with annualized growth that is more than double other hair removal alternatives. European Wax Center has become the category-defining brand within this rapidly growing market and became so by professionalizing a highly fragmented sector where service consistency, hygiene, and customer trust were not historically offered. We are approximately six times larger than the next largest waxing-focused competitor by center count and approximately 13 times larger by system-wide sales. Our unmatched scale enables us to drive broader brand awareness, ensures our licensed wax specialists are universally trained at the highest standards and drive consistent financial performance across each center.
Under the stewardship of our CEO, David Berg, and the other management team members, we have prioritized building a culture of performance, success, and inclusivity. Additionally, we have intensified our focus on enhancing the guest experience and have invested significantly in our corporate infrastructure and marketing capabilities to continue our track record of sustainable growth. The foundation for our next chapter of growth is firmly in place.
Growth Strategy and Outlook
We plan to grow our business primarily by opening new franchised centers and then additionally increasing our same-store sales and leveraging our corporate infrastructure to expand our profit margins and generate robust free cash flow.
We believe our franchisees’ track record of successfully opening new centers and consistently generating attractive unit-level economics validates our strategy to expand our footprint and grow our capacity to serve more guests. We aspire to grow between 7% to 10% of our center count each year. Our center count grew 7% and 6% during fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020, respectively, and has grown each year since 2010. Our thoughtful approach to growth ensures each center is appropriately staffed with the high-quality team and licensed, highly-trained wax specialists that our brand has been known for since our initial opening. We believe that none of our existing markets are fully penetrated, and that we have a significant whitespace opportunity of more than 3,000 locations for our standard center format across the United States. Our centers have a long track record of sustained growth delivering ten consecutive years of positive same-store sales growth through 2019 with resilient performance through economic cycles.
Our straightforward, asset-light franchise platform and our proven track record of increasing profitability will continue to drive EBITDA margin accretion and free cash flow generation as we expand our national footprint. We have invested in building our scalable support infrastructure, and we currently have the capabilities and systems in place to drive revenue growth and profitability across our existing and planned franchise centers.
Key Business Metrics
We track the following key business metrics to evaluate our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. Accordingly, we believe that these key business metrics provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations in the same manner as our management team. These key business metrics are presented for supplemental information purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled metrics or measures presented by other companies.
Number of Centers. Number of centers reflects the number of franchised and corporate-owned centers open at the end of the reporting period. We review the number of new center openings, the number of closed centers and the number of relocations of centers to assess net new center growth, and drivers of trends in system-wide sales, royalty and franchise fee revenue and corporate-owned center sales.
System-Wide Sales. System-wide sales represent sales from same day services, retail sales and cash collected from wax passes for all centers in our network, including both franchisee-owned and corporate-owned centers. While we do not record franchised center sales as revenue, our royalty revenue is calculated based on a percentage of franchised center sales, which are 6.0% of sales, net of retail
product sales, as defined in the franchise agreement. This measure allows us to better assess changes in our royalty revenue, our overall center performance, the health of our brand and the strength of our market position relative to competitors. Our system-wide sales growth is driven by net new center openings as well as increases in same-store sales.
Same-Store Sales. Same-store sales reflect the change in year-over-year sales from services performed and retail sales for the same-store base. We define the same-store base to include those centers open for at least 52 full weeks. This measure highlights the performance of existing centers, while excluding the impact of new center openings and closures. We review same-store sales for corporate-owned centers as well as franchisee-owned centers. Same-store sales growth is driven by increases in the number of transactions and average transaction size.
New Center Openings. The number of new center openings reflects centers opened during a particular reporting period for both franchisee-owned and corporate-owned centers, less centers closed during the same period. Opening new centers is an integral part of our growth strategy, and we expect the majority of our future new centers to be franchisee-owned. Before we obtain the certificate of occupancy or report any revenue from new corporate-owned centers, we incur pre-opening costs, such as rent expense, labor expense and other operating expenses. Some of our centers open with an initial start-up period of higher-than-normal marketing and operating expenses, particularly as a percentage of monthly revenue.
Average Unit Volume (“AUV”). AUV consists of the average annual system-wide sales of all centers that have been open for a trailing 52-week period or longer. This measure is calculated by dividing system-wide sales during the applicable period for all centers being measured by the number of centers being measured. AUV allows management to assess our franchisee-owned and corporate-owned center economics. Our AUV growth is primarily driven by increases in services and retail product sales as centers fill their books of reservations, which we refer to as maturation of centers.
Wax Pass Utilization. We define Wax Pass utilization as the adoption of our Wax Pass program by guests, measured as a percentage of total transactions conducted using a Wax Pass. Wax Pass utilization allows management to better assess the recurring nature of our business model because it is an indication of the magnitude of transactions by guests who have made a longer-term commitment to our brand by purchasing a Wax Pass.
(1)Same-store sales increase for the year ended December 25, 2021 is calculated in comparison to the year ended December 28, 2019 due to the significant decline in our sales in 2020 due to COVID-19. We believe this presents a more meaningful comparison of same-store sales. As described below, we typically remove stores from our calculation of same-store sales if they are closed for more than six consecutive days. However, given the widespread and unprecedented impact of COVID-19 same-store sales for the year ended December 26, 2020 were calculated without removing stores that were closed for longer than six days due to COVID-19.
The table below presents changes in the number of system-wide centers for the periods indicated:
Recent Developments
As more fully described in the notes to consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K, in fiscal year 2021 we completed a series of transactions including:
•Reorganization Transactions, which among other things, resulted in the Company being appointed as the sole managing member of the EWC Ventures and the Company entering into the tax receivable agreement ("TRA").
•The initial and secondary public offerings of the Company’s class A common stock; and
•The entry into a new credit agreement consisting of a $180.0 million term loan (“2026 Term Loan”) and a $40.0 million revolving credit facility (“2026 Revolving Credit Facility”) (together, the “2026 Credit Agreement”) which replaced our previous senior secured credit agreement.
On March 15, 2022, the Company announced that certain of its subsidiaries intend to complete a refinancing of our existing 2026 Credit Agreement with a new securitized financing facility. The Company intends to replace the 2026 Credit Agreement with a new securitized financing facility expected to be comprised of $400.0 million principal amount of senior fixed-rate term notes and $40.0 million principal amount of variable funding notes.
For additional information regarding these transactions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Impact
The Company is continuing to monitor the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on its business. Beginning in March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, most franchisees temporarily closed their centers in order to promote the health and safety of its members, team members and their communities. In April 2020, the entire franchise network was temporarily closed. Beginning in May 2020, certain governors announced steps to restart non-essential business operations in their respective states and certain centers began to re-open. By June 2021, all of the Company’s nationwide network of centers had re-opened.
There is a significant amount of uncertainty about the duration and severity of the consequences caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. While governmental and non-governmental organizations are engaging in efforts to combat the spread and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and related public health issues, the full extent to which outbreaks of COVID-19 could impact our business, results of operations and financial condition is still unknown and will depend on future developments, including new variants of the virus and spikes in cases in the areas where we operate, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. However, such effects may be material. Our financial statements reflect judgments and estimates that could change in the future as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Significant Factors Impacting Our Financial Results
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted, and that we expect will continue to impact, our business and results of operations. These factors include:
New Center Openings. We expect that new centers will be a key driver of growth in our future revenue and operating profit results. Opening new centers is an important part of our growth strategy, and we expect the majority of our future new centers will be franchisee-owned. Our results of operations have been and will continue to be materially affected by the timing and number of new center openings each period. As centers mature, center revenue and profitability increase significantly. The performance of new centers may vary depending on various factors such as the effective management and cooperation of our franchisee partners, whether the franchise is part of a multi-unit development agreement, the center opening date, the time of year of a particular opening, the number of licensed wax specialists recruited, and the location of the new center, including whether it is located in a new or existing market. Our planned center expansion will place increased demands on our operational, managerial, administrative, financial, and other resources.
Same-Store Sales Growth. Same-store sales growth is a key driver of our business. Various factors affect same-store sales, including:
•consumer preferences and overall economic trends;
•the recurring, non-discretionary nature of personal-care services and purchases;
•our ability to identify and respond effectively to guest preferences and trends;
•our ability to provide a variety of service offerings that generate new and repeat visits to our centers;
•the guest experience we provide in our centers;
•the availability of experienced wax specialists;
•our ability to source and deliver products accurately and timely;
•changes in service or product pricing, including promotional activities;
•the number of services or items purchased per center visit;
•center closures in response to state or local regulations due to the COVID-19 pandemic or other health concerns; and
•the number of centers that have been in operation for more than 52 full weeks.
A new center is included in the same-store sales calculation beginning 52 full weeks after the center’s opening. If a center is closed for greater than six consecutive days, the center is deemed a closed center and is excluded from the calculation of same-store sales until it has been reopened for a continuous 52 full weeks.
Overall Economic Trends. Macroeconomic factors that may affect guest spending patterns, and thereby our results of operations, include employment rates, business conditions, changes in the housing market, the availability of credit, interest rates, tax rates and fuel and energy costs. However, we believe that our guests see our services as non-discretionary in nature, given the rebound in performance in the second half of fiscal year 2020 despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, we believe that overall economic trends and related changes in consumer behavior have less of an impact on our business than they may have for other industries subject to fluctuations in discretionary consumer spending.
Guest Preferences and Demands. Our ability to maintain our appeal to existing guests and attract new guests depends on our ability to develop and offer a compelling assortment of services responsive to guest preferences and trends. We estimate that more than two-thirds of OOH waxing consumers start waxing by age 29 or earlier. We also believe that OOH waxing is a recurring need that brings guests back for services on a highly recurring basis which is reflected in the predictability of our financial performance over time. Our guests’ routine personal-care need for OOH waxing is further demonstrated by the top 20% of guests who visit us, on average, approximately every four weeks.
Our Ability to Source and Distribute Products Effectively. Our revenue and operating income are affected by our ability to purchase our products and supplies in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. While we believe our vendors have adequate capacity to meet our current and anticipated demand, our level of revenue could be adversely affected in the event we face constraints in our supply chain, including the inability of our vendors to produce sufficient quantities of some products or supplies in a manner that matches market demand from our guests, leading to lost revenue. We depend on two key suppliers to source our Comfort Wax and one key supplier to source our branded retail products and we are thus exposed to concentration of supplier risk.
Our Ability to Recruit and Retain Qualified Licensed Wax Specialists for our Centers. Our ability to operate our centers is largely dependent upon our ability to attract and retain qualified, licensed wax specialists. Our unmatched scale enables us to ensure that we universally train our wax specialists at the highest standards, ensuring that our guests experience consistent level of quality, regardless of the specific center they visit. The combination of consistent service delivery, across our trained base of wax specialists, along with the payment ease and convenience of our well-known, pre-paid Wax Pass program fosters loyalty and return visits across our guest base. Over time, our ability to build and maintain a strong pipeline of licensed wax specialists is important to preserving our current brand position.
Seasonality. Our results are subject to seasonality fluctuations in that services are typically in higher demand in periods leading up to holidays and the summer season. The resulting demand trend yields higher system-wide sales in the second and fourth quarter of our fiscal year. In addition, our quarterly results may fluctuate significantly, because of several factors, including the timing of center openings, price increases and promotions, and general economic conditions.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Product Sales: Product sales consist of revenue earned from sales of our Comfort Wax, other products consumed in administering our wax services and retail merchandise to franchisees, as well as retail merchandise sold in corporate-owned centers. Revenue on product sales is recognized upon transfer of control. Our product sales revenue comprised 55.8% and 55.1% of our total revenue for the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
Royalty Fees: Royalty fees are earned based on a percentage of the franchisees’ gross sales, net of retail product sales, as defined in the applicable franchise agreement, and recognized in the period the franchisees’ sales occur. The royalty fee is 6.0% of the franchisees’ gross sales for such period and is paid weekly. Our royalty fees revenue comprised 24.4% and 24.8% of our total revenue for the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
Marketing Fees: Marketing fees are earned based on 3.0% of the franchisees’ gross sales, net of retail product sales, as defined in the applicable franchise agreement, and recognized in the period the franchisees’ sales occur. Additionally, the Company charges a fixed monthly fee to franchisees for search engine optimization and search engine marketing services, which is due on a monthly basis and recognized in the period when services are provided. Our marketing fees revenue comprised 13.8% and 13.0% of our total revenue for the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
Other Revenue: Other revenue primarily consists of service revenues from our corporate-owned centers and franchise fees, as well as technology fees, annual brand conference revenues and training, which together represent 6.0% and 7.1% of our total revenue for the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, respectively. Service revenues from our corporate-owned centers are recognized at the time services are provided. Amounts collected in advance of the period in which service is rendered are recorded as deferred revenue. Franchise fees are paid upon commencement of the franchise agreement and are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis commencing at contract inception through the end of the franchise license term. Franchise agreements generally have terms of 10 years beginning on the date the center is opened and the initial franchise fees are amortized over a period
approximating the term of the agreement. Deferred franchise fees expected to be recognized in periods greater than 12 months from the reporting date are classified as long-term on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Technology fees, annual brand conference revenues and training are recognized as the related services are delivered and are not material to the overall business.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue: Cost of revenue primarily consists of the direct costs associated with wholesale product and retail merchandise sold, including distribution and outbound freight costs and inventory obsolescence charges, as well as the cost of materials and labor for services rendered in our corporate-owned centers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of wages, benefits and other compensation-related costs, rent, software, and other administrative expenses incurred to support our existing franchise and corporate-owned centers, as well as expenses attributable to growth and development activities. Also included in selling, general and administrative expenses are accounting, legal, marketing operations, and other professional fees.
Advertising Expenses: Advertising expenses consist of advertising, public relations, and administrative expenses incurred to increase sales and further enhance the public reputation of the European Wax Center brand.
Depreciation and Amortization: Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of property and equipment and capitalized leasehold improvements, as well as amortization of intangible assets, including franchisee relationships and reacquired area representative rights. Area representative rights represent an agreement with area representatives to sell franchise licenses and provide support to franchisees in a geographic region. From time to time, the Company enters into agreements to reacquire certain area representative rights.
Interest Expense: Interest expense consists of interest on our long-term debt, including amounts outstanding under our revolving credit facility, amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs and gain and losses on debt extinguishment.
Income Tax Expense: We are subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of EWC Ventures and are taxed at the statutory corporate tax rates. Income tax expense includes both current and deferred income tax expense.
Noncontrolling Interest: We are the sole managing member of EWC Ventures. Because we manage and operate the business and control the strategic decisions and day-to-day operations of EWC Ventures and also have a substantial financial interest in EWC Ventures, we consolidate the financial results of EWC Ventures, and a portion of our net income (loss) is allocated to the non-controlling interest to reflect the entitlement of the EWC Ventures Post-IPO Members to a portion of EWC Ventures’ net income (loss).
Results of Operations
The following tables presents our Consolidated Statements of Operations for each of the periods indicated (amounts in thousands, except percentages):
The following table presents the components of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for each of the periods indicated, as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased $75.3 million, or 72.8%, to $178.7 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $103.4 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in total revenue was largely due to our results for the year ended December 26, 2020 being impacted by center closures and restrictions stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we had 57 new center openings which became operational during the period from December 27, 2020 to December 25, 2021.
Product Sales
Product sales increased $42.8 million, or 75.1%, to $99.7 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $57.0 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in product sales during the year ended December 25, 2021 was primarily due to the negative impact of center closures and restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic on product sales during the year ended December 26, 2020. In addition, the increase in product sales was also partially attributable to shipments of a new product line to franchisees in the current year and new center openings which became operational during the period from December 27, 2020 to December 25, 2021.
Royalty Fees
Royalty fees increased $18.0 million, or 70.0%, to $43.6 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $25.7 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in royalty fees during the year ended December 25, 2021 was the result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on network revenues during the year ended December 26, 2020. In addition, the increase in royalty fees was also partially attributable to new center openings which became operational during the period from December 27, 2020 to December 25, 2021.
Marketing Fees
Marketing fees increased $11.1 million, or 82.8%, to $24.6 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $13.5 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. Marketing fees increased primarily due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on network revenues during the year ended December 26, 2020.
Other Revenue
Other revenue increased $3.4 million or 46.5%, to $10.7 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $7.3 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in other revenue during the year ended December 25, 2021 was primarily due to the continuing negative impact of corporate-owned center closures and restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 26, 2020. In addition, we waived technology fees for closed centers in 2020 to provide relief to our franchisees from the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $11.3 million, or 31.9%, to $46.8 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $35.5 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue was largely the result of higher revenues in the current year period as compared to our revenues for the year ended December 26, 2020, which were impacted by center closures and restrictions stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic. This increase in cost of revenue was partially offset by an in increase in the inventory obsolescence reserve during the year ended December 26, 2020 related to a pilot program for certain products with a limited shelf-life that did not have a chance to scale due to COVID-19, as well as a planned product restaging effort approved by management in the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $22.8 million, or 58.5%, to $61.8 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $39.0 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased payroll and benefits, professional fees and insurance expenses. The increase in payroll and benefits expense resulted from increased equity-based compensation due to the modification of certain pre-IPO equity awards and the issuance of new equity awards, cash bonus payments made in connection with our IPO and increased headcount at our corporate office as we prepared to become a public company. In addition, payroll and benefits expense during the year ended December 26, 2020 was lower due to our reduction and temporary furlough of certain corporate employees resulting from the impact of COVID-19. The increase in professional fees in the current year was attributable to preparations for our initial public offering. The increase in insurance expense was primarily attributable to the purchase of additional lines of coverage due to becoming a public company. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in commissions resulting from the reacquisition of rights from certain area representatives and a decrease in relocation costs in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
Advertising
Advertising expenses increased $13.5 million, or 117.4%, to $25.0 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $11.5 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in advertising expense was largely attributable to our suspension of marketing activities in the prior year commensurate with the center closures caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $0.8 million, or 3.8%, to $20.3 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $19.6 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily driven by an increase in amortization expense for the additional reacquired rights from area representatives completed during fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $2.0 million, or 11.0%, to $20.3 million during the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $18.3 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to a $6.3 million loss on debt extinguishment incurred with our refinancing transaction executed in fiscal year 2021. However, this increase was partially offset by lower interest expense on the 2026 Term Loan due to the reduced principal balance and interest rate on the Previous Term Loan and the payoff of our Previous Revolving Credit Facility.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded $0.1 million in income tax expense for the year ended December 25, 2021 primarily due to state income taxes. This differs from the federal statutory income tax rate primarily as a result of the impact of the Company’s full valuation allowance against its net federal and state deferred taxes. Other drivers of the effective tax rate include non-taxable income generated prior to the Reorganization Transactions, non-taxable income attributable to non-controlling interest, and the tax effects of stock compensation.
Prior to the Reorganization Transactions, EWC Ventures, our financial reporting predecessor, was a pass-through entity and not subject to income tax. As such, there was no income tax expense for periods prior to August 4, 2021. We estimate that in future annual periods, our blended statutory tax rate, prior to valuation allowance consideration, will be approximately 15% of EWC Ventures income or loss before income taxes. This estimated blended statutory tax rate is based on the current capital structure, excludes discrete or other rate impacting adjustments which may impact the company’s income tax provision in the future and is based on our
blended federal and state statutory tax rates reduced to exclude our non-taxable noncontrolling interest percentage. We expect this estimated blended statutory tax rate to increase as EWC Ventures Units and the corresponding shares of Class B common stock are exchanged for shares of Class A common stock because our nontaxable noncontrolling interest earnings will decrease.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our GAAP financial results, we believe the non-GAAP financial measures EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful in evaluating our performance. Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as substitutes for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental information purposes only and may be different from similarly titled metrics or measures presented by other companies. A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP and a further discussion of how we use non-GAAP financial measures is provided below.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We believe that EBITDA, which eliminates the impact of certain expenses that we do not believe reflect our underlying business performance, provides useful information to investors to assess the performance of our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted for the impact of certain additional non-cash and other items that we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing performance of our core operations. These items include exit costs related to leases of abandoned space, IPO-related costs, non-cash equity-based compensation expense, corporate headquarters office relocation, and other one-time expenses. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an appropriate measure of operating performance in addition to EBITDA because it eliminates the impact of other items that we believe reduce the comparability of our underlying core business performance from period to period and is therefore useful to our investors in comparing the core performance of our business from period to period. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to differences in methods of calculation.
A reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below for the periods indicated:
(1)Represents exit costs related to abandoned leases resulting from our corporate headquarters relocation.
(2)Represents costs related to employee relocation, severance and moving fees resulting from our corporate headquarter relocation.
(3)Represents non-cash equity-based compensation expense.
(4)Represents legal, accounting and other costs incurred in preparation for the initial public offering.
(5)Represents cash-based compensation expense recorded in connection with the initial public offering.
(6)Represents costs related to reorganization driven by COVID-19 and buildup of executive leadership team.
(7)Represents non-core operating expenses identified by management. For fiscal year 2021 these costs relate to the settlement of a legal matter and remeasurement of our tax receivable agreement liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure liquidity in terms of our ability to fund the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital needs, capital expenditures, contractual obligations and debt service with cash flows from operations and other sources of funding. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash provided from operating activities, cash and cash equivalents on hand,
proceeds from our secured term loan and revolving credit facility and proceeds from the issuance of equity to our members. We had cash and cash equivalents of $43.3 million as of December 25, 2021.
In August 2021, concurrent with our initial public offering, we entered into a new credit agreement providing for the 2026 Term Loan and 2026 Revolving Credit Facility. The proceeds from the new term loan were used together with proceeds from our initial public offering to fully repay the Previous Term Loan and Previous Revolving Credit Facility. See the notes to the consolidated financial statements (Note 10 -Long-Term Debt) contained elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information.
Future payments under the TRA with respect to the purchase of EWC Ventures Units which occurred as part of the IPO and through December 25, 2021 are currently expected to be $115.0 million. Such amounts will be paid when such deferred tax assets are realized as a reduction to income taxes due or payable. That is, payments under the TRA are only expected to be made in periods following the filing of a tax return in which we are able to utilize certain tax benefits to reduce our cash taxes paid to a taxing authority. The impact of any changes in the projected obligations under the TRA as a result of changes in the geographic mix of the Company’s earnings, changes in tax legislation and tax rates or other factors that may impact the Company’s tax savings will be reflected in income (loss) before income taxes on the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period in which the change occurs. We recorded a liability of $59.2 million based on current projections of future taxable income taking into consideration the Company’s full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax asset.
We believe that our sources of liquidity and capital will be sufficient to finance our continued operations and growth strategy for at least the next twelve months. Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are working capital, capital expenditures to grow our network of centers, debt servicing costs, and general corporate needs. We have in the past, and may in the future, refinance our existing indebtedness with new debt arrangements and utilize a portion of borrowings to return capital to our stockholders.
We expect capital expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2022 (“fiscal year 2022”) to be approximately $2.5 million. The majority of these capital expenditures will be to support investments in technology, including enhancements to data infrastructure and our e-commerce platform, as well as general investments in our corporate-owned centers. We anticipate our cash on hand and future cash flows from operations will provide the funds needed to meet our anticipated capital expenditure needs in fiscal year 2022.
We also have contractual obligations, including non-cancellable operating leases for office space and various retail locations, with terms expiring through 2032. Rent expense from our operating leases was $2.4 million and $3.1 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, included in selling, general and administrative expense on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Future minimum annual rental payments required under these operating lease agreements as of December 25, 2021 is presented within the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements (Note 12-Commitments and contingencies), included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Additionally, we have various contractual commitments with third parties whereby we expect to pay $11.3 million in fiscal year 2022, through cash on hand and operating cash flows.
Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and our future capital requirements could vary because of many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to acquire new centers and expand into new markets, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations and financial condition would be adversely affected.
2026 Credit Agreement
Our 2026 Credit Agreement consists of the 2026 Term Loan and the 2026 Revolving Credit Facility. Borrowings under the 2026 Term Loan bear interest at an index rate as defined in the credit agreement plus an applicable margin of 3.0% (The all-in rate was 3.1% at December 25, 2021). The 2026 Term Loan requires principal payments payable in quarterly installments with the final scheduled principal payment on the outstanding 2026 Term Loan borrowings due on August 9, 2026. There were no outstanding borrowings under the 2026 Revolving Credit Facility as of December 25, 2021.
The 2026 Credit Agreement contains certain customary events of default, including in the event of a change of control, and certain covenants and restrictions that limit the Borrower’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur additional debt; create liens on certain assets; pay dividends on or make distributions in respect of their capital stock or make other restricted payments; consolidate, merge, sell, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of their assets; and enter into certain transactions with their affiliates.
The Company is also subject to certain financial maintenance covenants under the 2026 Credit Agreement, which require the Company and its subsidiaries to (i) not exceed certain specified total net leverage ratios and (ii) not fall below a certain fixed charge coverage ratio, in each case, at the end of each fiscal quarter.
If the Company fails to perform its obligations under these and other covenants, or should any event of default occur, the term loan and revolving credit facility commitments under the 2026 Credit Agreement may be terminated and any outstanding borrowings, together with accrued interest, under the 2026 Credit Agreement could be declared immediately due and payable. For additional information regarding our long-term debt activity, see Note to Consolidated Financial Statements (Note 10-Long-term debt) contained elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities
In December 2018, we entered an interest rate cap derivative instrument which was designated as a cash flow hedge at inception. Our objective is to mitigate the impact of interest expense fluctuations on our profitability resulting from interest rate changes by capping the LIBOR component of the interest rate at 4.5% on $175.0 million of our long-term debt, as the interest rate cap provides for payments from the counterparty when LIBOR rises above 4.5%. The interest rate cap has a $175.0 million notional amount and is effective December 31, 2018, for the monthly periods from and including January 31, 2019 through September 25, 2024. The interest rate cap has a deferred premium; accordingly, the Company will pay a monthly premium for the interest rate cap over the term of the agreement. The annual premium is equal to 0.11486% on the notional amount.
Changes in the cash flows of interest rate cap derivatives designated as hedges are expected to be highly effective in offsetting the changes in interest payments on a principal balance equal to the designated derivative’s notional amount, attributable to the hedged risk.
We recognize as assets or liabilities at fair value the estimated amounts we would receive or pay upon a termination of the interest rate cap prior to the scheduled maturity date. As of December 25, 2021, the fair value of the interest rate cap derivative instrument was estimated to be a liability of $0.3 million, with $0.2 million classified within Other current liabilities and $0.1 million within Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The fair value is based on information that is model-driven and whose inputs were observable.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Generally, we are required under the TRA, which is described more fully in “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Organization and Structure-We are required to pay the EWC Ventures' pre-IPO members for certain tax benefits we may claim, and the amounts we may pay could be significant” included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K to make payments to the EWC Ventures pre-IPO members that are generally equal to 85% of the applicable cash tax savings, if any, that we actually realize (or are deemed to realize, calculated using certain assumptions) as a result of (i) increases in our allocable share of certain existing tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company and adjustments to the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company, in each case as a result of (a) the purchases of EWC Ventures Units (along with the corresponding shares of our Class B common stock) from certain of the EWC Ventures Post-IPO Members using a portion of the net proceeds from the initial and secondary public offerings or in any future offering or (b) Share Exchanges and Cash Exchanges by the EWC Ventures pre-IPO members (or their transferees or other assignees) in connection with or after the initial public offering, (ii) our utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies (including the Blocker Companies' allocable share of certain existing tax basis of EWC Ventures' assets) and (iii) certain other tax benefits related to entering into the TRA, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the TRA.
Subject to the discussion in the following paragraph below, payments under the TRA will occur only after we have filed our U.S. federal and state income tax returns and realized the cash tax savings from the favorable tax attributes. The first payment would be due after the filing of our tax return for the year ended December 25, 2021, which is due March 15, 2022, but the due date can be extended until September 15, 2022. Future payments under the TRA in respect of future purchases of EWC Ventures Units, Share Exchanges and Cash Exchanges would be in addition to these amounts. Payments under the TRA are computed by reference to realized tax benefits from attributes subject to the TRA and are expected to be funded by tax distributions made to us by our subsidiaries similar to how cash taxes would be funded to the extent these attributes did not exist. To the extent we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason (including because our credit agreement restricts the ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions to us), under the terms of the TRA such payments will be deferred and accrue interest until paid. If we are unable to make payments due to insufficient funds, such payments may be deferred indefinitely while accruing interest until paid, which could negatively impact our results of operations and could also affect our liquidity in future periods in which such deferred payments are made.
Under the TRA, as a result of certain types of transactions and other factors, including a transaction resulting in a change of control, we may also be required to make payments to the EWC Ventures pre-IPO members in amounts equal to the present value of future payments we are obligated to make under the TRA. If the payments under the TRA are accelerated, we may be required to raise additional debt or equity to fund such payments. To the extent that we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason (including because our credit agreement restricts the ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions to us), under the terms of the TRA Agreement such payments will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid. If we are unable to make payments due to insufficient funds to make such payments, such payments may be deferred indefinitely while accruing interest until paid, which could negatively impact our results of operations and could also affect our liquidity in future periods in which such deferred payments are made.
Summary Statements of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major components of our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the periods presented (amounts in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 25, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $41.3 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $1.4 million for the year ended December 26, 2020, an increase of $39.9 million. This improvement was largely attributable to our improved operating results in fiscal year 2021 compared to the fiscal year 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the increase in working capital requirements in fiscal year 2021 was less than the working capital increase in fiscal year 2020. The increase in working capital in 2021 was primarily attributable to increases of $2.2 million and $9.5 million in accounts receivable and inventory, respectively, resulting from our improved performance in 2021. These increases in working capital were partially offset by an $8.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses largely driven by increased inventory purchases and accrued professional fees.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, we used $7.6 million and $34.7 million of cash, respectively, for the reacquisition of area representative rights. Investing activities related to capital expenditures were $0.6 million in fiscal year 2021 and $2.2 million in fiscal year 2020, respectively.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 25, 2021 cash used in financing activities was $26.6 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $61.9 million for the for the year ended December 26, 2020. Financing activities during the year ended December 25, 2021 were largely the result of the Reorganization Transactions, the IPO and secondary public offerings and the debt refinancing transactions and consisted of the following:
•The receipt of cash proceeds from the following sources:
•$212.9 million from our initial and secondary public offerings of Class A common stock, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses
•$179.4 million from the 2026 term loan, net of debt discount
•Payments made for the following items:
•$270.6 million to fully repay our Previous Term Loan and Previous Revolving Credit Facility
•$2.4 million for debt extinguishment costs related to the Previous Term Loan
•$1.3 million in deferred financing costs related to the 2026 Term Loan and 2020 Revolving Credit Facility
•$138.4 million to repurchase Class B common stock and an equivalent number of EWC Ventures common units from certain EWC Ventures members
•$0.9 million to repurchase EWC Class A units which were outstanding prior to the Reorganization Transactions
•$5.3 million in net tax distribution payments made to EWC Ventures members
Financing activities during the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily consisted of additional funding obtained to optimize our cash position in preparation for a potential, prolonged impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, and to support our investments in the reacquisition of area representative rights. In fiscal year 2020 we drew down $27.0 million on our revolving credit facility and increased our term loan by $15.0 million. In addition, we received $24.9 million in contributions from members in exchange for the issuance of the Class D units during the year ended December 26, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions and judgements that we believe have the most significant impact on our financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue from contracts with customers consists primarily of product sales, royalties, marketing fees and other fees resulting from our franchise agreements.
Product sales primarily include the sale of wax and other products used in the provision of wax services to franchisees, as well as retail merchandise sold in corporate-owned centers. Revenue on product sales is recognized when control transfers. Generally, customers take control when the risk of loss, title and insurable risks have transferred to the customer.
Royalty fees are earned based on a percentage of franchisees’ gross sales, net of retail product sales, as defined in the applicable franchise agreement. Our franchise agreement royalties represent sales-based royalties that are related entirely to our performance obligation under the applicable franchise agreement and are recognized as franchise sales occur.
Marketing fees are primarily earned based on a percentage of franchisees’ gross sales, net of retail product sales and a fixed fee for search engine optimization and marketing services.
Franchise fees consist primarily of revenues earned from the delivery of services to franchisees over the franchise license term. The Company’s primary performance obligations under the franchise license center are granting the use of the European Wax Center trademarks, system, training, preopening assistance and operating assistance in exchange for franchise fees. The rights to use the Company’s intellectual property and all other services the Company provides under the applicable franchise agreement are highly interrelated, not distinct within the contract, and therefore accounted for under ASC 606 as a single performance obligation, which is satisfied by granting certain rights to use our intellectual property over the term of each franchise agreement.
Initial franchise fees paid by the franchisee are recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis commencing at contract inception through the end of the franchise license term. Franchise agreements generally have terms of ten years. These agreements also convey one extension term up to ten years, depending on contract terms and if certain conditions are met. Amounts collected in advance for franchise fees are recorded as deferred revenue on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Inventory Valuation: Our inventories are substantially comprised of wax, wholesale products consumed in the application of wax services and European Wax Center branded products including in-grown hair serums, exfoliates, body washes, lotions, and creams. Inventory is recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the FIFO method. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. We record adjustments to our inventory reserves if the cost of a specific product on hand exceeds the amount we expect to realize from the ultimate sale or disposal of the inventory. These estimates are based on management’s judgment regarding future demand, age of inventory, and analysis of historical experience. If actual demand or market conditions are different than those projected by management, future results may be unfavorably or favorably affected by adjustments to these estimates. We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our inventory reserves.
Goodwill: Goodwill is recognized for the excess of the fair value of an acquired entity over the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination and is not subject to amortization. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment annually on October 1 of the fiscal year, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. Factors that could trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to, underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the overall business and significant negative industry or economic trends.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually at a reporting unit level. We have determined that we have one reporting unit which is the same as our sole operating segment. We first perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill, a Step 0 analysis, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we determine that is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value we perform a quantitative impairment test. This test identifies both the existence of and the amount of goodwill impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value an impairment loss is recognized in amount equal to that excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. It is possible that changes in circumstances or changes in management’s judgments, assumptions and estimates could result in an impairment charge of a portion or all of its goodwill.
When performing a quantitative impairment test we make various estimates and assumptions in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting unit using a combination of discounted cash flow models and valuations based on earnings multiples for guideline public companies and transactions in our reporting unit’s industry peer group, when externally quoted market prices are not readily available. Discounted cash flow models are highly reliant on various assumptions, including projected business results, long-term growth factors and discount rate. Management judgement is involved in estimating these variables, and they include inherent uncertainties since they are forecasting future events. We perform sensitivity analyses by using a range of inputs to confirm the reasonableness of the long-term growth rate and discount rate estimates.
We performed our annual goodwill impairment test using the qualitative approach as of October 1, 2021 and concluded there was no impairment as of that date. Factors that we considered in determining that it was not more likely than not that the carrying value of our reporting unit exceeded its fair value included the results of the quantitative test performed in fiscal year 2020, our forecasts of future operating performance, market conditions, and other negative factors. In addition, we also considered our market capitalization relative to our net assets as of the testing date. Subsequent to this annual impairment test, no additional indications of an impairment were identified.
No goodwill impairment charges were recognized for goodwill for fiscal years 2021, 2020 or 2019. For additional information related to our goodwill, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Note 8-Goodwill and Intangible Assets, net) contained elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Intangible Assets: Intangible assets primarily consist of franchisee relationships, trade names and reacquired area representative rights. Franchisee relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life of ten years. Reacquired rights are amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining expected term of the agreement with the area representative. The initial term of the area representative agreements is ten years with an additional ten-year renewal at the option of the area representative. Trade names were deemed to have an indefinite life. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment annually as of October 1 of the fiscal year, or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. Factors that could trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to, underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the overall business and significant negative industry or economic trends.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets, including our trade names, are tested for impairment at the unit of account. We first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying amount. When necessary, a quantitative impairment test is performed by determining the fair value of the intangible asset. If the fair value of the intangible asset is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the difference. If an intangible asset that is not being amortized is subsequently determined to have a finite useful life, that asset is tested for impairment. After recognition of the impairment, if any, the asset is amortized prospectively over its estimated remaining useful life and accounted for in the same manner as other intangible assets that are subject to amortization.
When a quantitative analysis is performed, we test these assets using a “relief-from-royalty” valuation method to determine the fair value. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, future projected business results, growth rates, the discount rate for a market participant, and royalty rates.
We performed our annual impairment test for our trade name intangible asset using the qualitative approach as of October 1, 2021 and concluded there was no impairment as of that date. Factors that we considered in determining that it was not more likely than not that the carrying value of our trade name intangible asset exceeded its fair value included the results of the quantitative test performed in fiscal year 2020, our forecasts of future operating performance, market conditions, and other negative factors. Subsequent to this annual impairment test, no additional indications of an impairment were identified.
No impairment charges were recognized for our intangible assets for fiscal years 2021, 2020 or 2019. For additional information related to our intangible assets, see Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements (Note 8-Goodwill and Intangible Assets, net) contained elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Income taxes: We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), using the asset and liability method. Deferred income taxes are provided on temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of its assets and liabilities. Such net tax effects of temporary differences are reflected on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets as deferred tax assets and liabilities and are measured by applying the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when the Company believes that it is more-likely- than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In accordance with ASC 740 we assess whether it is more likely than not that some or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in estimating valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. The realization of a deferred tax asset ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in the applicable carryback or carryforward periods. We consider the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative losses as well as the reversal of existing deferred tax liabilities, historical and forecasted taxable income (exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards) in our assessment. In evaluating such projections, the Company considers its history of profitability and cumulative earnings/losses, the competitive environment, and general economic conditions. In addition, the Company considers
the time frame over which it would take to utilize the deferred tax assets prior to their expiration. To the extent the Company determines that, based on the weight of available evidence, all or a portion of its valuation allowance is no longer necessary, the Company will recognize the change in the period such determination occurs. It is possible that such change to the Company’s valuation allowance could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and/or financial position.
Changes in existing tax laws or rates could affect our actual tax results, and future business results may affect the amount of our deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of our deferred tax assets over time. Due to uncertainties in the estimation process, particularly with respect to changes in facts and circumstances in future reporting periods it is possible that actual results could differ from the estimates used in previous analyses. Differences between the anticipated and actual outcomes of these future results could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and/or financial position.
ASC 740 prescribes a two-step approach for the recognition and measurement of tax benefits associated with the positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return that affect amounts reported in the financial statements. The Company has reviewed and will continue to review the conclusions reached regarding uncertain tax positions, which may be subject to review and adjustment at a later date based on ongoing analyses of tax laws, regulations and interpretations thereof. To the extent that the Company’s assessment of the conclusions reached regarding uncertain tax positions changes as a result of the evaluation of new information, such change in estimate will be recorded in the period in which such determination is made. The Company reports income tax-related interest and penalties relating to uncertain tax positions, if applicable, as a component of income tax expense.
Tax Receivable Agreement: We entered into the TRA with the EWC Ventures Pre-IPO Members that provides for the payment by the Company to the EWC Ventures Pre-IPO Members of 85% of the benefits, if any, that the Company realizes, or is deemed to realize (calculated using certain assumptions), as a result of (i) increases in our allocable share of certain existing tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company and adjustments to the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company, in each case as a result of (a) the purchases of EWC Ventures Units (along with the corresponding shares of our Class B common stock) from certain of the EWC Ventures Post-IPO Members using a portion of the net proceeds from the initial and secondary public offerings or in any future offering or (b) Share Exchanges and Cash Exchanges by the EWC Ventures Pre-IPO Members (or their transferees or other assignees) in connection with or after the initial public offering, (ii) our utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies (including the Blocker Companies’ allocable share of certain existing tax basis of EWC Ventures’ assets) and (iii) certain other tax benefits related to entering into the TRA, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the TRA. We record liabilities for amounts payable under the TRA in the period in which the payment is deemed to be probable.
As of December 25, 2021, future payments under the TRA with respect to the purchase of EWC Ventures Units which occurred as part of the initial public offering and through December 25, 2021 are expected to be $115.0 million.
Payments made under the TRA represent payments that otherwise would have been made to taxing authorities in the absence of attributes obtained by us as a result of exchanges by the EWC Ventures Pre-IPO Members. Such amounts will be paid only when a cash tax savings is realized as a result of attributes subject to the TRA. That is, payments under the TRA are only expected to be made in periods following the filing of a tax return in which we are able to utilize certain tax benefits to reduce our cash taxes paid to a taxing authority. Amounts payable under the TRA are contingent upon, among other things, the generation of future taxable income. The projection of future taxable income involves significant judgment. In projecting future taxable income, we consider our historical results and incorporate certain assumptions including the growth rate of the Company and the amount, character, and timing of the taxable income in the future. Actual taxable income may differ from our estimates, which could significantly impact the liability under the TRA. The impact of any changes in the projected obligations under the TRA as a result of changes in the geographic mix of the Company’s earnings, changes in tax legislation and tax rates or other factors that may impact the Company’s tax savings will be reflected in income before taxes on the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period in which the change occurs.
As of December 25, 2021, the TRA liability recorded was $59.2 million based on current projections of future taxable income taking into consideration the Company’s full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax asset.
JOBS Act
The Company is an emerging growth company as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) and may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with those standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This may make it difficult to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of the potential impact of the pronouncements on our financial condition and results of operations and cash flows.