Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Objective
The purpose of this Management's Discussion and Analysis is to better allow our investors to understand and view our company from management's perspective. We are providing an overview of our business and strategy including a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations. The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have omitted discussion of 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which has been filed with the SEC.
Overview
Exact Sciences Corporation is a leading, global, advanced cancer diagnostics company. We have developed some of the most impactful tests in cancer diagnostics, and we are currently working on the development of additional tests, with the goal of bringing new innovative cancer tests to patients throughout the world.
Acquisitions
On December 31, 2021, we completed the acquisition of PreventionGenetics. PreventionGenetics is a CLIA-certified and CAP-accredited clinical DNA testing laboratory, providing more than 5,000 predefined genetic tests for nearly all clinically relevant genes, additional custom panels, and comprehensive germline whole exome and whole genome sequencing tests. We expect this acquisition to complement our advanced cancer diagnostics portfolio and support our entrance into hereditary cancer testing.
On June 23, 2021, we completed the acquisition of PFS Genomics. PFS is a healthcare company focused on personalizing treatment for breast cancer patients to improve outcomes and reduce unnecessary treatment. We expect this acquisition to expand our ability to help guide early stage breast cancer treatment through individualized radiotherapy treatment decisions.
On April 14, 2021, we completed the acquisition of all of the outstanding equity interests of Ashion from PMed Management, LLC, which is a subsidiary of TGen. Ashion is a CLIA-certified and CAP-accredited sequencing lab based in Phoenix, Arizona and developed oncomap ExTra, one of the most comprehensive genomic cancer tests available, and provides access to whole exome, matched germline, and transcriptome sequencing capabilities.
On January 11, 2021, we acquired a worldwide exclusive license to the proprietary TARDIS technology from TGen, an affiliate of City of Hope. We intend to use the TARDIS technology to develop a test to detect small amounts of tumor DNA that may remain in patients’ blood after they have undergone initial treatment, known as MRD.
On January 5, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Thrive. Thrive is a healthcare company dedicated to developing a blood-based, MCED test. We intend to combine Thrive's expertise with our scientific capabilities, clinical organization, and commercial infrastructure to bring an accurate blood-based, multi-cancer early detection test to patients faster.
2022 Priorities
Our top priorities for 2022 are to (1) impact more lives, (2) advance new tests, and (3) take care of the people we serve.
Impact More Lives
We are committed to delivering critical answers to patients by getting more people tested with our laboratory testing services.
Advance New Tests
In 2022, we are focused on advancing new tests to provide answers to patients, beginning with assessing risk for cancer through screening and throughout the cancer journey, by changing the way cancer is detected and treated. We plan to continue investing in ongoing and additional clinical trials to support our product development efforts in enhancing existing products and bringing new products to patients and providers. We are focused on three important programs within this priority: (1) advancing our colon cancer screening programs, (2) multi-cancer early detection, and (2) minimal residual disease and recurrence testing.
Take Care of the People we Serve
We want to take even better care of everyone we serve. We plan to improve customer relations by delivering simple and smooth workflows, providing communication that is clear and easy to understand, and providing results that are fast and accurate. Our goal is to become a caring partner to answer questions and help people navigate what is a difficult time in their life.
Business Environment and Current Trends
COVID-19 Impact
The spread of COVID-19 has affected many segments of the global economy, including the cancer screening and diagnostics industry. The pandemic and related precautionary measures have materially disrupted our business since March 2020 and may continue to disrupt our business for an unknown period of time. COVID-19 has significantly impacted, and may continue to impact, our workforce, supply chain and operating results including our testing volumes, revenues, margins, and cash utilization among other measures. The level and nature of the disruption caused by COVID-19 is unpredictable, may be cyclical and long-lasting, and may vary from location to location. As a result of the pandemic, we continue to provide COVID-19 testing, the revenue from which has partially offset the pandemic's impact on our Screening and Precision Oncology testing revenue.
Our Screening and Precision Oncology businesses have been negatively impacted by the pandemic but have in large part recovered. While Cologuard test orders have increased from the early pandemic lows, the growth has been slower than expected due to continuing restrictions on patients’ and our sales representatives’ access to healthcare provider offices and additional outbreaks of COVID-19 and its variants during 2021, which further diminished access to healthcare provider offices. Our Cologuard test is promotionally responsive, and preventive health and wellness visits continue to be deprioritized due to the risk of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has also reduced well-patient access to healthcare providers, which has contributed to, and may continue to contribute to, delays to clinical studies that are critical to the launch of future products and services. Even after the pandemic subsides, some healthcare providers and health systems may limit the extent and type of sales representatives’ access to their facilities and personnel. We have seen the impact of the COVID-19 variants to a lesser degree in our Precision Oncology business than we have with our Cologuard test. This is partly due to the fact that patients are already diagnosed with cancer and there is greater urgency to access healthcare providers and our Oncotype tests. In addition, it is reported that 40% of breast cancer diagnoses occur as a result of an at-home examination or symptoms recognized by the patient (i.e. a lump or swelling). Therefore, demand for our Oncotype DX Breast Recurrence Score test is less dependent on screening mammograms than our Cologuard test is on patients attending regular wellness visits, where our Cologuard test is most often prescribed today. We could see a delayed impact in our Precision Oncology business from the COVID-19 variants if patients deprioritize preventive services, including mammograms and prostate cancer screening.
Pandemic-related cost inflation and supply chain disruptions, whether caused by restrictions or slowdowns in shipping or logistics, increases demand for certain goods used in our operations, or otherwise, could impact our operations. See our Risk Factor, The COVID-19 outbreak has and may further materially and adversely affect our business and financial results, in Item 1A, for additional detail on the potential impacts to our business. In addition, personnel related costs have continued to rise as a result of the aforementioned inflation, which has and may continue to impact our operations.
We have adjusted and expect to continue to adjust our COVID-19 precautionary measures at our various locations based on local recovery levels and applicable governmental regulations. In 2021, we announced that anyone working onsite at an Exact Sciences U.S. facility and anyone going into a healthcare setting to perform their job in the U.S. must be fully vaccinated. We provided information to help educate and encourage our employees to receive the COVID-19 vaccination. We have also authorized more employees to work onsite and expect more teams to return onsite throughout 2022. Our business could be negatively affected if we take excessive, ineffective, or inadequate precautions.
Pfizer
In September 2021, we completed an expedited hiring process and onboarded approximately 400 former Pfizer sales representatives to increase adoption of our Cologuard test and our pipeline of innovative screening tests. Prior to late August 2021, when Pfizer announced a decrease in the number of sales positions supporting its Internal Medicine therapeutic area, these employees had been promoting our Cologuard test under our Promotion Agreement with Pfizer.
In November 2021, we entered into an amended and restated promotion agreement with Pfizer pursuant to which Pfizer ceased promoting our Cologuard test on November 30, 2021. The amendment requires us to pay Pfizer a total of $35.9 million in three installments throughout 2022 and eliminated our obligation to pay Pfizer royalties or other fees except for certain media fees, advertising fees, and any detail fees owed to Pfizer for promoting our Cologuard test prior to November 30, 2021. Pfizer will continue to purchase certain advertising for our Cologuard test on our behalf through the third quarter of 2022, which we will reimburse Pfizer for, and will provide support in transitioning responsibilities for purchasing such advertising.
We continue to plan for future growth through investing in our existing operations and through the acquisitions further discussed in our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Revenue. Our revenue is primarily generated by our laboratory testing services from our Cologuard, Oncotype, and COVID-19 tests.
The increase in Screening revenue, which primarily includes laboratory service revenue from our Cologuard test, was primarily due to an increase in the number of completed Cologuard tests, partially offset by a decrease in transaction price as discussed below. Relative recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and increases in electronic ordering rates, screening of patients in the 45 to 49 age group, and screening of patients that previously completed a Cologuard test contributed to the increase in completed Cologuard tests for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in Precision Oncology revenue, which primarily includes laboratory service revenue from our global Oncotype products, was primarily due to an increase in the number of completed Oncotype tests, which was driven by an increase in Oncotype DX breast test orders, both domestically and internationally, and to revenue generated from new products as a result of our acquisition of Ashion during the year.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a downward adjustment to revenue of $11.8 million on completed tests from the prior year after identifying a lower realized reimbursement rate on a portion of our laboratory testing services. This change in transaction price is primarily driven by certain prior claims not being submitted to insurance timely. We are working to address these issues, and are more broadly working on improvements to our billing systems to prevent recurrence. Pursuant to our contracts with payers and standards within the industry, claims submitted outside of specified timeframes may not be reimbursed. Successful reimbursement for our laboratory testing services will continue to depend on our ability to execute our order to cash operations efficiently. At each reporting period-end, we monitor our estimates of transaction price to ensure reflection of conditions that exist at each reporting date, and while we strive to restrict volatility in our realized reimbursement rates, changes in transaction price can occur. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we identified new constraints on variable consideration that had not previously existed resulting in an adjustment to revenue.
We expect revenues to continue to increase in 2022, both from our Screening and Precision Oncology laboratory testing services. We would expect revenue from our COVID-19 testing to decline as the pandemic abates and alternative testing options become more widely available. Our revenues are affected by the test volume of our products, patient adherence rates, payer mix, the levels of reimbursement, our order to cash operations, and payment patterns of payers and patients.
Cost of sales (exclusive of amortization of acquired intangible assets). Cost of sales includes costs related to inventory production and usage, shipment of collection kits and tissue samples, royalties, and the cost of services to process tests and provide results to healthcare providers. The increase in cost of sales is primarily due to an increase in production costs, which is a direct result of an increase in completed Cologuard and Oncotype tests. The increase was partially offset by a reduction in the number of COVID-19 tests completed year over year. We expect that cost of sales (exclusive of amortization of acquired intangible assets) will continue to increase in future years as a result of an increase in production costs in line with an increase in completed Cologuard and Oncotype tests, along with a corresponding increase in personnel and support services associated with this growth.
Research and development expenses. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily due to relatively smaller intellectual property acquisitions in 2021 as compared to 2020. In 2020 we acquired Base Genomics, which resulted in an expense of $412.6 million, whereas in 2021 we spent a total of $85.3 million to acquire PFS Genomics and an exclusive license to TARDIS. The acquisitions were accounted for as asset acquisitions and are further described in Note 19 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. When excluding the impact of these asset acquisitions, research and development expenses increased by $158.8 million. The increase in research and development expenses is primarily a result of the acquisition of Thrive in January 2021, which resulted in increased direct research and development expenses, as well as an increase in personnel and stock-based compensation expenses due to the increase in headcount. We also saw an increase in clinical trial related expenses, which were driven by the BLUE-C study, as enrollment increased in 2021 following a slowdown in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and cost cutting measures that were put in place. We expect that research and development expenses will continue to increase in future years as we continue to invest in our pipeline products and the improvement of our current products, which are further discussed above in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sales and marketing expenses. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase in direct marketing spend to support the future growth of our products and increased personnel expenses and stock-based compensation as a result of an increase in headcount, including the approximately 400 former Pfizer sales representatives that were onboarded in the third quarter of 2021. In addition, professional fees increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to an increase in costs related to our Promotion Agreement with Pfizer during the second and third quarters of 2021 as compared to 2020, which were reduced due to cost saving measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in professional fees also includes the $35.9 million fee incurred in the fourth quarter of 2021 as a result of the amendment of the Promotion Agreement with Pfizer as further discussed above. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase in future years to support the expected future growth of our Cologuard, Oncotype, and pipeline products.
General and administrative expenses. The increase in general and administrative expenses was in part due to $140.6 million in acquisition and integration related costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 as part of our acquisitions completed during the year, which primarily consists of integration related stock-based compensation and professional and legal fees incurred. Personnel expenses and stock-based compensation also increased due to an increase in headcount to prepare for future growth in our operations and from our recent acquisitions. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the protective measures that were put in place, we experienced lower spend in our personnel and professional fees during the first half of 2020. As our business began to recover in the third quarter of 2020, personnel expenses and stock-based compensation increased due to additional headcount. These factors account for a portion of the increase that we see for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the prior year. We expect significant leverage in general and administrative expenses going forward, but expenses will continue to increase in future years due to an increase in headcount that will be necessary to support the growth in our existing and pipeline products.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets. Amortization of acquired intangible assets increased to $95.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $93.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets was primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of our acquisition of Ashion.
Intangible asset impairment charge. Intangible asset impairment charge was $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $209.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The impairment recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the impairment of the supply agreement intangible asset acquired as part of the combination with Genomic Health. The impairment recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to the impairment of the in-process research and development intangible asset acquired as part of the combination with Genomic Health.
Other operating income. Other operating income decreased to zero for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the funding received under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) Provider Relief Fund, which was accepted from the Department of Health & Human Services in May 2020.
Investment income, net. Investment income, net increased to $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in investment income, net was due to the realized gain of $30.5 million that was recorded on our preferred stock investment in Thrive at closing in January 2021, which represented the adjustment to our historical investment to its fair value prior to our acquisition of Thrive. Our acquisition of Thrive is further described in Note 19 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $67.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense recorded from our outstanding convertible notes totaled $16.1 million and $65.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Of the interest expense recorded on outstanding convertible notes for the year ended December 31, 2020, $50.8 million is due to the loss on settlement of convertible notes. The convertible notes are further described in Note 10 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit increased to $246.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax benefit is primarily due to an income tax benefit of $239.2 million recorded as a result of the change in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance resulting from the acquisition of Thrive.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and have historically financed our operations primarily through public offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and through revenue generated by the sale of our laboratory testing services. We expect our operating expenditures to continue to increase to support future growth of our laboratory testing services, as well as an increase in research and development and clinical trial costs to support the advancement of our pipeline products and bringing new tests to market. We expect that cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand at December 31, 2021, along with cash flows generated through our operations, will be sufficient to fund our current operations for at least the next twelve months based on current operating plans. We have access to additional financing resources, if needed, and we may raise additional capital to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments, to take advantage of financing opportunities or for other reasons. If we are unable to obtain sufficient additional funds to enable us to fund our planned operations, our results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected, and we may be required to delay the implementation of our plans or otherwise scale back our operations. There can be no certainty that we will ever be successful in generating sufficient cash flow from operations to achieve and maintain profitability and meet all of our obligations as they come due.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $315.5 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and approximately $715.0 million in marketable securities.
The majority of our investments in marketable securities consist of fixed income investments, and all are deemed available-for-sale. The objectives of this portfolio are to provide liquidity and safety of principal while striving to achieve the highest rate of return. Our investment policy limits investments to certain types of instruments issued by institutions with investment grade credit ratings and places restrictions on maturities and concentration by type and issuer.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
The increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in cash payments made related to expenses necessary to process our tests and an increase in operating expenses to prepare for future growth of our operations as further discussed above. The increase in cash used in operating activities was partially offset by an increase in revenue, which was driven by an increase in completed Cologuard and Oncotype tests.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.08 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. We purchased $1.16 billion in marketable securities, while $794.3 million of our marketable securities were sold or matured during the year. Excluding the impact of purchases, sales, and maturities of marketable securities, net cash used in investing activities consisted primarily of our acquisition of Thrive of $343.2 million, our acquisition of PreventionGenetics of $84.2 million, our acquisition of Ashion of $72.3 million, our asset acquisition of PFS Genomics of $33.1 million, and our TARDIS license asset acquisition of $25.0 million, purchases of property and equipment of $135.8 million, and investments in privately held companies of $18.0 million. Net cash used in investing activities was $702.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We purchased $1.09 billion in marketable securities, while $886.7 million of our marketable securities were sold or matured during the year. We used net cash of $411.4 million in the acquisition of Base Genomics and $6.7 million in other business combinations. We also invested $65.1 million in property and equipment and $15.9 million in investments in privately held companies.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities consisted of proceeds of $14.4 million from the exercise of stock options and $23.1 million from our employee stock purchase plan, which was partially offset by cash outflows of $23.7 million for payments on our construction loan and $5.3 million for other financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.88 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. We received proceeds of $1.13 billion from the issuance of convertible notes with a maturity date of March 1, 2028 (the “2028 Notes”), and we used $150.1 million of cash to settle a portion of the convertible notes with a maturity date of January 1, 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). We also received proceeds of $861.7 million from the sale of common stock, net of issuance costs. Additionally, we received proceeds of $27.1 million from the exercise of stock options, and $18.4 million from our employee stock purchase plan.
Material Cash Requirements
Convertible Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding aggregate principal of $2.21 billion on our convertible notes with maturity dates of January 15, 2025 (the “2025 Notes”), March 15, 2027 (the “2027 Notes”), and March 1, 2028 Notes (the "2028 Notes" and collectively, the “Notes”). The 2025 Notes have a maturity date of January 15, 2025 and an outstanding principal balance of $315.0 million. The 2027 Notes have a maturity date of March 15, 2027 and an outstanding principal balance of $747.5 million. The 2028 Notes have a maturity date of March 1, 2028 and an outstanding principal balance of $1.15 billion. The 2025 Notes, 2027 Notes, and 2028 Notes accrue interest at a fixed rate of 1.0%, 0.375%, and 0.375% per year, respectively, which is payable in cash semi-annually in arrears each year until the maturity date. See Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Until the six-months immediately preceding the maturity date of the applicable series of Notes, each series of Notes is convertible only upon the occurrence of certain events and during certain periods. The Notes will be convertible into cash, shares of our common stock (plus, if applicable, cash in lieu of any fractional share), or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. It is our intent and policy to settle all conversions through a combination settlement, consisting primarily of shares of our common stock.
Lease Commitments
We act as lessee in our lease agreements, which include operating leases for corporate offices, laboratory space, warehouse space, vehicles, and certain laboratory and office equipment, and finance leases for certain equipment and vehicles. As of December 31, 2021, we had minimum operating and finance lease payments of $262.0 million and $20.2 million, respectively. Of the outstanding operating lease obligations, $30.7 million matures in 2022, and the remaining $231.3 million will mature in periods subsequent to 2022. Of the outstanding finance lease obligations, $7.0 million matures in 2022, and the remaining $13.1 million will mature in periods subsequent to 2022. See Note 15 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Contingent Consideration
Certain of our business combinations and asset acquisitions involve potential payment of future consideration that is contingent upon the achievement of certain regulatory and product revenue milestones. A liability is recorded for the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration on the acquisition date for business combinations. A liability is recorded for the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration when the achievement of a milestone becomes probable for asset acquisitions.
As a result of the acquisition of Thrive in January 2021, an additional $450.0 million would be payable in cash to Thrive’s former shareholders upon the achievement of two discrete events, FDA approval and CMS coverage, for $150.0 million, and $300.0 million, respectively, in relation to the development and commercialization of a blood-based, multi-cancer early detection test. The projected fiscal year of payment range is from 2024 to 2027. See Note 19 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
As a result of the acquisition of Ashion in April 2021, an additional $20.0 million would be payable in cash to Ashion's former shareholders upon the commercial launch, on or before the tenth anniversary of the acquisition of Ashion, of a test for MRD detection and/or treatment. An additional $30.0 million would be payable in cash to Ashion's former shareholders upon reaching cumulative revenues of $500.0 million, on or before the fifth anniversary of the acquisition of Ashion from MRD products. See Note 19 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
As a result of the acquisition of the proprietary TARDIS technology from TGen in January 2021, an additional $45.0 million would be payable in cash to TGen upon the achievement of cumulative product revenue milestones related to MRD detection and/or treatment. Milestone payments of $10.0 million and $35.0 million would be payable upon achieving $100.0 million and $250.0 million, respectively, in cumulative revenue on or before December 31, 2030. See Note 19 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
License Agreements
We license certain technologies that are, or may be, incorporated into our technology under several license agreements, as well as the rights to commercialize certain diagnostic tests through collaboration agreements. Generally, the license agreements require us to pay single-digit royalties and sales-based milestone payments based on net revenues received using the technologies and may require minimum royalty amounts or maintenance fees.
The timing and amounts of any such royalty or milestone payments is unknown due to the uncertain nature of the product development and associated net revenues using these technologies. Refer to Note 11 and Note 19 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Capital Expenditures
We expect to continue to invest in capital expenditures to support the growth of our existing products and our research and development activities. Our current projects include the build out of additional lab and warehouse space at our existing facilities in Madison, WI and the construction of a research and development facility in Madison, WI. These projects are expected to be completed in 2022 and 2023. We also have assets under construction related to leasehold improvements, laboratory equipment, and software projects. We expect to incur approximately $200.0 million in capital expenditures in 2022.
Sources of Cash
In November 2021, we entered into a Revolving Loan Agreement with a revolving line of credit of up to $150.0 million. We believe that our anticipated income from operations, cash and marketable securities on hand, and borrowing capacity under our line of credit will be adequate to meet these short-term and long-term commitments. However, we may need to raise additional capital to fully fund our current strategic plan and and meet our commitments. We continuously evaluate our liquidity and capital resources, including access to external capital, in light of current economic and market conditions and our operational performance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal, state, and foreign NOL carryforwards of approximately $2.15 billion, $1.04 billion, and $15.9 million, respectively. We also had federal and state research tax credit carryforwards of approximately $63.0 million and $39.8 million, respectively. The net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards will expire at various dates through 2040, if not utilized. The Internal Revenue Code and applicable state laws impose substantial restrictions on a corporation’s utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards if an ownership change is deemed to have occurred. Additionally, tax law limitations may result in our NOLs expiring before we have the ability to use them. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (H.R. 1) of 2017 limits the deduction for NOLs to 80% of current year taxable income and provides for an indefinite carryover period for federal NOLs. Both provisions are applicable for losses arising in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.32 billion of NOLs incurred after December 31, 2017. For these reasons, even if we attain profitability our ability to utilize our NOLs may be limited, potentially significantly so.
A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not these items will either expire before we are able to realize their benefit, or that future deductibility is uncertain. In general, companies that have a history of operating losses are faced with a difficult burden of proof on their ability to generate sufficient future income in order to realize the benefit of the deferred tax assets. We have recorded a valuation against our deferred tax assets based on our history of losses and current uncertainty as to timing of future taxable income. Given the future limitations on and expiration of certain Federal and State deferred tax assets, the recording of a valuation allowance resulted in a deferred tax liability of approximately $28.8 million remaining at the end of 2021, which is included in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we believe that the following judgments are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenues when we release a result to the ordering healthcare provider, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to collect in exchange for those services. The amount of revenue we recognize is based on the established billing rates less contractual and other adjustments, which yields the unconstrained amount that we expect to ultimately collect.
We determine the amount we expect to ultimately collect using historical collections, established reimbursement rates, and other adjustments. Any changes in these inputs would ultimately impact the amount of revenue recognized during the period. The expected amount is typically lower than, if applicable, the agreed-upon reimbursement amount due to several factors, such as the amount of any patient co-payments, out-of-network payers, the existence of secondary payers, and claim denials. The consideration derived from our contracts is fixed when we contract with a direct bill payer. Our ability to collect is not contingent on the customer’s ability to collect through their downstream billing efforts.
In the case of some of our agreements, the right to bill and collect exists prior to the receipt of a specimen and release of a test result to the ordering healthcare provider, which results in deferred revenue. The deferred revenue balance is generally relieved upon the release of the applicable patient’s test result to the ordering healthcare provider or as of the date the customer has surpassed the window of time in which they are able to exercise their rights for testing services. We believe these points in time represent our fulfillment of our obligations to the customer.
The quality of our billing operations, most notably those activities that relate to obtaining the correct information in order to bill effectively for services provided, directly impacts the collectability of our receivables and revenue estimates. As such, we continually assess the state of our order to cash operations in order to identify areas of risk and opportunity that allow us to appropriately estimate receivables and revenue. Upon ultimate collection, the aggregate amount received from payers and patients where reimbursement was estimated is compared to previous collection estimates and, if necessary, the transaction price is adjusted. Finally, should we later determine the judgments underlying estimated collections change, our financial results could be negatively impacted in future quarters.
Tax Positions. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets reported if, based on the weight of the evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We compute our provision for income taxes based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions that we operate. Judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our annual tax provision.
We have incurred significant losses since our inception and due to the uncertainty of the amount and timing of future taxable income, it may be necessary to record an allowance to reduce the tax assets we have recognized.
Management has determined that a valuation allowance of $262.2 million and $293.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively is necessary to reduce the tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Due to the existence of the valuation allowance, future changes in our unrecognized tax benefits will not impact our effective tax rate.
Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions. We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. Goodwill is the residual after allocating the purchase price to net assets acquired, unless the transaction is an asset acquisition in which the excess is allocated to acquired assets on a relative fair value basis. Determining the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities, particularly intangible assets, requires management to make significant judgements and estimates.
As a result of the acquisitions of Ashion and PreventionGenetics, we identified developed technology intangibles which we determined to have a fair value of $39.0 million and $64.0 million, respectively. Key assumptions used to value developed technology include projected revenue growth, projected gross margin and operating expenses, discount rates, terminal growth rate, and other factors. We believe that the estimates applied are based on reasonable assumptions, but the estimates are inherently uncertain. As a result, the actual results may differ from the assumptions and judgments used to determine fair value of the assets acquired, which could result in material impairment charges in the future. Determining the useful life of the developed technology also requires judgment and actual useful life may differ.
As a result of the acquisition of Thrive, we recorded an in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) asset of $1.25 billion. There are major risks and uncertainties associated with IPR&D due to the regulatory approvals needed, which rely on the success of clinical trials that demonstrate product effectiveness. Key assumptions used to calculate the fair value of the IPR&D asset included inputs such as projected revenues, gross margin, required rate of return, tax rate, probability of commercial success, and obsolescence factor. We believe that the estimates applied are based on reasonable assumptions, but the estimates are inherently uncertain. As a result, the eventual realized value of the IPR&D project may vary from its fair value at the date of acquisition, and material IPR&D impairment charges may occur in future periods.
Business Combinations may include contingent consideration to be paid based on the occurrence of future events, such as the achievement of certain development, regulatory and sales milestones. Contingent consideration is a financial liability recorded at fair value at the acquisition date. The estimate of fair value contains uncertainties as it involves judgement about the likelihood and timing of achieving milestones as well as the present-value factor. We recorded contingent consideration liabilities of $352.0 million and $19.0 million as a result of the Thrive and Ashion acquisitions, respectively.
Remeasurement of Contingent Consideration. We remeasure the fair value of outstanding contingent consideration liabilities at each reporting period. The estimate of fair value contains uncertainties as it involves judgement about the likelihood and timing of achieving milestones as well as the present-value factor. A change in the probability of success assumption could have a material impact on the estimated fair value.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived Assets. We test indefinite-lived assets for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Based on the qualitative assessment, if it is determined that the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets is more likely than not to be less than its carrying amount, the fair value will be calculated and compared with its carrying amount and an impairment charge will be recognized for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value. Determining whether impairment indicators exist and estimating the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets if necessary for impairment testing requires significant judgment. We performed our annual goodwill assessment using a qualitative assessment and concluded there were no impairments. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment included industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors. We also performed our annual IPR&D assessment using a qualitative assessment and concluded there were no impairments for the year ended December 31, 2021. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment included industry and market conditions, financial and strategic factors, the status of product development, and the consideration of legal, competitive, regulatory, and technical risks. We recorded an impairment charge of $200.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the IPR&D acquired as part of the combination with Genomic Health due to the abandonment of further development of the IPR&D.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We evaluate the fair value of long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets, and investments in privately held companies, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of the assets may not be fully recoverable. The review of qualitative factors requires significant judgement. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. We recorded an impairment charge of $20.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the supply agreement intangible asset acquired as part of the combination with Genomic Health. We utilized the income approach to measure the fair value of the supply agreement which required management to make estimates including revenue projections, estimated cash flows and discount rate. We recorded an impairment charge of $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the patent intangible asset acquired as part of an asset purchase agreement with Armune Biosciences, Inc. due to the abandonment of the research and development activities using the acquired assets. We believe that the estimates applied are based on reasonable assumptions, but the estimates are inherently uncertain. As a result, the eventual realized value of the impaired asset may vary from its fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for the discussion of Recent Accounting Pronouncements.