Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollars in millions except per share data, unless otherwise noted)
Exelon
Executive Overview
As of December 31, 2021, Exelon was a utility services holding company engaged in the generation, delivery, and marketing of energy through Generation and the energy distribution and transmission businesses through ComEd, PECO, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE.
Exelon has eleven reportable segments consisting of Generation’s five reportable segments (Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT, and Other Power Regions), ComEd, PECO, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE. See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5 - Segment Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding Exelon's principal subsidiaries and reportable segments.
Exelon’s consolidated financial information includes the results of its seven separate operating subsidiary registrants, ComEd, PECO, BGE, PHI, Pepco, DPL, and ACE and its subsidiary Generation. The following combined Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations summarizes results for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, and is separately filed by Exelon, ComEd, PECO, BGE, PHI, Pepco, DPL, and ACE. However, none of the Registrants makes any representation as to information related solely to any of the other Registrants. For discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS in the 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
COVID-19. The Registrants have taken steps to mitigate the potential risks posed by the global outbreak (pandemic) of COVID-19. The Registrants provide a critical service to our customers which means that it is paramount that we keep our employees who operate our businesses safe and minimize unnecessary risk of exposure to the virus by taking extra precautions for employees who work in the field and in our facilities. The Registrants have implemented work from home policies where appropriate, and imposed travel limitations on employees.
The Registrants continue to implement strong physical and cyber-security measures to ensure that our systems remain functional in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and keep them running to ensure uninterrupted service to our customers.
There were no changes in internal control over financial reporting as a result of COVID-19 that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, any of the Registrants’ internal control over financial reporting. See ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES for additional information.
Unfavorable economic conditions due to COVID-19 resulted in an estimated reduction to Exelon’s Net income of approximately $245 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The impact was not material for the year ended December 31, 2021. To offset the unfavorable impacts from COVID-19, Exelon identified approximately $250 million in cost savings in 2020. The cost savings achieved in 2020 were higher than originally anticipated.
The Registrants assessed long-lived assets, goodwill, and investments for recoverability and there were no material impairment charges recorded in 2020 or 2021 as a result of COVID-19. See Note 12 - Asset Impairments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to other impairment assessments.
The Registrants will continue to monitor developments affecting their workforce, customers, and suppliers and will take additional precautions that they determine to be necessary in order to mitigate the impacts. The Registrants cannot predict the full extent of the impacts of COVID-19, which will depend on, among other things, the rate, and public perceptions of the effectiveness, of vaccinations and rate of resumption of business activity.
Financial Results of Operations
GAAP Results of Operations. The following table sets forth Exelon's GAAP consolidated Net Income attributable to common shareholders by Registrant or subsidiary for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. For additional information regarding the financial results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 see the discussions of Results of Operations by Registrant or subsidiary.
__________
(a)Primarily includes eliminating and consolidating adjustments, Exelon’s corporate operations, shared service entities, and other financing and investing activities.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020. Net income attributable to common shareholders decreased by $257 million and diluted earnings per average common share decreased to $1.74 in 2021 from $2.01 in 2020 primarily due to:
•Impacts of the February 2021 extreme cold weather event;
•Accelerated depreciation and amortization associated with Generation's previous decision in the third quarter of 2020 to early retire Byron and Dresden nuclear facilities in 2021, a decision which was reversed on September 15, 2021, and Generation's decision in the third quarter of 2020 to early retire Mystic Units 8 and 9 in 2024;
•Decommissioning-related activities that were not offset for the Byron units beginning in the second quarter of 2021 through September 15, 2021. With Generation's September 15, 2021 reversal of the previous decision to retire Byron, Generation resumed contractual offset for Byron as of that date;
•Impairments at Generation of the New England asset group, the Albany Green Energy biomass facility, and a wind project, partially offset by the absence of an impairment of the New England asset group in the third quarter of 2020;
•Higher net unrealized and realized losses on equity investments; and
•The absence of prior year one-time tax settlements.
The decreases were partially offset by;
•Higher electric distribution earnings from higher rate base and higher allowed ROE due to an increase in treasury rates at ComEd;
•The favorable impacts of the multi-year plan at BGE and Pepco and regulatory rate increases at DPL and ACE;
•Favorable weather conditions at PECO and DPL's Delaware service territory;
•Favorable volume at PECO and ACE;
•Lower storm costs at PECO and DPL due to the absence of the June 2020 and August 2020 storms, respectively;
•Lower operating and maintenance expense at ComEd due to the payments that ComEd made in 2020 under the Deferred Prosecution Agreement;
•Higher mark-to-market gains;
•Higher net unrealized and realized gains on NDT funds;
•Absence of one time charges recorded in the third quarter of 2020 associated with Generation's decision to early retire the Byron and Dresden nuclear facilities and Mystic Units 8 and 9, and the reversal of one-time charges resulting from the reversal of the previous decision to early retire Byron and Dresden on September 15, 2021;
•Favorable sales and hedges of excess emission credits;
•Favorable commodity prices on fuel hedges;
•Lower nuclear fuel costs due to accelerated amortization of nuclear fuel and lower prices; and
•Higher New York ZEC revenues due to higher generation and an increase in ZEC prices.
Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings. In addition to net income, Exelon evaluates its operating performance using the measure of Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings because management believes it represents earnings directly related to the ongoing operations of the business. Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings exclude certain costs, expenses, gains and losses, and other specified items. This information is intended to enhance an investor’s overall understanding of year-to-year operating results and provide an indication of Exelon’s baseline operating performance excluding items that are considered by management to be not directly related to the ongoing operations of the business. In addition, this information is among the primary indicators management uses as a basis for evaluating performance, allocating resources, setting incentive compensation targets, and planning and forecasting of future periods. Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings is not a presentation defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to other companies’ presentations or deemed more useful than the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this report.
The following table provides a reconciliation between Net income attributable to common shareholders as determined in accordance with GAAP and Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020:
__________
Note:
Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
Unless otherwise noted, the income tax impact of each reconciling item between GAAP Net Income and Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings is based on the marginal statutory federal and state income tax rates for each Registrant, taking into account whether the income or expense item is taxable or deductible, respectively, in whole or in part. For all items except the unrealized gains and losses related to NDT funds, the marginal statutory income tax rates for 2021 and 2020 ranged from 25.0% to 29.0%. Under IRS regulations, NDT fund investment returns are taxed at different rates for investments if they are in qualified or non-qualified funds. The effective tax rates for the unrealized gains and losses related to NDT funds were 50.4% and 52.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(a)Reflects the impact of net unrealized gains and losses on Generation’s NDT fund investments for Non-Regulatory Agreement Units.
(b)In 2021, reflects an impairment of the New England asset group, an impairment recorded as a result of the agreement to sell the Albany Green Energy biomass facility, and an impairment of a wind project at Generation. In 2020, reflects an impairment at ComEd related to the acquisition of transmission assets and an impairment of the New England asset group in the third quarter of 2020 at Generation.
(c)In 2021, primarily reflects accelerated depreciation and amortization associated with Generation's decisions to early retire Byron, Dresden, and Mystic Units 8 and 9, partially offset by reversal of one-time charges resulting from the reversal of the previous decision to retire Byron and Dresden on September 15, 2021 and a gain on sale of Generation's solar business. Depreciation for Byron and Dresden was adjusted beginning September 15, 2021 to reflect the extended useful life estimates. In 2020, primarily reflects one-time charges and accelerated depreciation and amortization expenses
associated with Generation’s decisions in the third quarter of 2020 to early retire Byron and Dresden nuclear facilities in 2021 and Mystic Units 8 and 9 in 2024.
(d)Primarily represents reorganization and severance costs related to cost management programs.
(e)For Generation, reflects an adjustment to the nuclear asset obligation for the Non-Regulatory Agreement Units resulting from the annual update in the third quarter of 2021 and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively.
(f)Represents direct costs related to COVID-19 consisting primarily of costs to acquire personal protective equipment, costs for cleaning supplies and services, and costs to hire healthcare professionals to monitor the health of employees.
(g)Reflects the payments made by ComEd under the Deferred Prosecution Agreement, which ComEd entered in July 2020 with the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Illinois.
(h)Reflects costs related to the acquisition of EDF's interest in CENG, which was completed in the third quarter of 2021.
(i)Reflects costs related to a multi-year Enterprise Resource Program (ERP) system implementation.
(j)Represents costs related to the separation primarily comprised of system-related costs, third-party costs paid to advisors, consultants, lawyers, and other experts assisting in the planned separation, and employee-related severance costs.
(k)Decommissioning-related activities for the former ComEd and PECO units (Regulatory Agreement Units), net of applicable taxes, including realized and unrealized gains and losses on the NDT funds, depreciation of the ARC, and accretion of the decommissioning obligation, are generally offset within Exelon’s consolidated statements of operations. These costs reflect the impact of suspension of contractual offset for the Byron units beginning in the second quarter of 2021 through September 15, 2021. With Generation's September 15, 2021 reversal of the previous decision to retire Byron, Generation resumed contractual offset for Byron as of that date.
(l)In 2021, primarily reflects the recognition of a valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset associated with Delaware net operating loss carryforwards due to a change in Delaware tax law. In 2021 and 2020, also reflects the adjustment to deferred income taxes due to changes in forecasted apportionment.
(m)Represents elimination from Generation’s results of the noncontrolling interests related to certain exclusion items, primarily related to unrealized gains and losses on NDT fund investments for CENG units prior to Generation's acquisition of EDF's interest in CENG on August 6, 2021 and the noncontrolling interest portion of a wind project impairment.
Significant 2021 Transactions and Developments
Separation
On February 21, 2021, Exelon’s Board of Directors approved a plan to separate the Utility Registrants and Generation, creating two publicly traded companies with the resources necessary to best serve customers and sustain long-term investment and operating excellence ("the separation"). The separation gives each company the financial and strategic independence to focus on its specific customer needs, while executing its core business strategy. Exelon completed the separation on February 1, 2022. The new publicly traded company is Constellation Energy Corporation. See Note 26 - Separation of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In connection with the separation, Exelon incurred transaction costs of $122 million on a pre-tax basis for the year ended December 31, 2021, which are recorded in Operating and maintenance expense. Exelon expects to incur incremental transaction costs of approximately $90 million in 2022. These costs are excluded from Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings. The transaction costs are primarily comprised of system-related costs, third-party costs paid to advisors, consultants, lawyers, and other experts assisting in the separation, and employee-related severance costs.
CENG Put Option
EDF had the option to sell its 49.99% equity interest in CENG to Generation exercisable beginning on January 1, 2016 and thereafter until June 30, 2022. On November 20, 2019, Generation received notice of EDF’s intention to exercise the put option and sell its 49.99% equity interest in CENG to Generation and the put automatically exercised on January 19, 2020 at the end of the sixty-day advance notice period. On August 6, 2021, Generation and EDF entered into a settlement agreement pursuant to which Generation, through a wholly owned subsidiary, purchased EDF’s equity interest in CENG for a net purchase price of $885 million, which includes, among other things, an adjustment for EDF’s share of the balance of the preferred distribution payable by CENG to Generation. The difference between the net purchase price and EDF’s noncontrolling interest as of the closing date was recorded to Common Stock in Exelon’s Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In connection with the settlement agreement, on August 6, 2021, Generation issued approximately $880 million under a term loan credit agreement to fund the transaction, which will expire on August 5, 2022.
See Note Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions and Note 17 - Debt and Credit Agreements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Clean Energy Law
On September 15, 2021, the Illinois Public Act 102-0662 was signed into law by the Governor of Illinois (“Clean Energy Law”). The Clean Energy Law is designed to achieve 100% carbon-free power by 2045 to enable the state’s transition to a clean energy economy. The Clean Energy Law establishes decarbonization requirements for Illinois as well as programs to support the retention and development of emissions-free sources of electricity. Among other things, the Clean Energy Law authorized the IPA to procure up to 54.5 million CMCs from qualifying nuclear plants for a five-year period beginning on June 1, 2022 through May 31, 2027. CMCs are credits for the carbon-free attributes of eligible nuclear power plants in PJM. The Byron, Dresden, and Braidwood nuclear plants located in Illinois participated in the CMC procurement process and were awarded contracts that commit each plant to operate through May 31, 2027. Pursuant to these contracts, ComEd will procure CMCs based upon the number of MWhs produced annually by each plant, subject to minimum performance requirements. ComEd is required to purchase CMCs pursuant to these contracts and all its costs of doing so will be recovered through a new rider.
Following enactment of the Clean Energy Law, Generation announced on September 15, 2021, that it has reversed the previous decision to retire Byron and Dresden given the opportunity for additional revenue. In addition, Generation no longer considers the Braidwood or LaSalle nuclear plants to be at risk for premature retirement. See Note 7 - Early Plant Retirements of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and Early Retirement of Generation Facilities below.
The Clean Energy Law also contains requirements associated with ComEd’s transition away from the performance-based electric distribution formula rate. The law authorizing that rate setting process sunsets at the end of 2022. The Clean Energy Law, and tariffs adopted under it, governs both the remaining reconciliations of rates set under that process and requires ComEd to file in 2023 its choice of either a general rate case or a four-year multi-year plan to set rates that take effect in 2024. If ComEd elects to file a multi-year plan, that plan would set rates for 2024 - 2027, based on forecasted revenue requirements and an ICC determined rate of return on rate base, including the cost of common equity. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and other features of the Clean Energy Law.
Early Retirement of Generation Facilities
In August 2020, Generation announced the intention to retire the Byron Generating Station in September 2021, Dresden Generating Station in November 2021, and Mystic Units 8 and 9 at the expiration of the cost of service commitment in May 2024. As a result, Exelon recognized a $500 million pre-tax impairment for the New England asset group along with certain one-time charges in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 in addition to ongoing annual financial impacts stemming from shortening the expected economic useful lives of these facilities, primarily related to accelerated depreciation of plant assets (including any ARC) and accelerated amortization of nuclear fuel.
In the second quarter of 2021, an incremental decline in value resulted in an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $350 million for the New England asset group.
Exelon recorded pre-tax charges of $53 million and $140 million, in the second and third quarters of 2021, respectively, for decommissioning-related activities that were not offset for the Byron units due to the inability to recognize a regulatory asset at ComEd.
On September 15, 2021, Generation reversed the previous decision to early retire Byron and Dresden and the expected economic useful life for both facilities was updated to 2044 and 2046 for Byron Units 1 and 2, respectively, and to 2029 and 2031 for Dresden Units 2 and 3, respectively. Depreciation was therefore adjusted beginning September 15, 2021, to reflect these extended useful life estimates. In addition, in the third quarter of 2021, Exelon reversed approximately $81 million of severance benefit costs and $13 million of other one-time charges initially recorded in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 associated with the early retirements.
All of the charges were excluded from Exelon's Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings.
Exelon recognized pre-tax expenses for Byron, Dresden, and Mystic Units 8 and 9 of $1,458 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to accelerated depreciation and amortization of plant assets, partially offset by the reversal of one-time charges for Byron and Dresden.
See Note 7 - Early Plant Retirements, Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations, and Note 12 - Asset Impairments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Impacts of the February 2021 Extreme Cold Weather Event and Texas-based Generating Assets Outages
Beginning on February 15, 2021, Generation’s Texas-based generating assets within the ERCOT market, specifically Colorado Bend II, Wolf Hollow II, and Handley, experienced outages as a result of extreme cold weather conditions. In addition, those weather conditions drove increased demand for service, dramatically increased wholesale power prices, and also increased gas prices in certain regions.
The estimated impact to Exelon’s Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 arising from these market and weather conditions was a reduction of approximately $800 million. The ultimate impact to Exelon’s consolidated financial statements may be affected by a number of factors, including the impacts of customer and counterparty defaults and recoveries, any additional solutions to address the financial challenges caused by the event, and related litigation and contract disputes. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters and Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
To offset a portion of the unfavorable impacts, Exelon identified between $410 million and $490 million of enhanced revenue opportunities, deferral of selected non-essential maintenance, and primarily one-time cost savings, primarily at Generation, which was achieved in 2021.
Agreement for the Sale of a Generation Biomass Facility
On April 28, 2021, Generation and ReGenerate Energy Holdings, LLC ("ReGenerate") entered into a purchase agreement, under which ReGenerate agreed to purchase Generation's interest in the Albany Green Energy biomass facility. As a result, in the second quarter of 2021, Exelon recorded a pre-tax impairment charge of $140 million which is excluded from Exelon’s Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings. The sale was completed on June 30, 2021 for a net purchase price of $36 million. Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Utility Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
The Utility Registrants file base rate cases with their regulatory commissions seeking increases or decreases to their electric transmission and distribution, and gas distribution rates to recover their costs and earn a fair return on their investments. The outcomes of these regulatory proceedings impact the Utility Registrants’ current and future financial statements.
The following tables show the Utility Registrants’ completed and pending distribution base rate case proceedings in 2021. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these and other regulatory proceedings.
Completed Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
Pending Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
Transmission Formula Rates
The following total increases/(decreases) were included in the Utility Registrants' 2021 annual electric transmission formula rate updates. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other Key Business Drivers and Management Strategies
Utility Rates and Rate Proceedings
The Utility Registrants file rate cases with their regulatory commissions seeking increases or decreases to their electric transmission and distribution, and gas distribution rates to recover their costs and earn a fair return on their investments. The outcomes of these regulatory proceedings impact the Utility Registrants’ current and future results of operations, cash flows, and financial positions. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these regulatory proceedings.
Legislative and Regulatory Developments
FERC Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
On April 15, 2021, FERC issued a Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NOPR) proposing to modify the current regulation permitting a continuous 50-basis-point ROE incentive adder for a transmission utility that joins and remains a member of a RTO. Under the NOPR, the ROE incentive adder would only be available for a period of up to three years after a transmission utility newly joins a RTO and all existing ROE incentive adders would end for transmission utilities that have been members for three or more years. The Utility Registrants’ existing transmission rates include the ROE incentive adder. Exelon submitted comments to FERC on this matter on June 25, 2021. Exelon cannot predict the outcome, but a final rule as proposed could have an adverse impact to the Registrants’ financial statements. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Utility Registrants’ transmission formula rates and regulatory proceedings at FERC.
City of Chicago Franchise Agreement
ComEd has had a Franchise Agreement with the City of Chicago (the City) since 1992. The Franchise Agreement grants rights to use the public right of way to install, maintain, and operate the wires, poles, and other infrastructure required to deliver electricity to residents and businesses across the City. The Franchise Agreement became terminable on one year notice as of December 31, 2020. It now continues in effect indefinitely unless and until either party issues a notice of termination, effective one year later, or it is replaced by mutual agreement with a new franchise agreement between ComEd and the City. If either party terminates and no new agreement is reached between the parties, the parties could continue with ComEd providing electric services within the City with no franchise agreement in place. The City also has an option to terminate and purchase the ComEd system (“municipalize”), which also requires one year notice. Neither party has issued a
notice of termination at this time, the City has not exercised its municipalization option, and no new agreement has been reached. Accordingly, the 1992 Franchise Agreement remains in effect at this time. In April 2021, the City invited interested parties to respond to a Request for Information (RFI) regarding the franchise for electricity delivery. Under this process, the City could choose to terminate the ComEd Franchise Agreement on one year notice and grant a franchise to another party instead. Final responses to the RFI were due on July 30, 2021, however, on July 29, 2021, the City chose to extend the final submission deadline to September 30, 2021. ComEd submitted its response to the RFI by the due date and looks forward to continuing engagement with the City about its response. While Exelon and ComEd cannot predict the ultimate outcome of the RFI and the Franchise Agreement, fundamental changes in the agreement or other adverse actions affecting ComEd’s business in the City would require changes in their business planning models and operations and could have a material adverse impact on Exelon’s and ComEd’s consolidated financial statements. If the City were to disconnect from the ComEd system, ComEd would seek full compensation for the business and its associated property taken by the City, as well as for all damages resulting to ComEd and its system. ComEd would also seek appropriate compensation for stranded costs with FERC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect results of operations and the amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the financial statements. Management believes that the accounting policies described below require significant judgment in their application or incorporate estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Additional information on the application of these accounting policies can be found in the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Nuclear Decommissioning Asset Retirement Obligations (Exelon)
Exelon recorded AROs associated with decommissioning Generation's nuclear units of $12.7 billion at December 31, 2021. The authoritative guidance requires that Generation estimate its obligation for the future decommissioning of its nuclear generating plants. To estimate that liability, Generation uses an internally-developed, probability-weighted, discounted cash flow model which, on a unit-by-unit basis, considers multiple decommissioning outcome scenarios.
As a result of nuclear plant retirements in the industry, in recent years, nuclear operators and third-party service providers are obtaining more information about costs associated with decommissioning activities. At the same time, regulators are gaining more information about decommissioning activities which could result in changes to existing decommissioning requirements. In addition, as more nuclear plants are retired, it is possible that technological advances will be identified that could create efficiencies and lead to a reduction in decommissioning costs. The amount of NDT funds could also impact the timing of the decommissioning activities. Additionally, certain factors such as changes in regulatory requirements during plant operations or the profitability of a nuclear plant could impact the timing of plant retirements.
The nuclear decommissioning obligation is adjusted on a regular basis due to the passage of time and revisions to the key assumptions for the expected timing and/or estimated amounts of the future undiscounted cash flows required to decommission the nuclear plants, based upon the following methodologies and significant estimates and assumptions:
Decommissioning Cost Studies. Generation uses unit-by-unit decommissioning cost studies to provide a marketplace assessment of the expected costs (in current year dollars) and timing of decommissioning activities, which are validated by comparison to current decommissioning projects within the industry and other estimates. Decommissioning cost studies are updated, on a rotational basis, for each of Generation’s nuclear units at least every five years, unless circumstances warrant more frequent updates. As part of the annual cost study update process, Generation evaluates newly assumed costs or substantive changes in previously assumed costs to determine if the cost estimate impacts are sufficiently material to warrant application of the updated estimates to the AROs across the nuclear fleet outside of the normal five-year rotating cost study update cycle.
Cost Escalation Factors. Generation uses cost escalation factors to escalate the decommissioning costs from the decommissioning cost studies discussed above through the assumed decommissioning period for each of the units. Cost escalation studies, updated on an annual basis, are used to determine escalation factors, and are
based on inflation indices for labor, equipment and materials, energy, LLRW disposal, and other costs. All the nuclear AROs are adjusted each year for updated cost escalation factors.
Probabilistic Cash Flow Models. Generation’s probabilistic cash flow models include the assignment of probabilities to various scenarios for decommissioning cost levels, decommissioning approaches, and timing of plant shutdown on a unit-by-unit basis. Probabilities assigned to cost levels include an assessment of the likelihood of costs 20% higher (high-cost scenario) or 15% lower (low-cost scenario) than the base cost scenario. The assumed decommissioning scenarios generally include the following three alternatives: (1) DECON, which assumes major decommissioning activities begin shortly after the cessation of operation, (2) Shortened SAFSTOR, which generally assumes a 30-year delay prior to onset of major decommissioning activities, and (3) SAFSTOR, which assumes the nuclear facility is placed and maintained in such condition during decommissioning so that the nuclear facility can be safely stored and subsequently decontaminated within 60 years after cessation of operations. In each decommissioning scenario, spent fuel is transferred to dry cask storage as soon as possible until DOE acceptance for disposal.
The actual decommissioning approach selected once a nuclear facility is shutdown will be determined by Generation at the time of shutdown and may be influenced by multiple factors including the funding status of the NDT funds at the time of shutdown and regulatory or other commitments.
The assumed plant shutdown timing scenarios include the following four alternatives: (1) the probability of operating through the original 40-year nuclear license term, (2) the probability of operating through an initial 20-year license renewal term, (3) the probability of a second, 20-year license renewal term, and (4) the probability of early plant retirement for certain sites due to changing market conditions and regulatory environments. As power market and regulatory environment developments occur, Generation evaluates and incorporates, as necessary, the impacts of such developments into its nuclear ARO assumptions and estimates.
Generation’s probabilistic cash flow models also include an assessment of the timing of DOE acceptance of SNF for disposal. Generation currently assumes DOE will begin accepting SNF from the industry in 2035. The SNF acceptance date assumption is based on management’s estimates of the amount of time required for DOE to select a site location and develop the necessary infrastructure for long-term SNF storage. For additional information regarding SNF, see Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Discount Rates. The probability-weighted estimated future cash flows for the various assumed scenarios are discounted using credit-adjusted, risk-free rates (CARFR). Generation initially recognizes an ARO at fair value and subsequently adjusts it for changes to estimated costs, timing of future cash flows and modifications to decommissioning assumptions. The ARO is not required or permitted to be re-measured for changes in the CARFR that occur in isolation. Increases in the ARO due to upward revisions in estimated undiscounted cash flows are considered new obligations and are measured using a current CARFR as the increase creates a new cost layer within the ARO. Any decrease in the estimated undiscounted future cash flows relating to the ARO are treated as a modification of an existing ARO cost layer and, therefore, are measured using the average historical CARFR rates used in creating the initial ARO cost layers. If all of Generation's future nominal cash flows associated with the ARO were to be discounted at the current prevailing CARFR, the obligation would increase from approximately $12.7 billion to approximately $16.0 billion.
The following table illustrates the significant impact that changes in the CARFR, when combined with changes in projected amounts and expected timing of cash flows, can have on the valuation of the ARO:
ARO Sensitivities. Changes in the assumptions underlying the ARO could materially affect the decommissioning obligation. The impact of a change in any one of these assumptions to the ARO is highly dependent on how the other assumptions may correspondingly change.
The following table illustrates the effects of changing certain ARO assumptions while holding all other assumptions constant:
__________
(a)Excludes any sites in which management has committed to a specific decommissioning approach.
(b)Excludes any retired sites.
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding accounting for nuclear AROs.
Goodwill (Exelon, ComEd, and PHI)
As of December 31, 2021, Exelon’s $6.7 billion carrying amount of goodwill consists primarily of $2.6 billion at ComEd and $4 billion at PHI. These entities are required to perform an assessment for possible impairment of their goodwill at least annually or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting units below their carrying amount. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (known as a component) and is the level at which goodwill is assessed for impairment. ComEd has a single operating segment and reporting unit. PHI’s operating segments and reporting units are Pepco, DPL, and ACE. See Note 5 - Segment Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Exelon's and ComEd’s goodwill has been assigned entirely to the ComEd reporting unit. Exelon's and PHI’s goodwill has been assigned to the Pepco, DPL, and ACE reporting units in the amounts of $2.1 billion, $1.4 billion, and $0.5 billion, respectively. See Note 13 - Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Entities assessing goodwill for impairment have the option of first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative assessment is necessary. As part of the qualitative assessments, Exelon, ComEd, and PHI evaluate, among other things, management's best estimate of projected operating and capital cash flows for their businesses, outcomes of recent regulatory proceedings, changes in certain market conditions, including the discount rate and regulated utility peer EBITDA multiples, and the passing margin from their last quantitative assessments performed.
Application of the goodwill impairment assessment requires management judgment, including the identification of reporting units and determining the fair value of the reporting unit, which management estimates using a weighted combination of a discounted cash flow analysis and a market multiples analysis. Significant assumptions used in these fair value analyses include discount and growth rates, utility sector market performance and transactions, and projected operating and capital cash flows for ComEd’s, Pepco's, DPL's, and ACE's businesses and the fair value of debt.
While the 2021 annual assessments indicated no impairments, certain assumptions used in the assessment are highly sensitive to changes. Adverse regulatory actions or changes in significant assumptions could potentially result in future impairments of Exelon’s, ComEd's, or PHI’s goodwill, which could be material.
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 13 - Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Unamortized Energy Contract Assets and Liabilities (Exelon and PHI)
Unamortized energy contract assets and liabilities represent the remaining unamortized balances of non-derivative energy contracts that Generation has acquired and the electricity contracts Exelon acquired as part of the PHI merger. The initial amount recorded represents the difference between the fair value of the contracts at the time of acquisition and the contract value based on the terms of each contract. At Exelon and PHI, offsetting regulatory assets or liabilities were also recorded for those energy contract costs that are probable of recovery or refund through customer rates. The unamortized energy contract assets and liabilities and any corresponding regulatory assets or liabilities, respectively, are amortized over the life of the contract in relation to the expected realization of the underlying cash flows. Amortization of the unamortized energy contract assets and liabilities are recorded through purchased power and fuel expense or operating revenues, depending on the nature of the underlying contract. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters and Note 13 - Intangible Assets of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets (Exelon)
Exelon regularly monitors and evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of those assets may not be recoverable. Indicators of potential impairment may include a deteriorating business climate, including, but not limited to, declines in energy prices, condition of the asset, or plans to dispose of a long-lived asset significantly before the end of its useful life.
The review of long-lived assets or asset groups for impairment utilizes significant assumptions about operating strategies and estimates of future cash flows, which require assessments of current and projected market conditions. For Generation, forecasting future cash flows requires assumptions regarding forecasted commodity prices for the sale of power and purchases of fuel and the expected operations of assets. A variation in the assumptions used could lead to a different conclusion regarding the recoverability of an asset or asset group. An impairment evaluation is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level at which cash flows of the long-lived assets or asset groups are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. For Generation, the lowest level of independent cash flows is determined by the evaluation of several factors, including the geographic dispatch of the generation units and the hedging strategies related to those units. The cash flows from the generating units are generally evaluated at a regional portfolio level given the interdependency of cash flows generated from the customer supply and risk management activities within each region. In certain cases, the generating assets may be evaluated on an individual basis where those assets are contracted on a long-term basis with a third party and operations are independent of other generating assets (typically contracted renewables).
On a quarterly basis, Generation assesses its long-lived assets or asset groups for indicators of potential impairment. If indicators are present for a long-lived asset or asset group, a comparison of the undiscounted expected future cash flows to the carrying value is performed. When the undiscounted cash flow analysis indicates the carrying value of a long-lived asset or asset group may not be recoverable, the amount of the impairment loss is determined by measuring the excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group over its fair value. The fair value of the long-lived asset or asset group is dependent upon a market participant’s view of the exit price of the asset or asset groups. This includes significant assumptions of the estimated future cash flows generated by the asset or asset groups and market discount rates. Events and circumstances often do not occur as expected, resulting in differences between prospective financial information and actual results, which may be material. The determination of fair value is driven by both internal assumptions that include significant unobservable inputs (Level 3), such as revenue and generation forecasts, projected capital, maintenance expenditures, and discount rates, as well as information from various public, financial and industry sources.
See Note 12 - Asset Impairments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of asset impairment assessments.
Depreciable Lives of Property, Plant, and Equipment (All Registrants)
The Registrants have significant investments in electric generation assets and electric and natural gas transmission and distribution assets. These assets are generally depreciated on a straight-line basis, using the group, composite, or unitary methods of depreciation. The group approach is typically for groups of similar assets
that have approximately the same useful lives and the composite approach is used for heterogeneous assets that have different lives. Under both methods, a reporting entity depreciates the assets over the average life of the assets in the group. The estimation of asset useful lives requires management judgment, supported by formal depreciation studies of historical asset retirement experience. Depreciation studies are conducted periodically and as required by a rate regulator or if an event, regulatory action, or change in retirement patterns indicate an update is necessary.
For the Utility Registrants, depreciation studies generally serve as the basis for amounts allowed in customer rates for recovery of depreciation costs. Generally, the Utility Registrants adjust their depreciation rates for financial reporting purposes concurrent with adjustments to depreciation rates reflected in customer rates, unless the depreciation rates reflected in customer rates do not align with management’s judgment as to an appropriate estimated useful life or have not been updated on a timely basis. Depreciation expense and customer rates for ComEd, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE include an estimate of the future costs of dismantling and removing plant from service upon retirement. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding regulatory liabilities and assets recorded by ComEd, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE related to removal costs.
PECO’s removal costs are capitalized to accumulated depreciation when incurred, and recorded to depreciation expense over the life of the new asset constructed consistent with PECO’s regulatory recovery method. Estimates for such removal costs are also evaluated in the periodic depreciation studies.
At Generation, along with depreciation study results, management considers expected future energy market conditions and generation plant operating costs and capital investment requirements in determining the estimated service lives of its generating facilities and reassesses the reasonableness of estimated useful lives whenever events or changes in circumstances warrant. When a determination has been made that an asset will be retired before the end of its current estimated useful life, depreciation provisions will be accelerated to reflect the shortened estimated useful life. See Note 7 - Early Plant Retirements of the Combined Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Changes in estimated useful lives of electric generation assets and of electric and natural gas transmission and distribution assets could have a significant impact on the Registrants’ future results of operations. See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding depreciation and estimated service lives of the property, plant, and equipment of the Registrants.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefits (All Registrants)
Exelon sponsors defined benefit pension plans and OPEB plans for substantially all current employees. The measurement of the plan obligations and costs of providing benefits involves various factors, including the development of valuation assumptions and inputs and accounting policy elections. When developing the required assumptions, Exelon considers historical information as well as future expectations. The measurement of benefit obligations and costs is affected by several assumptions including the discount rate, the long-term expected rate of return on plan assets, the anticipated rate of increase of health care costs, Exelon's contributions, the rate of compensation increases, and the long-term expected investment rate credited to employees of certain plans, among others. The assumptions are updated annually and upon any interim remeasurement of the plan obligations.
Pension and OPEB plan assets include equity securities, including U.S. and international securities, and fixed income securities, as well as certain alternative investment classes such as real estate, private equity, and hedge funds.
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets. In determining the EROA, Exelon considers historical economic indicators (including inflation and GDP growth) that impact asset returns, as well as expectation regarding future long-term capital market performance, weighted by Exelon’s target asset class allocations. Exelon calculates the amount of expected return on pension and OPEB plan assets by multiplying the EROA by the MRV of plan assets at the beginning of the year, taking into consideration anticipated contributions and benefit payments to be made during the year. In determining MRV, the authoritative guidance for pensions and postretirement benefits allows the use of either fair value or a calculated value that recognizes changes in fair value in a systematic and rational manner over not more than five years. For the majority of pension plan assets, Exelon uses a calculated value that adjusts for 20% of the difference between fair value and expected MRV of plan assets. Use of this
calculated value approach enables less volatile expected asset returns to be recognized as a component of pension cost from year to year. For OPEB plan assets and certain pension plan assets, Exelon uses fair value to calculate the MRV.
Discount Rate. The discount rates are determined by developing a spot rate curve based on the yield to maturity of a universe of high-quality non-callable (or callable with make whole provisions) bonds with similar maturities to the related pension and OPEB obligations. The spot rates are used to discount the estimated future benefit distribution amounts under the pension and OPEB plans. The discount rate is the single level rate that produces the same result as the spot rate curve. Exelon utilizes an analytical tool developed by its actuaries to determine the discount rates.
Mortality. The mortality assumption is composed of a base table that represents the current expectation of life expectancy of the population adjusted by an improvement scale that attempts to anticipate future improvements in life expectancy. Exelon’s mortality assumption utilizes the SOA 2019 base table (Pri-2012) and MP-2021 improvement scale adjusted to use Proxy SSA ultimate improvement rates.
Sensitivity to Changes in Key Assumptions. The following tables illustrate the effects of changing certain of the actuarial assumptions discussed above, while holding all other assumptions constant:
__________
(a)In general, the discount rate will have a larger impact on the pension and OPEB cost and obligation as the rate moves closer to 0%. Therefore, the discount rate sensitivities above cannot necessarily be extrapolated for larger increases or decreases in the discount rate. Additionally, Exelon utilizes a liability-driven investment strategy for its pension asset portfolio. The sensitivities shown above do not reflect the offsetting impact that changes in discount rates may have on pension asset returns.
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 15 - Retirement Benefits of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the accounting for the defined benefit pension plans and OPEB plans.
Regulatory Accounting (All Registrants)
For their regulated electric and gas operations, the Registrants reflect the effects of cost-based rate regulation in their financial statements, which is required for entities with regulated operations that meet the following criteria: (1) rates are established or approved by a third-party regulator; (2) rates are designed to recover the entities’ cost of providing services or products; and (3) a reasonable expectation that rates designed to recover costs can be charged to and collected from customers. Regulatory assets represent incurred costs that have been deferred because of their probable future recovery from customers through regulated rates. Regulatory liabilities represent (1) revenue or gains that have been deferred because it is probable such amounts will be returned to customers through future regulated rates; or (2) billings in advance of expenditures for approved regulatory programs. If it is concluded in a future period that a separable portion of operations no longer meets the criteria discussed above, the Registrants would be required to eliminate any associated regulatory assets and liabilities and the impact, which could be material, would be recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income.
The following table illustrates gains (losses) to be included in net income that could result from the elimination of regulatory assets and liabilities and charges against OCI related to deferred costs associated with Exelon's pension and OPEB plans that are recorded as regulatory assets in Exelon's Consolidated Balance Sheets (before taxes):
___________
(a)Exelon's charge against OCI (before taxes) consists of up to $2.2 billion, $391 million, $703 million, $323 million, $154 million, and $91 million related to ComEd's, BGE's, PHI's, Pepco's, DPL's, and ACE's respective portions of the deferred costs associated with Exelon's pension and OPEB plans. Exelon also has a net regulatory liability of $66 million (before taxes) related to PECO’s portion of the deferred costs associated with Exelon’s OPEB plans that would result in an increase in OCI if reversed.
See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding regulatory matters, including the regulatory assets and liabilities of the Registrants.
For each regulatory jurisdiction in which they conduct business, the Registrants assess whether the regulatory assets and liabilities continue to meet the criteria for probable future recovery or refund at each balance sheet date and when regulatory events occur. This assessment includes consideration of recent rate orders, historical regulatory treatment for similar costs in each Registrant's jurisdictions, and factors such as changes in applicable regulatory and political environments. If the assessments and estimates made by the Registrants for regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities are ultimately different than actual regulatory outcomes, the impact in their consolidated financial statements could be material.
Refer to the revenue recognition discussion below for additional information on the annual revenue reconciliations associated with ICC-approved electric distribution and energy efficiency formula rates for ComEd, and FERC transmission formula rate tariffs for the Utility Registrants.
Accounting for Derivative Instruments (All Registrants)
The Registrants use derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk, foreign currency exchange risk, and interest rate risk related to ongoing business operations. The Registrants’ derivative activities are in accordance with Exelon’s Risk Management Policy (RMP). See Note 16 - Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The Registrants account for derivative financial instruments under the applicable authoritative guidance. Determining whether a contract qualifies as a derivative requires that management exercise significant judgment, including assessing market liquidity as well as determining whether a contract has one or more underlying and one or more notional quantities. Changes in management’s assessment of contracts and the liquidity of their markets, and changes in authoritative guidance, could result in previously excluded contracts becoming in scope of new authoritative guidance.
All derivatives are recognized on the balance sheet at their fair value, except for certain derivatives that qualify for, and are elected under, NPNS. Derivatives entered for economic hedging and for proprietary trading purposes are recorded at fair value through earnings. For economic hedges that are not designated for hedge accounting for the Utility Registrants, changes in the fair value each period are generally recorded with a corresponding offsetting regulatory asset or liability given the likelihood of recovering the associated costs through customer rates.
NPNS. As part of Generation’s energy marketing business, Generation enters contracts to buy and sell energy to meet the requirements of its customers. These contracts include short-term and long-term commitments to purchase and sell energy and energy-related products in the retail and wholesale markets with the intent and ability to deliver or take delivery. While some of these contracts are considered derivative financial instruments under the authoritative guidance, certain of these qualifying transactions have been designated by Generation as NPNS transactions, which are thus not required to be recorded at fair value, but rather on an accrual basis of accounting. Determining whether a contract qualifies for the NPNS requires judgment on whether the contract will physically deliver and requires that management ensure compliance with all the associated qualification and
documentation requirements. Revenues and expenses on contracts that qualify as NPNS are recognized when the underlying physical transaction is completed. Contracts that qualify for the NPNS are those for which physical delivery is probable, quantities are expected to be used or sold in the normal course of business over a reasonable period, and the contract is not financially settled on a net basis. The contracts that ComEd has entered into with suppliers as part of ComEd’s energy procurement process, PECO’s full requirement contracts under the PAPUC-approved DSP program, most of PECO’s natural gas supply agreements, all of BGE’s full requirement contracts and natural gas supply agreements that are derivatives, and certain Pepco, DPL, and ACE full requirement contracts qualify for and are accounted for under the NPNS.
Commodity Contracts. Identification of a commodity contract as an economic hedge requires Generation to determine that the contract is in accordance with the RMP. Generation reassesses its economic hedges on a regular basis to determine if they continue to be within the guidelines of the RMP.
As a part of the authoritative guidance, the Registrants make estimates and assumptions concerning future commodity prices, load requirements, interest rates, the timing of future transactions and their probable cash flows, the fair value of contracts and the expected changes in the fair value in deciding whether to enter derivative transactions, and in determining the initial accounting treatment for derivative transactions. Under the authoritative guidance for fair value measurements, the Registrants categorize these derivatives under a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value.
Derivative contracts are traded in both exchange-based and non-exchange-based markets. Exchange-based derivatives that are valued using unadjusted quoted prices in active markets are generally categorized in Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.
Certain derivative pricing is verified using indicative price quotations available through brokers or over-the-counter, online exchanges. The price quotations reflect the average of the mid-point of the bid-ask spread from observable markets that the Registrants believe provide the most liquid market for the commodity. The price quotations are reviewed and corroborated to ensure the prices are observable and representative of an orderly transaction between market participants. The Registrant’s derivatives are traded predominantly at liquid trading points. The remaining derivative contracts are valued using models that consider inputs such as contract terms, including maturity, and market parameters, and assumptions of the future prices of energy, interest rates, volatility, credit worthiness, and credit spread. For derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps, and options, the model inputs are generally observable. Such instruments are categorized in Level 2.
For derivatives that trade in less liquid markets with limited pricing information, the model inputs generally would include both observable and unobservable inputs and are categorized in Level 3.
The Registrants consider nonperformance risk, including credit risk in the valuation of derivative contracts, and both historical and current market data in its assessment of nonperformance risk. The impacts of nonperformance and credit risk to date have generally not been material to the financial statements.
See