ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in connection with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the statements in the following discussion are forward looking statements.
We have described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the impact of the global Coronavirus Disease 2019 pandemic (“COVID-19”) on our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021. See "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" below and in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding risks and uncertainties relating to COVID-19.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. You should not place undue reliance on these statements because they are subject to numerous uncertainties and factors relating to our operations and business environment, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. These statements often include words such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate” or similar expressions. These statements are based on assumptions that we have made in light of our experience in the industry as well as our perceptions of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments and other factors we believe are appropriate under the circumstances. As you read and consider this Annual Report on Form 10-K, you should understand that these statements are not guarantees of performance or results. They involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Although we believe that these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, you should be aware that many factors could affect our actual financial results or results of operations and could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. Many of the following risks, uncertainties and other factors identified below have been, and will be, amplified by COVID-19. These factors include but are not limited to:
•the impact of COVID-19 and related response measures on our business, results of operations and financial condition, including the impact of governmental lockdowns and other restrictions on our operations and processes and those of our clients and suppliers;
•our dependence on a limited number of clients in a limited number of industries and our ability to withstand the loss of a significant client;
•negative public reaction in the U.S. or elsewhere to offshore outsourcing;
•fluctuations in our earnings;
•our ability to attract and retain clients including in a timely manner;
•our ability to successfully consummate or integrate strategic acquisitions;
•our ability to accurately estimate and/or manage the costs;
•restrictions on immigration;
•our ability to hire and retain enough sufficiently trained employees to support our operations;
•our ability to grow our business or effectively manage growth and international operations;
•any changes in the senior management team;
•increasing competition in our industry;
•telecommunications or technology disruptions or breaches, natural or other disasters, or medical epidemics or pandemics;
•our ability to realize the entire book value of goodwill and other intangible assets from acquisitions;
•our ability to make accurate estimates and assumptions in connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements;
•failure to protect our intellectual property;
•regulatory, legislative and judicial developments, including changes to or the withdrawal of governmental fiscal incentives;
•changes in tax laws or decisions regarding repatriation of funds held abroad;
•ability to service debt or obtain additional financing on favorable terms;
•credit risk fluctuations in the market values of our investment and derivatives portfolios;
•legal liability arising out of customer contracts;
•technological innovation;
•our ability to meet our environmental, social and governance-related goals and targets;
•effects of political and economic conditions globally, particularly in the geographies where we operate;
•operational and information security failures arising as a result of remote work solutions adopted due to COVID-19;
•cyber security incidents, data breaches, or other unauthorized disclosure of sensitive or confidential client and employee data; and
•adverse outcome of our disputes with the tax authorities, in the geographies where we operate.
In particular, you should consider the numerous risks outlined in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These and other risks could cause actual results to differ materially from those implied by forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The forward-looking statements made by us in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or elsewhere, speak only as of the date on which they were made. New risks and uncertainties come up from time to time, and it is impossible for us to predict those events or how they may affect us. We have no obligation to update any forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, except as required by federal securities laws.
Executive Overview
We are a leading data analytics and digital operations and solutions company that partners with clients to improve business outcomes and unlock growth. By bringing together deep domain expertise with robust data, powerful analytics, cloud, AI and ML, we create agile, scalable solutions and execute complex operations for the world’s leading corporations in industries including insurance, healthcare, banking and financial services, media, and retail, among others.
We deliver data analytics and digital operations and solutions to our clients, driving enterprise-scale business transformation initiatives that leverage our deep expertise in advanced analytics, AI, ML and cloud. We manage and report financial information through our four strategic business units: Insurance, Healthcare, Analytics and Emerging Business, which reflects how management reviews financial information and makes operating decisions, and is in line with certain operational and structural changes we made effective January 1, 2020 to more closely integrate our businesses and to simplify our organizational structure.
Our reportable segments are as follows:
•Insurance,
•Healthcare,
•Analytics, and
•Emerging Business
Our global delivery network, which includes highly trained industry and process specialists across the United States, Latin America, South Africa, Europe and Asia (primarily India and the Philippines), is a key asset. We have operations centers in India, the United States, the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Bulgaria, Colombia, South Africa, Romania and the Czech Republic.
On December 16, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Clairvoyant, a global data, AI, ML, and cloud services firm that helps organizations in their business transformation by maximizing the value of data through actionable insights. It provides
data engineering, analytics, AI, ML, product engineering, and cloud-based solutions. The acquisition strengthens our Analytics capabilities by adding additional expertise in data engineering and cloud enablement, further supporting our clients in the insurance, healthcare, banking and financial services, and retail industries.
Continued Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Over the course of 2020, and continuing into 2021, our clients, contractors, suppliers, and other partners adapted in order to conduct business activities in a COVID-19 environment. As the global economy continued to adapt to the impact of COVID-19, our clients are focused on receiving personalized customer experiences, optimizing costs and supporting resilient operating models. We remain committed to helping our clients adapt and thrive through the ongoing uncertainties caused by COVID-19 and, going forward, to the shifting business environment.
Our remote working delivery capability steadily improved throughout 2021. We estimate that we are able to deliver a significant portion of our clients’ current requirements in a remote work model given the current lockdown restrictions in the locations in which we operate and certain clients not authorizing us to perform the remaining process work remotely due to its sensitive nature.
We continue to incur additional costs in order to ensure the continuity of our operations and support our remote work model. Such costs include purchase of desktops and laptops for our employees, software and internet connectivity devices, technology tools for productivity enhancement, accommodation, meal, overtime, transportation and sanitization and cleaning costs of our offices and facilities. We also expect that we will continue to incur additional costs to monitor and improve operational efficiency of our remote work model, implement new information technology solutions and security measures to safeguard against information security risks and protect the health and safety of our employees as they gradually return to the office. We believe that these short-to-medium-term costs may benefit us in the long-term, as these steps have broadened our remote working capabilities, which we expect to become a permanent feature in our future delivery model, as well as our business continuity plans.
Certain impacts of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations, financial position and cash flow during 2021 have been described above and below, however the full extent of the impact for the period beyond 2021 is currently uncertain and will depend on many factors that are not within our control.
For additional information and risks related to COVID-19, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed our annual goodwill quantitative impairment test for any potential impairment. We considered the effects of COVID-19 on our significant inputs used in determining the fair value of our reporting units. Based on the results, the fair value of each of our reporting units exceeded their carrying value and the goodwill was not impaired. However, there can be no assurances that goodwill will not be impaired in future periods. Estimating the fair value of goodwill requires the use of estimates and significant judgments that are based on a number of factors including actual operating results. These estimates and judgments may not be within our control and accordingly it is reasonably possible that they could change in future periods.
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenues of $1,122.3 million compared to revenues of $958.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $163.9 million, or 17.1%.
We serve clients mainly in the United States and the United Kingdom, with these two regions generating 85.9% and 9.4%, respectively, of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 85.0% and 9.3%, respectively, of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our total revenues from our top ten clients accounted for 38.1% and 37.4% of our total revenues, respectively. Our revenue concentration with our top clients remains largely consistent year-over-year and we continue to develop relationships with new clients to diversify our client base. We believe that the loss of any of our top ten clients could have a material adverse effect on our financial performance.
Our Business
We provide data analytics and digital operations and solutions to our clients. We market our services to our existing and prospective clients through our sales and client management teams, which are aligned by key industry verticals and cross-industry domains such as finance and accounting. Our sales and client management teams operate from the United States, Europe and Australia.
Digital Operations and Solutions: We provide our clients with a range of digital operations and solutions from our Insurance, Healthcare and Emerging Business strategic business units, which are focused on solving complex industry problems such as the insurance claims lifecycle and financial transactions processing, and typically involve the use of agile delivery models to implement digital technologies and interventions like hyper-automation, customer experience transformation, advanced automation, robotics, enterprise architecture, end-to-end business function management and transformations. We either administer and manage these functions on an ongoing basis via longer-term arrangements or project work. For a portion of our digital operations and solutions, we hire and train employees to work at our operations centers on the relevant business operations, implement a process migration to these operations centers and then provide services either to the client or directly to the client’s customers. Each client contract has different terms based on the scope, deliverables and complexity of the engagement. We also provide consulting services related to digital operations and solutions that include industry-specific digital transformational services as well as cross-industry finance and accounting services as part of the Emerging Business strategic business unit.
We provide our services under contracts with our clients, which typically have terms of three or more years, with some being rolling contracts with no end dates. Typically, our clients can terminate these contracts with or without cause and with short notice periods. These contracts provide us with a relatively predictable revenue base for a substantial portion of our digital operations and solutions business. However, we have a long selling cycle for our services and the budget and approval processes of prospective clients make it difficult to predict the timing of entering into definitive agreements with new clients. Similarly, new license sales and implementation projects for our technology service platforms and other software-based services have a long selling cycle, however ongoing annual maintenance and support contracts for existing arrangements provide us with a relatively predictable revenue base.
We charge for our services using various pricing models like time-and-material pricing, full-time-equivalent pricing, transaction-based pricing, outcome-based pricing, subscription-based pricing and other alternative pricing models. Outcome-based pricing arrangements are examples of non-linear pricing models where clients link revenues from platforms and solutions and the services we provide to usage or savings rather than the efforts deployed to provide these services. We continue to observe a shift in the industry pricing models toward transaction-based pricing, outcome-based pricing and other alternative pricing models. We believe this trend will continue and we use such alternative pricing models with some of our current clients and are seeking to move certain other clients from a full-time-equivalent pricing model to a transaction-based or other alternative pricing model. These alternative pricing models place the focus on operating efficiency in order to maintain or improve our gross margins.
We have also observed that prospective larger clients are entering into multi-vendor relationships with regard to their outsourcing needs. We believe that the trend toward multi-vendor relationships will continue. A multi-vendor relationship allows a client to seek more favorable pricing and other contract terms from each vendor, which can result in significantly reduced gross margins from the provision of services to such client for each vendor. To the extent our large clients expand their use of multi-vendor relationships and are able to extract more favorable contract terms from other vendors, our gross margins and revenues may be reduced with regard to such clients if we are required to modify the terms of our relationships with such clients to meet competition.
Analytics: Our analytics services focus on driving improved business outcomes for our clients by unlocking deep insights from data and create data driven solutions across all parts of our clients’ business. We also provide care optimization and reimbursement optimization services, for our clients through our healthcare analytics solutions and services. We also offer integrated solutions to help our clients in cost containment by leveraging technology platforms, customizable and configurable analytics and expertise in healthcare reimbursements to help clients enhance their claim payment accuracy. Our teams deliver predictive and prescriptive analytics in the areas of customer acquisition and lifecycle management, risk underwriting and pricing, operational effectiveness, credit and operational risk monitoring and governance, regulatory reporting, payment integrity and care management and data management. We enhance, modernize and enrich structured and unstructured data and use a spectrum of advanced analytical tools and techniques, including our in-house ML and AI capabilities to create insights and improve decision making for our clients. Our Clairvoyant acquisition in December 2021 strengthens our analytics capabilities by adding additional expertise in data engineering and cloud enablement, further supporting our clients in the insurance, healthcare, banking and financial services, and retail industries. We actively cross-sell and, where appropriate, integrate our analytics services with other digital operations and solutions as part of a comprehensive offering for our clients. Our projects-based analytics services are cyclical and can be significantly affected by variations in business cycles. In addition, our projects-based analytics services are documented in contracts with terms generally not exceeding one year and may not produce ongoing or recurring business for us once the project is completed. These contracts also usually contain provisions permitting termination of the contract after a short notice period. The short-term nature and specificity of these projects could lead to fluctuations and uncertainties in the revenues generated from providing analytics services.
We anticipate that revenues from our analytics services will grow as we expand our service offerings and client base, both organically and through acquisitions.
Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues primarily consists of:
•employee costs, which include salary, bonus and other compensation expenses; retirement benefits, recruitment and training costs; employee health and life insurance; transport; rewards and recognition for certain employees; and non-cash stock compensation expense; and
•costs relating to our facilities and communications network, which include telecommunication and IT costs; facilities and customer management support; operational expenses for our operations centers; rent expenses; and
•Outsourced/subcontractors and professional services costs; and
•travel and other billable costs to our clients; and
•costs relating to our direct mail operations and other digital operations and solutions.
The most significant components of our cost of revenues are salaries and benefits (including stock-based compensation), retirement benefits, recruitment, training, transport, meals, rewards and recognition and employee health and life insurance. Salary levels, employee turnover rates and our ability to efficiently manage and utilize our employees significantly affect our cost of revenues. We make every effort to manage employee and capacity utilization and continuously monitor service levels and staffing requirements. Although we generally have been able to reallocate our employees as client demand has fluctuated, a contract termination or significant reduction in work assigned to us by a major client could cause us to experience a higher-than-expected number of unassigned employees, which would increase our cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues until we are able to reduce or reallocate our headcount. A significant increase in the turnover rate among our employees, particularly among the highly skilled workforce needed to execute certain services, would increase our recruiting and training costs and decrease our operating efficiency, productivity and profit margins. In addition, cost of revenues also includes non-cash amortization of stock compensation expense relating to our issuance of equity awards to employees directly involved in providing services to our clients.
We expect our cost of revenues to continue to increase as we continue to add professionals in our operating centers globally to service additional business and as wages continue to increase globally. In particular, we expect training costs to continue to increase as we continue to add staff to service new clients and provide existing staff with additional skill sets. There is significant competition for professionals with skills necessary to perform the services we offer to our clients. As our existing competitors continue to grow, and as new competitors enter the market, we expect competition for skilled professionals in each of these areas to continue to increase, with corresponding increases in our cost of revenues to reflect increased compensation levels for such professionals. We also expect that we will continue to incur additional costs to monitor and improve operational efficiency of our remote work model, invest in information technology solutions and security measures to safeguard against information security risks and costs to protect the health and safety of our employees as they gradually return to the office. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” under “Risks Related to Our Business-Employee wage increases may prevent us from sustaining our competitive advantage and may reduce our profit margin” and under “Risks Related to the International Nature of Our Business-We are subject to labor and employment laws across jurisdictions and if more stringent labor laws become applicable to us or if our employees unionize, our profitability may be adversely affected.” However, a significant portion of our client contracts include inflation-based adjustments to our billing rates year over year which partially offset such increase in cost of revenues.
We generally experience a higher cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues during the initial 12 to 18 months in a long-term digital operations and solutions contract due to upfront investments in infrastructure, resource hiring and training during migration. The cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues improves as we scale up, achieve operational efficiencies and complete the migration.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
Our General and Administrative expenses (“G&A”) comprise of expenses relating to salaries and benefits (including stock based compensation), retirement benefits as well as costs related to recruitment, training and retention of senior management and other support personnel in enabling functions, telecommunications, utilities, travel and other miscellaneous administrative costs. G&A expenses also include acquisition-related costs, legal and professional fees (which represent the costs of third party legal, tax, accounting, immigration and other advisors), investment in product development, digital technology, advanced automation and robotics, cloud, AI and MI, bad debt allowance and stock compensation expenses related to our issuance of
equity awards to members of our board of directors. We expect our G&A costs to increase as we continue to strengthen our support and enabling functions and invest in leadership development, performance management and training programs.
Selling and marketing expenses primarily consist of salaries and benefits (including stock based compensation), retirement benefits and other compensation expenses of sales and marketing and client management personnel, sales commission, travel and brand building, client events and conferences. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase as we invest in our sales and client management functions to better serve our clients and in our branding.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization pertains to depreciation of our tangible assets, including network equipment, cabling, computers, office furniture and equipment, motor vehicles and leasehold improvements and amortization of intangible assets. As we add new facilities and expand our existing operations centers, we expect that depreciation expense will increase, reflecting additional investments in equipment such as desktop computers, servers and other infrastructure. The property and equipment which are abandoned, are assessed for revision of their useful life, thereby revising the future depreciation to reflect the use of property and equipment over the remaining shortened life. We expect lower depreciation on assets related to operating centers closed as a result of optimization of office space and increased reliance on remote work model, due to the impact of COVID-19. We expect amortization of intangible assets to increase further as we pursue strategic relationships and acquisitions.
Foreign Exchange
We report our financial results in the U.S. dollar. However, a significant portion of our total revenues are earned in the U.K. pound sterling (8.6% and 8.3%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020), while a significant portion of our expenses are incurred and paid in Indian rupees (29.4% and 27.2%, respectively, of our total costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020) and the Philippine peso (9.5% and 11.5%, of our total costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020). The exchange rates among the Indian rupee, the Philippine peso, the U.K. pound sterling and the U.S. dollar have changed substantially in recent years and may fluctuate substantially in the future as well. The results of our operations could be substantially impacted as the Indian rupee, the Philippine peso and the U.K. pound sterling appreciate or depreciate against the U.S. dollar. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 16 - Derivatives and Hedge Accounting to our consolidated financial statements and Part II, Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk-Foreign Currency Risk.”
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consist of interest on our borrowings under our credit facility and convertible senior notes, finance lease liabilities and notional interest implicit in the purchase of property and equipment.
Other Income, net
Other income, net primarily consists of gain/(loss) on sale, mark to market and dividend income on our investments in mutual funds and money market funds, and interest on time deposits classified under “Cash and cash equivalents,” “Short-term investments” and “Other assets,” as applicable on our consolidated balance sheets. Other income, net also consists of changes in fair value of earn-out consideration, interest on refunds received from income tax authorities in India on completion of tax assessments and components of net periodic benefit cost such as interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of actuarial gain or loss and profit or loss on disposal of long-lived assets.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions. Our tax expense and cash tax liability in the future could be adversely affected by various factors, including, but not limited to, changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles or interpretations and the potential adverse outcome of tax examinations. Changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, which may result from a decline in our profitability or changes in tax rates or legislation, could have a material adverse effect on our tax expense.
During the year 2018, we made an election to change the tax status of most of our controlled foreign corporations (“CFC”) to disregarded entities for U.S. income tax purposes. As a result, we no longer have undistributed earnings in connection with these CFCs. The Transition Tax resulted in previously taxed income (“PTI”) which may be subject to withholding taxes and currency gains or losses upon repatriation. We periodically evaluate opportunities to distribute PTI among our group entities to fund our operations in the United States and other geographies, and as and when we decide to distribute, we may have to accrue additional taxes in accordance with local tax laws, rules and regulations in the relevant foreign jurisdictions. These distributions do not constitute a change in our permanent reinvestment assertion.
In 2019, the Government of India introduced a new tax regime for certain Indian companies by enacting the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019. The new tax regime is optional and provides for a lower tax rate for Indian companies, subject to certain conditions, which among other things includes not availing of specified exemptions or incentives. During the year 2019 and 2020, we elected this new tax regime for our Indian subsidiaries to obtain the benefit of a lower tax rate.
We also benefited from a corporate tax holiday in the Philippines for our operations centers established there over the last several years. The tax holiday expired for few of our operations centers in last few years and will expire for other operations centers by year 2022, which may lead to an increase in our overall tax rate. Following the expiry of the tax exemption, income generated from operations centers in the Philippines will be taxed at the prevailing annual tax rate, which as of December 31, 2021 was 5.0% on gross income.
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss carry forwards. We determine if a valuation allowance is required or not on the basis of an assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be realized.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements. We consider the policies discussed below to be critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements, as their application places the most significant demands on management’s judgment regarding matters that are inherently uncertain at the time an estimate is made. These policies include revenue recognition, allowance for expected credit losses, business combinations, goodwill, intangibles and long-lived assets, stock-based compensation, derivative instruments and hedging activity and borrowings. The significant estimates and assumptions that affect the financial statements include, but are not limited to, estimates of the fair value of the identifiable intangible assets and contingent consideration, purchase price allocation, allowance for expected credit losses, the nature and timing of the satisfaction of performance obligations, the standalone selling price of performance obligations, and variable consideration in a customer contract, expected recoverability from customers with contingent fee arrangements, estimated costs to complete fixed price contracts, recoverability of dues from statutory authorities, assets and obligations related to employee benefit plans, deferred tax valuation allowances, income-tax uncertainties and other contingencies, valuation of derivative financial instruments, assumptions related to lease liabilities, ROU assets, lease cost, income taxes and assets, obligations related to employee benefit plans, revenue projections and discount rate applied within the discounted cash flow model for business acquisitions. These accounting policies and the associated risks are set out below. Future events may not develop exactly as forecasted and estimates routinely require adjustment.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when services are provided to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the services provided.
Revenue is measured based on consideration specified in a contract with a customer and excludes discounts and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by providing services to a customer.
Taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by us from a customer, are excluded from revenue.
Significant judgments
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
We sometimes enter into contracts with our clients which include promises to transfer multiple products and services to the client. Determining whether products and services are considered as distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately rather than as one performance obligation may require significant judgment. The transaction price is allocated to performance obligations on relative standalone selling price basis.
Judgment is also required to determine the standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation. In instances where the standalone selling price is not directly observable, it is determined using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs.
Variable Consideration
Variability in the transaction price arises primarily due to service level agreements and volume discounts.
We consider our experience with similar transactions and expectations regarding the contract in estimating the amount of variable consideration that should be recognized during a period.
We believe that the expected value method is most appropriate for determining the variable consideration since we have a large number of contracts with similar nature of transactions/services.
Type of Contracts Requiring Judgment
a.Revenues for our fixed-price contracts are recognized using costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion to measure progress toward satisfying our performance obligations. Incurred cost represents work performed, which corresponds with, and thereby best depicts, the transfer of control to the client. The use of this method requires significant judgment to estimate the cost required to complete the contracted scope of work, including assumptions and estimates relative to the length of time to complete the project and the nature and complexity of the work to be performed and resources engaged. We regularly monitor these estimates throughout the execution of the project and record changes in the period in which a change in an estimate is determined. If a change in an estimate results in a projected loss on a project, such loss is recognized in the period in which it is first identified.
b.Revenues from reimbursement optimization services having contingent fee arrangements are recognized by us at the point in time when a performance obligation is satisfied, which is when we identify an overpayment claim. In such contracts, our consideration is contingent upon the actual collections made by our clients and net of any subsequent retraction claims. Based on guidance on “variable consideration” in Topic 606, we use our historical experience and projections to determine the expected recoveries from our clients and recognize revenue based upon such expected recoveries. Any adjustment required due to change in estimates are recorded in the period in which such change is identified.
For additional information, see Note 4 - Revenues, net to our consolidated financial statements under Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Unbilled Receivables
Unbilled receivables represent revenues recognized for services rendered between the last billing date and the balance sheet date. Unbilled receivables also include revenues recognized from reimbursement optimization services where we identify an overpayment claim. In such contracts, our consideration is contingent upon and collectable only when the actual collections are made by our clients. Based on guidance on “variable consideration” in Topic 606, we use our historical experience and projections to determine the expected recoveries from our clients and recognize revenue and receivables based upon such expected recoveries. Accordingly, the amounts for which services have been performed and for which invoices have not been issued to customers on the balance sheet date, (i.e. unbilled receivables) are presented under accounts receivable.
Deferred Revenue and contract fulfillment costs
We have contract liabilities (deferred revenue) consisting of advance billings and billing in excess of revenues recognized. Deferred revenue also includes the amount for which services have been rendered but other conditions of revenue recognition are not met, for example where we do not have an enforceable contract.
Further, we also defer revenues attributable to certain process transition activities, with respect to our clients where such activities do not represent separate performance obligations. Revenues related to such transition activities are classified under “Deferred revenue” and “Other non-current liabilities” in our consolidated balance sheets and are recognized ratably over the period during which the related services are performed.
Costs related to such transition activities are contract fulfillment costs, and thereby classified under “Other current assets” and “Other assets” in the consolidated balance sheets, and are recognized over the expected duration of the relationship with customers, under “Cost of revenues” in our consolidated statements of income.
Contract Acquisition Costs
Direct and incremental costs incurred for acquiring contracts, such as sales commissions are contract acquisition costs and thereby classified under “Other current assets” and “Other assets” in our consolidated balance sheets. Such costs are amortized
over the expected duration of the relationship with customers and recorded under Selling and marketing expenses in our consolidated statements of income.
Upfront Payment Made to Customers
Upfront payments in nature of deal signing discount or deal signing bonuses made to customers are contract assets and classified under “Other current assets” and “Other assets” in our consolidated balance sheets. Such costs are amortized over the expected period of benefit and are recorded as an adjustment to transaction price and reduced from revenues.
Allowance for Expected Credit Losses
We record accounts receivable net of allowances for expected credit losses. Allowances for credit losses are established through the evaluation of aging of accounts receivables, prior collection experience, current market conditions, forecasts about future economic conditions, clients’ financial condition and the amount of accounts receivable in dispute to estimate the collectability of these accounts receivable. Accounts receivable balances are written-off against the allowance for expected credit losses after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
Business Combinations
We account for all business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting as prescribed by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, “Business Combinations.” The guidance requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including intangible assets and contingent consideration, and allocation of purchase price over such assets and liabilities on the acquisition date. The significant estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, the timing and amount of future revenue and cash flows based on, among other things, discount rate reflecting the risk inherent in future cash flows, customer attrition rates and the long-term growth rate applied within the discounted cash flow model. This requires a high degree of the Company’s judgment and the need to involve fair value specialists to evaluate the reasonableness of the Company’s valuation methodology and the selection of inputs to the valuation.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill represents the cost of the acquired businesses in excess of the fair value of identifiable tangible and intangible net assets purchased in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least on an annual basis, relying on a number of factors including operating results, business plans and estimated future cash flows of the reporting units to which it is assigned. We undertake studies to determine the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired and allocate purchase consideration to assets and liabilities, including property and equipment, goodwill and other identifiable intangibles. We examine the carrying value of the goodwill annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently, as circumstances warrant, to determine whether there are any impairment losses. We test for goodwill impairment at the reporting unit level. We also assess any potential goodwill impairment for our reporting units immediately prior to any segment changes and reallocate goodwill on the basis of the new reporting units.
The goodwill quantitative impairment test involves a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using a combination of the income approach, using discounted cash flow analysis (“DCF model”), and also the market approach, using market multiples for reporting units whereby the fair value is not substantially in excess of carrying value. Under the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. We use our internal forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for each business. Actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting units. The discount rate is mainly based on judgment of the specific risk inherent within each reporting unit. The variables within the discount rate, many of which are outside of our control, provide us best estimate of all assumptions applied within the DCF model. Discount rates used in our reporting unit valuations range from 12.0% to 12.1%. We also use the “Market approach” to corroborate the results of the income approach for some of our reporting units. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value based on market multiples of revenues and earnings derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with characteristics similar to the reporting unit and comparable market transactions. The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
Determining fair value requires the use of estimates and exercise of significant judgment, including assumptions about appropriate discount rates, perpetual growth rates, amount and timing of expected future cash flows, market multiples of revenues and earnings and comparable market transactions. These estimates and judgements may not be within our control and
accordingly it is reasonably possible that the estimates and judgments described above could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that operations will achieve the future cash flows reflected in the projections. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized, in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We review long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In general, we will recognize an impairment loss when the sum of discounted expected future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of such asset. The estimate of discounted cash flows and the fair value of assets require several assumptions and estimates like the weighted average cost of capital, discount rates, risk-free rates, market rate of return and risk premiums and can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts. Although we believe the historical assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Business Combinations, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Stock-based Compensation
Under the fair value recognition provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC No. 718”), cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally the vesting period.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires significant judgment, including estimating the expected term over which the stock awards will be outstanding before they are exercised and the expected volatility of our stock.
We also grant performance-based restricted stock units (“PRSUs”) to executive officers and other specified employees. Generally the grants provide that 50% of the PRSUs cliff vest at the end of a three-year period based on an aggregated revenue target (“PUs”) for a three-year period. The remaining 50% vest based on a market condition (“MUs”) that is contingent on EXL meeting or exceeding the total shareholder return relative to a group of peer companies specified under the program, measured over a three-year performance period. The award recipient may earn up to 200% of the PRSUs granted based on the actual achievements of both targets. However, the features of our equity incentive compensation program are subject to change by the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors.
The fair value of each PU is determined based on the market price of one share of our common stock on the day prior to the date of grant. The grant date fair value for the MUs is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The Monte Carlo simulation model simulates a range of possible future stock prices and estimates the probabilities of the potential payouts. The Monte Carlo simulation model also involves the use of additional key assumptions, including dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. We periodically assess the reasonableness of our assumptions and update our estimates as required. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations could be materially affected.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities
In the normal course of business, we actively look to mitigate the exposure of foreign currency market risk associated with forecasted transactions denominated in certain foreign currencies and to minimize earnings and cash flow volatility associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates by entering into various foreign currency exchange forward contracts, with counterparties that are highly rated financial institutions.
We hedge forecasted transactions that are subject to foreign exchange exposure with foreign currency exchange contracts that qualify as cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of these cash flow hedges are recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax, until the hedged transactions occurs. The resultant foreign exchange gain/(loss) upon settlement of these cash flow hedges is recorded along with the underlying hedged item in the same line in our consolidated statements of income as a part of “Cost of revenues,” “General and administrative expenses,” “Selling and marketing expenses,” and “Depreciation and amortization expense,” as applicable.
We also use derivative instruments consisting of foreign currency exchange contracts to economically hedge intercompany balances and other monetary assets or liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. These derivatives do not qualify as fair value hedges. Changes in the fair value of these derivatives are recognized in our consolidated statements of income and are included in foreign exchange gain/(loss).
We determine the fair value of our derivatives based on market observable inputs including both forward and spot prices for currencies. Derivative assets and liabilities included in Level 2 primarily represent foreign currency forward contracts. The quotes are taken primarily from independent sources, including highly rated financial institutions.
We evaluate hedge effectiveness of cash flow hedges at the time a contract is entered into as well as on an ongoing basis. For hedge relationships that are discontinued because the forecasted transaction is not expected to occur by the end of the originally specified period, any related derivative amounts recorded in equity are reclassified to earnings.
Borrowings
We account for convertible notes in accordance with the guidelines established by the ASC No. 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. We separate the convertible notes into liability and equity components. The Beneficial Conversion Feature ("BCF") of a convertible note, which is the equity component and recorded as additional paid-in capital, is normally characterized as the convertible portion or feature of certain notes payable that provide a rate of conversion that is below market value or in-the-money when issued. We record a BCF related to any issuance of convertible notes.
If a convertible note is within the scope of the Cash Conversion Subsections contains embedded features other than the embedded conversion option, the guidance in ASC No. 815-15, Derivatives and Hedging - Embedded Derivatives (“ASC 815-15”), is applied to determine if any of those features must be separately accounted for as a derivative instrument.
The estimated fair value of the liability component at issuance is determined using a discounted cash flow technique, which considers debt issuances with similar features of our convertible notes, excluding the conversion feature. The excess of the gross proceeds received over the estimated fair value of the liability component is allocated to the BCF, which is credited to additional paid-in-capital with a corresponding offset recognized as a discount to reduce the net carrying value of the convertible notes. The discount is being amortized to interest expense over the expected term of the convertible notes using the effective interest method.
Direct, incremental finance costs related to the convertible notes are amortized over the term instrument through charges to interest expense using the effective interest method.
Pursuant to ASC Subtopic 470-20, total consideration for the settlement of an existing debt obligation is separated into liability and equity components. The fair value of the existing liability is estimated using a discounted cash flow technique, which considers debt issuances with terms similar to that of our debt, however without the conversion feature. The excess of consideration over the fair value of liability component is assigned to the equity component. The effective interest rate used to estimate the fair value of the liability component is based on the income and market based approaches, adjusted for the remaining tenor of the extinguished debt. The difference between the fair value and the carrying value of the extinguished debt, net of the unamortized debt discount and unamortized debt issuance costs, is recorded as a gain or loss on settlement in the consolidated statements of income.
Income Taxes
We account for income tax using the asset and liability method. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized in respect of future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their tax bases and operating losses carried forward, if any. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the anticipated tax rates for the years in which such temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities during the period in which the new tax rate was enacted or the change in tax status was filed or approved. We release the tax effects from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (“AOCI”) at the time of reclassification of cash flows hedges gains/ (losses) from AOCI to the consolidated statements of income. Deferred tax assets are recognized in full, subject to a valuation allowance that reduces the amount recognized to that which is more likely than not to be realized. In assessing the likelihood of realization, we consider all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. With respect to any entity that benefits from a corporate tax holiday, deferred tax assets or liabilities for existing temporary differences are recorded only to the extent such temporary differences are expected to reverse following the expiration of the tax holiday.
We also evaluate potential exposures related to tax contingencies or claims made by the tax authorities in various jurisdictions in order to determine whether a reserve may be required. A reserve is recorded if we believe that a loss is probable and if the amount of such loss can be reasonably estimated. Such reserves are based on estimates and, consequently, are subject to changing facts and circumstances, including the progress of ongoing audits, changes in case law and the passage of new legislation. We believe that we have established adequate reserves to cover any current tax assessments.
During the year 2018, we made an election to change the tax status of most of our controlled foreign corporations (“CFC”) to disregarded entities for U.S. income tax purposes. As a result, we no longer have undistributed earnings in connection with these CFCs. The Transition Tax resulted in previously taxed income (“PTI”) which may be subject to withholding taxes and currency gains or losses upon repatriation. We periodically evaluate opportunities to repatriate PTI held by our foreign subsidiaries to fund our operations in the United States and other geographies, and as and when we decide to repatriate such PTI, we may have to accrue additional taxes which will be recorded in accordance with local tax laws, rules and regulations in the relevant foreign jurisdictions. See Note 21 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements contained herein.
We employ a two-step process for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining, based on the technical merits, that the position will, more likely than not, be sustained upon examination. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount of the tax benefit that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement.
Employee Benefits
We record contributions to defined contribution plans in our consolidated statements of income in the period in which services are rendered by the covered employees. Current service costs for defined benefit plans are recognized in the period to which they relate. The liability in respect of defined benefit plans is calculated annually by using the projected unit credit method and various actuarial assumptions including discount rates, mortality, expected return on assets, expected increase in the compensation rates and attrition rates. We evaluate these critical assumptions at least annually. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, current service costs for defined benefit plans and our results of operations could be materially impacted.
We include the service cost component of the net periodic benefit cost in the same line item or items as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the respective employees during the period. The interest cost, expected return on plan assets and amortization of actuarial gains/loss, are included in “Other income, net.” See Note 19 - Employee Benefit Plans to our consolidated financial statements for details.
We recognize the liabilities for compensated absences dependent on whether the obligation is attributable to employee services already rendered, relates to rights that vest or accumulate and payment is probable and estimable.
Leases
We account for a lease at the inception of the contract. Our assessment is based on whether: (1) the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefits from the use of the asset throughout the term of the contract, and (3) we have the right to direct the use of the asset. A lease is classified as a finance lease if any one of the following criteria are met: (1) the lease transfers ownership of the asset by the end of the lease term, (2) the lease contains an option to purchase the asset that is reasonably certain to be exercised, (3) the lease term is for a major part of the remaining useful life of the asset or (4) the present value of the lease payments equals or exceeds substantially all of the fair value of the asset. Operating leases are recorded in “Operating lease right-of-use assets,” “Current portion of operating lease liabilities” and “Operating lease liabilities, less current portion” in our consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases are recorded in “Property and equipment, net,” and the current and non-current portion of finance lease liabilities are presented within “Accrued expenses and other current liabilities” and “Other non-current liabilities,” respectively in our consolidated balance sheets.
ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset during the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease arrangement. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. For leases in which the rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable, we use our incremental borrowing rate at commencement date by adjusting the benchmark reference rates, applicable to the respective geographies where the leases are entered, with appropriate financing spreads and lease specific adjustments for the effects of collateral.
Lease terms includes our assessment for the effects of options to extend or terminate the lease. We consider the extension option as part of our lease term for those lease arrangements where we are reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for operating lease arrangements is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are accounted for separately.
We account for lease-related concessions to mitigate the economic effects of COVID-19 on lessees in accordance with guidance in Topic 842, Leases, to determine, on a lease-by-lease basis, whether the concession provided by lessor should be accounted for as a lease modification.
We account for a modification as a separate contract when it grants an additional right of use not included in the original lease and the increase is commensurate with the standalone price for the additional right of use, adjusted for the circumstances of the particular contract. Modifications which are not accounted for as a separate contract are reassessed as of the effective date of the modification based on its modified terms and conditions and the facts and circumstances as of that date. The lease liability is remeasured to reflect changes to the remaining lease payments and discount rates and we recognize the amount of the remeasurement of the lease liability as an adjustment to the ROU assets. However, if the carrying amount of the ROU assets is reduced to zero as a result of modification, any remaining amount of the remeasurement is recognized as an expense in our consolidated statements of income.
Contingencies
Loss contingencies are recorded as liabilities when a loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. When a material loss contingency is reasonably possible but not probable, we do not record a liability, but instead disclose the nature and the amount of the claim, and an estimate of the loss or range of loss, if such an estimate can be made. Significant judgment is required in the determination of probability and whether an exposure is reasonably estimable, both. Our judgments are subjective and based on the information available from the status of the legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of our defenses and consultation with in-house and outside legal counsel. As additional information becomes available, we reassess any potential liability related to any pending litigation and may revise our estimates. Such revisions in estimates of any potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Results of Operations
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Exclusive of depreciation and amortization expense.
Due to rounding, the numbers presented in the tables included in this Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” may not add up precisely to the totals provided.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues.
The following table summarizes our revenues by reportable segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,122.3 million, up $163.9 million, or 17.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue growth in Insurance of $40.2 million was primarily driven by expansion of business from our new and existing clients of $37.7 million and an increase in revenues of $2.5 million that was mainly attributable to the appreciation of the Australian dollar, the U.K. pound sterling and the South African ZAR against the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Insurance revenues were 34.0% and 35.7% of our total revenues during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue growth in Healthcare of $11.2 million was primarily driven by expansion of business from our new and existing clients of $11.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Healthcare revenues were 10.0% and 10.6% of our total revenues during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue growth in Emerging Business of $14.5 million was primarily driven by expansion of business from our new clients and existing clients of $13.9 million and an increase in revenues of $0.6 million that was mainly attributable to the appreciation of the U.K. pound sterling and the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Emerging Business revenues were 14.9% and 15.9% of our total revenues during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue growth in Analytics of $98.0 million was attributable to the higher volumes in our annuity and project based engagements from our new and existing clients of $95.8 million, including contribution from our acquisition of Clairvoyant in December 2021 and an increase in revenues of $2.2 million mainly attributable to the appreciation of the U.K. pound sterling and the South African ZAR against the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Analytics revenues were 41.0% and 37.8% of our total revenues during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin: The following table sets forth cost of revenues and gross margin of our reportable segments.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenues was $690.9 million compared to $623.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $67.0 million, or 10.7%. Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 38.4% compared to 34.9% for year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 350 ("bps") primarily driven by higher revenues, operational efficiencies and lower COVID-19 related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in cost of revenues in Insurance of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increases in employee-related costs of $14.2 million on account of higher headcount and wage inflation, higher annual performance incentives and higher technology costs of $0.7 million on account of increased leverage of remote work model, partially offset by lower travel costs of $6.1 million, lower other operating costs of $0.3 million and foreign exchange gain, net of hedging of $0.9 million. Gross margin in Insurance increased by 510 bps during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenues, expansion in margin in certain existing clients, operational efficiencies and lower COVID-19 related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The decrease in cost of revenues in Healthcare of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to improved employee utilization in existing clients, resulting in lower employee-related costs of $2.9 million, and lower travel costs of $0.8 million, partially offset by higher facility costs of $0.4 million. Gross margin in Healthcare increased by 1,010 bps during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenues, expansion in margin in certain existing clients, operational efficiencies and lower COVID-19 related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in cost of revenues in Emerging Business of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increases in employee-related costs of $2.8 million on account of higher headcount and wage inflation, higher annual performance incentives, higher technology costs of $1.1 million on account of increased leverage of remote work model, partially offset by lower travel costs of $0.3 million, lower facility costs of $0.3 million, lower other operating costs of $0.3 million and foreign exchange gain, net of hedging $0.8 million. Gross margin in Emerging Business increased by 370 bps during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenues, operational efficiencies and lower COVID-19 related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in cost of revenues in Analytics of $60.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increases in employee-related costs of $50.4 million on account of higher headcount and wage inflation, higher annual performance incentives including incremental cost related to our acquisition of Clairvoyant in December 2021. The remaining increase was attributable to higher other operating costs of $13.8 million. This was partially offset by lower travel costs of $1.4 million, lower facility costs of $1.0 million on account of remote work model and foreign exchange gain, net of hedging of $1.3 million. Gross margin in Analytics increased by 40 bps during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenues and operational efficiencies compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses.
The increase in SG&A expenses of $52.4 million was primarily due to higher employee-related costs of $44.8 million on account of higher headcount and wage inflation, higher annual performance incentives, higher other operating costs of $6.0 million, COVID-19 related expenses of $3.1 million primarily related to financial support to family members of deceased employees, increase in technology cost of $2.4 million on account of continued investments, product development, digital technology, advanced automation, robotics, cloud, artificial intelligence, machine learning and acquisition-related cost of $0.8 million on account of our acquisition of Clairvoyant in December 2021, partially offset by lower facilities costs of $4.7 million due to optimization of office space.
Depreciation and Amortization.
The decrease in intangibles amortization expense of $1.6 million was primarily due to end of useful lives for certain intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in depreciation expense of $0.2 million was primarily due to depreciation related to our investments in new operating centers, internally developed software and accelerated depreciation resulting from a reduction in useful lives related to certain operating centers due to the impact of COVID-19 aggregating to $0.7 million, partially offset by foreign exchange gain, net of hedging $0.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income from Operations. Income from operations increased by $45.9 million, or 41.7%, from $110.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $155.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to higher revenues, partially offset by higher cost of revenues and higher SG&A expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of revenues, income from operations increased from 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 13.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Foreign Exchange Gains and Losses. Foreign exchange gains and losses are primarily attributable to the movement of the U.S. dollar against the Indian rupee, the U.K. pound sterling, the Philippine peso and the South African ZAR during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average exchange rate of the U.S. dollar against the Indian rupee decreased from 74.07 during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 73.88 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average exchange rate of the U.K. pound sterling against the U.S. dollar increased from 1.29 during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 1.38 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average exchange rate of the U.S. dollar against the Philippine peso decreased from 49.49 during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 49.36 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average exchange rate of the U.S. dollar against the South African ZAR decreased from 16.51 during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 14.92 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We recorded a net foreign exchange gain of $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net foreign exchange gain of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased from $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to settlement of outstanding obligations under the Notes (as defined below under “Financing Arrangements (Debt Facility and Notes)-Convertible Senior Notes”) on August 27, 2021, and lower effective interest rates of 1.7% under our Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, net.
Other income, net decreased by $5.3 million, from $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to lower amount invested in mutual funds and lower returns on such investments of $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on settlement of Notes. On August 27, 2021, we settled our outstanding obligations under the Notes and recognized a loss of $12.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 17 - Borrowings to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Tax Expense. The effective tax rate decreased from 22.2% during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 21.7% during the year ended December 31, 2021. We recorded income tax expense of $31.9 million and $25.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in the income tax expense was primarily a result of higher profit during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, increase in state taxes and increase in non-deductible expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by (i) the recording of higher excess tax benefits related to stock awards of $3.7 million pursuant to ASU No. 2016-09 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, and (ii) the recording of a one-time deferred tax benefit of $2.4 million on settlement of the Notes during the during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Income. Net income increased from $89.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $114.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increase in income from operations of $45.9 million, lower interest expense of $3.6 million, partially offset by loss on settlement of the Notes of $12.8 million, lower other income, net of $5.2 million and higher income tax expense of $6.3 million. As a percentage of revenues, net income increased from 9.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 10.2% during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $313.9 million and $402.8 million, respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, of which $277.4 million and $335.1 million, respectively, is located in foreign jurisdictions that upon distribution may be subject to withholding and other taxes. We periodically evaluate opportunities to distribute cash among our group entities to fund our operations in the United States and other geographies, and as and when we decide to distribute, we may have to accrue additional taxes in accordance with local tax laws, rules and regulations in the relevant foreign jurisdictions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repatriated to the United States $66.0 million (net of $3.5 million withholding taxes) from India and $42.5 million (net of $7.5 million withholding taxes) from the Philippines. These distributions do not constitute a change in our permanent reinvestment assertion. We base our decision to continue to indefinitely reinvest earnings in India and the Philippines on our estimate of the working capital required to support our operations in these geographies and periodically review our capital initiatives to support and expand our global operations, as well as whether there exits an economically viable rate of return on our investments made in India and the Philippines as compared to those made in the United States.
Operating Activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $184.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $203.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting higher working capital needs, offset by higher cash earnings. The major drivers contributing to the decrease of $18.6 million year-over-year included the following:
•Changes in accounts receivable, including unbilled receivable and advance billings, contributed to a lower cash flow of $91.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was a result of the higher accounts receivable resulting from revenue growth. Lower cash flows were also affected by our accounts receivable days sales outstanding, which increased to 56 days as of December 31, 2021 from 53 days as of December 31, 2020.
•Increase in net income of $25.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase in income from operations of $45.9 million driven by higher revenues, lower interest expense of $3.6 million, partially offset by loss on settlement of the Notes of $12.8 million, lower other income, net of $5.2 million, and higher income tax expense of $6.3 million.
•Increase in accrued employee costs, accrued expenses and other liabilities contributed to a higher cash flow of $76.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher annual performance incentives and other employee costs accruals of $54.3 million and higher accrued expenses due to an increase in our cost base to support revenue growth of $22.4 million.
•Other drivers decreasing cash flows in 2021 compared to 2020 included: income tax payments, net of refunds, of $29.3 million, primarily due to higher advance income tax payments on higher net income.
Investing Activities: Cash flows used for investing activities were $114.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to cash flows used for investing activities of $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $96.0 million was primarily due to an increase in cash used for a business acquisition of $76.8 million, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired, during the year ended December 31, 2021, net purchase of investments of $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net redemption of investments of $23.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This was partially offset by lower capital expenditures for purchase of long-lived assets, including investments in infrastructure, technology assets, software and product developments of $5.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, and acquisition of an additional stake in our equity affiliate of $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities: Cash flows used for financing activities were $146.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to cash flows used for financing activities of $89.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash flows used for financing activities was primarily due to net repayment of $29.0 million under our revolving Credit Facility and the Notes during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net repayments of $10.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, higher purchases of treasury stock by $38.4 million under our share repurchase program and lower proceeds from the exercise of stock options by $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect to use cash from operating activities to maintain and expand our business by making investments, primarily related to new facilities and capital expenditures associated with leasehold improvements to build our facilities, digital capabilities and purchase telecommunications equipment and computer hardware and software in connection with managing client operations.
We incurred $37.2 million of capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021. We expect to incur total capital expenditures of between $40 million to $45 million in 2022, primarily to meet our growth requirements, including additions to our facilities as well as investments in technology applications, product development, digital technology, advanced automation, robotics and infrastructure.
In connection with any tax assessment orders that have been issued or may be issued against us or our subsidiaries, we may be required to deposit additional amounts with respect to such assessment orders (see Note 25 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements herein for further details). We anticipate that we will continue to rely upon cash from operating activities to finance our working capital needs, capital expenditures and smaller acquisitions. If we have significant growth through acquisitions, we may need to obtain additional financing.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and sources of liquidity will be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements over the next 12 months. Our future cash requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, our investments in strategic initiatives, applications or technologies, operation centers and acquisition of complementary businesses, continued purchases under our board-authorized stock repurchase program, which may require the use of significant cash resources and/or additional financing. We anticipate that we will continue to rely upon cash from operating activities to finance most of our above mentioned requirements, while if we have significant growth through acquisitions, we may need to obtain additional financing.
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. These obligations include borrowings, including interest obligations, purchase commitments, operating and finance lease commitments, employee benefit payments under Gratuity plans and uncertain tax positions. See Note 17- Borrowings, Note 19- Employee Benefit Plans, Note 20- Leases, Note 21- Income Taxes and Note 25- Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements herein for further information on material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations.
In the ordinary course of business, we provide standby letters of credit to third parties primarily for facility leases. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit of $0.5 million, each, that were not recognized in our consolidated balance sheets. These are not reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We had no other off-balance sheet arrangements or obligations. We had no other off-balance sheet arrangements or obligations.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, (the “CARES Act”) allows employers to defer the payment of the employer share of Federal Insurance Contributions Act (“FICA”) taxes for the period from April 1, 2020 and ending December 31, 2020. The deferred amount is payable as follows: (1) 50% of the deferred amount was paid on or before December 31, 2021 and (2) the remaining 50% of the deferred amount will be paid on or before December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we deferred our contributions, net of payments to FICA of $3.1 million and $6.3 million, respectively, under the CARES Act. The deferred amount as of December 31, 2021 will be paid on or before December 31, 2022.
Financing Arrangements (Debt Facility and Notes)
The following tables summarizes our Debt balances as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
*Unamortized debt issuance costs for our revolving Credit Facility of $0.2 million and $0.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, are presented under “Other current assets” and “Other assets,” as applicable in our consolidated balance sheets.
Credit Agreement
On November 21, 2017, we and each of our wholly owned material domestic subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement with certain lenders, and Citibank, N.A. as Administrative Agent (the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for a $200.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) with an option to increase the commitments by up to $100.0 million, subject to certain approvals and conditions as set forth in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement also includes a letter of credit sub facility. The Credit Facility has a maturity date of November 21, 2022 and is voluntarily pre-payable from time to time without premium or penalty. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement may be used for working capital and general corporate purposes, including permitted acquisitions. On July 2, 2018, we exercised our option under the Credit Agreement to increase the commitments by $100.0 million, thereby utilizing the entire revolver under the Credit Facility of $300.0 million to fund our July 2018 acquisition of SCIOinspire Holdings, Inc.
Depending on the type of borrowing, loans under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate equal to the specified prime rate (alternate base rate) or adjusted LIBO rate, plus, in each case, an applicable margin. The applicable margin is tied to our total net leverage ratio and ranges from 0% to 0.75% per annum with respect to loans pegged to the specified prime rate, and 1.00% to 1.75% per annum on loans pegged to the adjusted LIBO rate. The revolving credit commitments under the Credit Agreement are subject to a commitment fee which is also tied to our total net leverage ratio, and ranges from 0.15% to 0.30% per annum on the average daily amount by which the aggregate revolving commitments exceed the sum of outstanding revolving loans and letter of credit obligations.
The revolving Credit Facility carried an effective interest rate as shown below:-
Obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by our material domestic subsidiaries and are secured by all or substantially all of our assets and that of our material domestic subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the ability to incur indebtedness, create liens, make certain investments, make certain dividends and related distributions, enter into, or undertake, certain liquidations, mergers, consolidations or acquisitions and dispose of assets or subsidiaries. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains a covenant to not permit the interest coverage ratio or the total net leverage ratio, both as defined for the four consecutive quarter period ending on the last day of each fiscal quarter, to be less than 3.5 to 1.0 or more than 3.0 to 1.0, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants listed under the Credit Agreement.
We entered into a second amendment (the “Amendment”) to our Credit Agreement, as amended, among the Company, as borrower, with certain lenders, and Citibank, N.A. as Administrative Agent to, among other things, permit the issuance by the Company of the Notes, and settlement upon maturity or conversion thereof, in accordance with the Investment Agreement, the indenture dated as of October 4, 2018 and the other documents entered into in connection therewith.
Convertible Senior Notes
On October 1, 2018, we entered into an investment agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) with Orogen Echo LLC (the “Purchaser”), an affiliate of The Orogen Group LLC, relating to the issuance to the Purchaser of $150.0 million, in an aggregate
principal amount of 3.5% per annum Convertible Senior Notes due October 1, 2024 (the “Notes”). The Notes were issued on October 4, 2018. The Notes carried interest at a rate of 3.5% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears in cash on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The Notes were convertible at an initial conversion rate of 13.3333 shares of the common stock per one thousand dollar principal amount of the Notes (which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $75 per share). We had the option to redeem the principal amount of the Notes, at our option, in whole but not in part, at a purchase price equal to the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest on or after October 1, 2021, if the closing sale price of our common stock exceeded 150% of the then-current conversion price for 20 or more trading days in the 30 consecutive trading day period preceding our exercise of this redemption right (including the trading day immediately prior to the date of the notice of redemption).We had the option elect to settle conversions of the Notes by paying or delivering, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock.
On August 27, 2021, we entered into a Payoff and Termination Agreement (the “Payoff and Termination Agreement”) with the Purchaser, pursuant to which we prepaid and settled our outstanding obligations under the Notes for an aggregate consideration of $236.7 million, excluding accrued and unpaid interest under the Notes calculated through and including, August 26, 2021, in the form of a combination of cash and shares of our common stock. As a result, we made a cash payment of $200.0 million to the Purchaser and satisfied the remainder of the obligation under the Notes by issuing to the Purchaser 310,394 shares of our common stock calculated at $118.37 per share based on a 20-day volume weighted average price ending on, and including, August 26, 2021. We satisfied the cash payment obligation under the Payoff and Termination Agreement by drawing $200.0 million from our existing revolving Credit Facility, and our common stock was issued from our existing treasury shares. In addition, except as set forth in the Payoff and Termination Agreement, the Investment Agreement was also terminated. See Note 17 - Borrowings and Note 18 - Capital Structure to our consolidated financial statements herein for further details.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized interest expense and amortization of debt discount, on the Notes as below:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements to our consolidated financial statements contained herein.