ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows of the Company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors.” All references herein to "2021" and "2020" refer to the 52-week periods ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 25, 2021.
Our management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is presented in the following sections:
OVERVIEW
Grounded in versatility and powered by a styling community, Express is a modern, multichannel apparel and accessories brand whose purpose is to Create Confidence & Inspire Self-Expression. Launched in 1980 with the idea that style, quality and value should all be found in one place, Express has been a part of some of the most important and culture-defining fashion trends. The Express Edit design philosophy ensures that the brand is always "of the now" so people can get dressed for every day and any occasion knowing that Express can help them look the way they want to look and feel the way they want to feel. We operate 561 retail and factory outlet stores in the United States and Puerto Rico, the express.com online store and the Express mobile app.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. Our business operations and financial performance have been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2020, we temporarily closed all of our retail and factory outlet stores and offices, and as a result all store associates and a number of home office employees were furloughed. As mandated shutdowns and stay-at-home orders went into effect across the country, we experienced an immediate reduction in sales levels compared to the prior year. We continued to be materially impacted by COVID-19 throughout fiscal year 2020, even after all of our stores re-opened, as customer traffic continued to be depressed, especially in our retail stores, and two of our key categories, wear to work and occasion wear, saw significant declines in demand.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 29
Beginning in the first quarter of 2021 and continuing throughout the balance of 2021, we have seen improved trends coinciding with the vaccination rollout and the lifting of COVID-19 related restrictions, especially in areas where COVID-19 guidelines were less restrictive. We continue to monitor and comply with all governmental regulations imposed.
Additionally, COVID-19 has contributed to disruptions and rising costs to global supply chains. Although we have successfully managed these challenges thus far, our ability to continue to replenish our inventory to meet continued levels of consumer demand could be impacted by further delays or disruptions. We expect these impacts to continue for as long as the global supply chain is experiencing these challenges. For additional information regarding risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors: Operational and Industry Risk Factors”.
OUTLOOK
Our comparable sales accelerated in each of the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 and we delivered substantial gross margin expansion. We delivered positive operating income and operating cash flow for the year. The EXPRESSway Forward strategy has effectively galvanized our organization, advanced our brand, and accelerated our business. We believe our 2021 results demonstrate the power of this strategy.
The following defines each pillar of the EXPRESSway Forward strategy and provides an update on each priority:
PRODUCT BRAND CUSTOMER EXECUTION
Product
We completely reimagined our product, bringing more style, more versatility, and more newness across our entire assortment. We established a design and merchandising philosophy called the Express Edit that supports our brand promise: “to edit the best of now for real life versatility”. We are designing best-in-class, modern product at incredible value, and gaining market share across some of the most significant, volume-driving categories.
Express customers have always appreciated newness and relied on us to help them be 'of the now', so we have a consistent flow of fashion throughout the year in each category.
Our occasion-based categories that have historically been our strength, and were disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, accelerated significantly as the year progressed. Dresses and men’s suits were particularly strong.
The foundation of every modern wardrobe is denim, and we completely reinvented our offering. We now offer a wide variety of fits, leg shape, innovative fabrics, colors and washes. For the last nine months of 2021, our denim had its best performance in recent history.
We introduced Express Essentials which are foundational pieces that help people build more flexible, versatile wardrobes. Our men’s polos and graphic t-shirts also delivered their best results in recent history.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 30
Brand
Restoring the relevance of the Express brand is a top priority. We have made good progress toward reinvigorating our brand, clarifying our message and articulating a clear, compelling brand purpose, to create confidence and inspire self-expression.
We have reinvented our marketing model, optimized the investment and allocation of our marketing spend, evolved to reflect where and how content is being consumed, and we are leveraging more social media platforms. Important indicators of the health and vitality of our brand, including brand tracking measures, social media engagement, and positive customer feedback, all continue to trend positively.
We have increased our spending on customer acquisition while decreasing spending related to store-wide and site-wide promotions, and reinvested those markdown dollars into marketing programs and activations that we believe drive customer traffic, engagement and conversion at much higher profits.
Customer
We are successfully engaging existing customers, acquiring new ones, and improving the quality of our customer file. Our Express Insider loyalty program brought in 2.7 million new customers and reactivated 2.2 million lapsed customers since its relaunch in the first quarter of 2021. We ended 2021 with the highest number of active loyalty members in the Company's history.
Execution
Outstanding execution helped accelerate sales across all channels. We refined our go-to-market process, advanced our multi-channel capabilities and identified meaningful operational and financial efficiencies. We have right sized our fleet, closed nearly 100 stores, and begun to execute a fleet optimization strategy. We effectively navigated supply chain challenges and applied strong financial discipline to both expenses and investments.
HOW WE ASSESS THE PERFORMANCE OF OUR BUSINESS
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. These key measures include net sales, comparable sales, eCommerce demand, transactions, cost of goods sold, buying and occupancy costs, gross profit/(loss)/gross margin, and selling, general, and administrative expenses. The following describes and discusses these measures.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 31
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 32
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 33
FISCAL YEAR COMPARISON
Net Sales
Net sales increased by approximately $661.9 million, or 55%, between 2021 and 2020. The sales increase was primarily attributed to our product and brand strategies resonating with our customers coupled with the vaccination rollout and the lifting of COVID-related restrictions during 2021, as compared to the material adverse impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on our business during 2020. Our retail comparable sales percentage increases were lower than our total retail sales percentage increases for 2021 due primarily to the impact of closed stores. This was due to our comparable sales calculation excluding sales for stores that were closed in the comparable period last year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit/(Loss)
The following table shows cost of goods sold, buying and occupancy costs, gross profit/(loss) in dollars, and gross margin percentage for the stated periods:
The 3,030 basis point increase in gross margin percentage, or gross profit/(loss) as a percentage of net sales, in 2021 compared to 2020 was comprised of a 1,300 basis point increase in merchandise margin and a 1,730 basis point decrease in buying and occupancy costs as a percentage of net sales. The increase in merchandise margin was primarily driven by positive customer response to our new receipts and significant reduction in promotional activity. The improvement in buying and occupancy leverage was driven by increased sales. In addition, we had a $34.4 million impairment related to certain long-lived store related assets and right of use assets in 2020. Refer to Note 2 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the impairment charges.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 34
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
The following table shows selling, general, and administrative expenses in dollars and as a percentage of net sales for the stated periods:
The $107.4 million increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily the result of an increase in variable costs driven by the sales increase, pandemic related store closures in 2020 and 2021 compensation related expenses and incremental investments in marketing.
Interest Expense, Net
The following table shows interest expense in dollars for the stated periods:
The $11.8 million increase in interest expense, net in 2021 compared to 2020 was the result of borrowing under our Term Loan Facility and Amended Revolving Credit Facility, which bear interest at variable rates. Refer to Note 6 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our borrowings during 2021.
Other (Income)/Expense, Net
The following table shows other (income)/expense in dollars for the stated periods:
The $3.0 million decrease in other (income)/expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was the result of a $2.7 million pre-tax write-off of our remaining investment in Homage, LLC, a privately held retail apparel company based in Columbus, Ohio ("Homage") in 2020. Refer to Note 2 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the write-off during 2020.
Income Tax Expense/(Benefit)
The following table shows income tax expense/(benefit) in dollars for the stated periods:
The effective tax rate was (2.2)% in 2021 compared to 12.1% in 2020. The effective tax rate for 2021 was less than the statutory tax rate due to the impact of nondeductible executive compensation. The effective tax rate for 2020 was less than the statutory tax rate due to the impact of establishing a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets, of which a portion relates to 2020 U.S. federal net operating losses that could not be carried back to offset taxable income in the five-year carryback period as part of the CARES Act. This was partially offset by a $42.1 million tax benefit related to the portion of the 2019 and 2020 U.S. federal net operating losses that are able to be carried back to years with a higher federal statutory tax rate than is currently enacted. Refer to Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the tax rate.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 35
Operating Income/(Loss), Net Loss, Diluted Earnings Per Share and EBITDA
Included in the table below is operating income/(loss), net loss, diluted earnings per share and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ("EBITDA") for 2021 and 2020, respectively. We supplement the reporting of our financial information determined under United States generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") with certain non-GAAP financial measures: adjusted operating income/(loss), adjusted net loss, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA. The following table presents these financial measures, each a non-GAAP financial measure, for the stated periods which eliminate certain non-core operating costs:
* No adjustments were made to operating income for 2021.
How These Measures Are Useful
We believe that these non-GAAP measures provide additional useful information to assist stockholders in understanding our financial results and assessing our prospects for future performance. Management believes adjusted operating income/(loss), adjusted net loss, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA are important indicators of our business performance because they exclude items that may not be indicative of, or are unrelated to, our underlying operating results, and may provide a better baseline for analyzing trends in the business. In addition, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA are used as performance measures in our long-term executive compensation program for purposes of determining the number of equity awards that are ultimately earned and EBITDA is also a metric used in our short-term cash incentive compensation plan.
Limitations of the Usefulness of These Measures
Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies' non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. These adjusted financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported net loss, operating income/(loss), or diluted earnings per share. These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing our operations that, when viewed with the GAAP results and the below reconciliations to the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provide a more complete understanding of our business. Management strongly encourages investors and stockholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures (adjusted operating income/(loss), adjusted net loss, and adjusted diluted earnings per share) with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures (operating income/(loss), net loss, and diluted earnings per share, respectively) for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
a.Valuation allowance released due to utilization of deferred tax assets in the current year.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 36
a.Items tax affected at the applicable deferred or statutory rate.
b.Impairment before tax was $2.7 million and was recorded in other expense, net.
c.Valuation allowance provided against previously recognized deferred tax assets and 2020 losses, less net operating losses utilized under the CARES Act.
d.Income tax benefit primarily due to a net operating loss carryback under the CARES Act to years with a higher federal statutory tax rate than is currently enacted.
e.Represents the tax impact related to the expiration of former executive non-qualified stock options.
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measure EBITDA with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Forward-Looking Liquidity Discussion
Our liquidity position benefits from the fact that we generally collect cash from sales to customers the same day or, in the case of credit or debit card transactions, within three to five days of the related sale, and we have up to 75 days to pay certain merchandise vendors and 45 days to pay the majority of our non-merchandise vendors. We also have commitments under lease agreements and debt agreements that will require future cash outlays. For information on future payments required under lease agreements see Note 4 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and for future payment information related to our short-term and long-term debt see Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Based upon the sales and results of operations recovery seen during 2021, as well as the availability of additional liquidity under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility, and expense control and other measures taken to date, our liquidity position has improved significantly. We continue to be in compliance with the financial covenants under our Amended Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility and plan to continue our cost reduction measures taken to date, and we are forecasting continued strength in both sales and profitability in 2022. We believe this will result in sufficient cash flows to support our ongoing operations and to meet our covenant requirements under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility for one year following the date that the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report are issued and beyond.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 37
As previously disclosed, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in significant disruption to our business. As a result, our revenues, results of operations and cash flows continued to be materially adversely impacted in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 but we saw significant improvement as the year progressed. For the 52-week period ended January 29, 2022, we reported a net loss of $14.4 million but positive operating cash flows of $89.4 million. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and our ongoing working capital requirements we continue to utilize our Amended Revolving Credit Facility and have $96.7 million outstanding under our Term Loan Facility including $6.7 million outstanding that will be repaid upon receipt of the CARES Act receivable. We have (and in the future may continue to have) a negative working capital balance. Our current liabilities include current operating lease liabilities, for which the corresponding operating right of use assets are recorded as non-current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. However, the cash collected from our sales is typically collected before payment is due on our current liabilities. Subsequent to year-end, we have borrowed an additional $87.0 million to fund normal working capital needs. The Amended Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan Facility contain certain affirmative and negative covenants. Refer to Note 6 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding the Amended Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility.
Analysis of Cash Flows
A summary of cash provided by or used in operating, investing, and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Our business historically relies on cash flows from operations as our primary source of liquidity, with the majority of those cash flows being generated in the fourth quarter of the year. Our primary operating cash needs are for merchandise inventories, payroll, store rent and marketing. Net cash provided by operating activities was $89.4 million in 2021 compared to $323.6 million used in operating activities in 2020. The $413.0 million improvement in cash flows from operating activities for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily driven by the temporary closure of our stores as a result of COVID-19 during 2020 and our improved operating results during 2021. In addition, we received approximately $60.0 million of CARES Act receivables during 2021 ($43.3 million and $13.7 million related to our 2020 and 2019 income tax returns, respectively, and $3.0 million related to the employee retention credit). This was partially offset by the fact that we did not initially make our store rent payments for April, May or June of 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 related store closures. We established an accrual for the rent payments that were not made and have continued to recognize accrued rent expense. As a result of negotiations with certain landlords, we have since made rent payments for the majority of stores and some landlords have agreed to abate certain rent payments. The appropriate adjustments were made to accrued rent and are reflected in the cash flows from operations.
Investing Activities
We also use cash for investing activities. Our capital expenditures consist primarily of new and remodeled store construction and fixtures and investments in information technology. We had capital expenditures of approximately $34.8 million in 2021 and $16.9 million in 2020. The increase in investing activities in 2021 was primarily driven by investments in information technology to support our strategic business initiatives.
Financing Activities
Credit Facilities
On January 13, 2021, we entered into a definitive loan agreement with Sycamore Partners as lead lender, along with Wells Fargo and Bank of America Merrill Lynch. The new financing included a $90.0 million FILO Term Loan
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 38
received in 2020, and a $50.0 million Delayed Draw Term Loan ("DDTL"), that was drawn down in March 2021. During 2021, we received approximately $43.3 million of CARES Act income tax refunds that was used to repay a portion of the DDTL. The remainder of the CARES Act tax refunds are expected to be received in 2022, at which time we will be required to repay the remaining balance on the DDTL. This financing is in addition to our existing $250.0 million Amended Revolving Credit Facility under which we drew down $165.0 million in the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. Upon the receipt of the proceeds from the FILO Term Loan, we repaid $59.0 million of the amount borrowed under our Amended Revolving Credit Facility, and during 2021, we repaid a net additional $71.1 million. The expiration date of the facilities is May 24, 2024.
As of January 29, 2022, the net amount outstanding under our facilities was $128.8 million, of which $11.2 million is classified as short-term debt and $117.6 million is classified as long-term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, net of unamortized costs, and approximately $145.8 million was available for borrowing under our Amended Revolving Credit Facility subject to certain borrowing base limitations and after outstanding letters of credit in the amount of $34.6 million, primarily related to our third party logistics contract. Refer to Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our Amended Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility.
Share Repurchases
On November 28, 2017, the Board approved a share repurchase program that authorizes us to repurchase up to $150.0 million of our outstanding common stock using available cash. During 2021 and 2020, we did not repurchase shares under the stock repurchase program.
ATM Equity Offering Sales Agreement
On June 3, 2021, we entered into an ATM Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with BofA Securities, Inc. (“BofA”), as the sales agent to sell up to 15.0 million shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, through an “at-the-market” offering program. Such shares are issued pursuant to the Company’s shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-253368) filed with the SEC on April 6, 2021. During 2021, we did not sell any shares under the Sales Agreement. We intend to use net proceeds, if any, from the sale of the common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement for general corporate purposes, which may include investments in working capital, or capital expenditures, including the acceleration of investments to grow and enhance our eCommerce channel and omni-channel assets, the repayment of indebtedness, and other investments.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 39
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates, and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following policies involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position and are, therefore, discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. More information on all of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2021 Form 10-K | 40