Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Figure Acquisition Corp. I.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Figure Acquisition Corp. I. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the annual financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on December 15, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Our Sponsor is Fintech Acquisition LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on February 18, 2021. On February 23, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 28,750,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $16.3 million, inclusive of approximately $10.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,166,667 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $7.75 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $287.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account and was invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or February 23, 2023, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares for a per share pro rata portion of the Trust Account, including interest and not previously released to us to fund our working capital requirements (subject to an annual limit of $500,000) (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of such net interest to pay dissolution expenses) and (iii) as promptly as possible following such redemption, dissolve and liquidate the balance of our net assets to our remaining stockholders, as part of our plan of dissolution and liquidation. Our Sponsor and our executive officers and independent director nominees (the “initial stockholders”) entered into a letter agreement with us, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to participate in any redemption with respect to their Founder Shares; however, if the initial stockholders or any of our officers, directors or affiliates acquire shares of common stock in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled to a pro rata share of the Trust Account upon our redemption or liquidation in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the required time period. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the Initial Public Offering price per Unit in the Initial Public Offering.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $2.93 million, which included a loss from operations of $0.79 million, offering cost expense allocated to warrants of $0.62 million, excess fair value of private warrants in excess of proceeds received of $0.16 million, and offset mainly by a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4.4 million and interest earned on investments held in trust account of $0.05 million.
For the period from December 15, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $8,134, relating to formation and operating costs.
Our business activities from inception to December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our formation and completing our IPO, and since the offering, our activity has been limited to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.8 million in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $0.8 million.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the cash receipt of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder Shares and Class L Shares, and an up to $300,000 note agreement issued to our Sponsor, which was repaid by us on February 25, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. To date, there were no Working Capital Loans outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
If the Company does not consummate an initial business combination by February 23, 2023, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We agreed to pay the underwriters an additional fee (the “Deferred Underwriting Fees”) of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $10,062,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Except as set forth below, there have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies as discussed in the Company’s final prospectus filed with the SEC, dated February 18, 2021.
Warrants Liability
We evaluated the Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers as well as provisions that provided for potential changes to the settlement amounts dependent upon the characteristics of the holder of the warrant, precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815 and are not eligible for an exception from derivative accounting, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statements of Operations in the period of change.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the Class A Common Stock sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, all shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net (Loss) Income Per Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has two classes of shares, Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The Company has not considered the effect of warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the private placement to purchase 12,354,167 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share of common stock is the same as basic net income (loss) per share of common stock for the period presented.
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per common stock for Class A common stock and Class B common stock is calculated by dividing net income (loss) attributable to the Company by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of common stock.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we intend to rely on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, we will not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.