Item 7.‎ Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Freedom Acquisition I Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 23, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Our sponsor is Freedom Acquisition I LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company.
The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) became effective on February 25, 2021. On March 2, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 units, which included the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 4,500,000 units at the Initial Public Offering price to cover over-allotments (the “Units”, and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units, the “Public Shares” and, with respect to the one-fourth of one redeemable warrant included in the Units, the “Public Warrants”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $19.18 million, inclusive of approximately $12.08 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,266,667 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $9.4 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $345.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we have not completed a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 2, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in each case, to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our outstanding Warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to consummate a business combination within the Combination Period.
Recent Developments
We have issued an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”) in the amount of up to $500,000 to our sponsor. The proceeds of the Note, which may be drawn down from time to time until we consummate our initial business combination, will be used for general working capital purposes. The Note bears no interest and is payable in full upon the earlier to occur of (i) twenty-four (24) months from the closing of our initial public offering (or such later date as may be extended in accordance with the terms of our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association) or (ii) the consummation of our business combination. A failure to pay the principal within five business days of the date specified above or the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy action shall be deemed an event of default, in which case the Note may be accelerated. Prior to the Company’s first payment of all or any portion of the principal balance of the Note in cash, our sponsor has the option to convert all, but not less than all, of the principal balance of the Note into private placement warrants (the “Conversion Warrants”), each warrant exercisable for one ordinary share of the Company at an exercise price of $1.50 per share. The terms of the Conversion Warrants would be identical to the warrants issued by the Company to the sponsor in a private placement that was consummated in connection with our initial public offering. Our sponsor shall be entitled to certain registration rights relating to the Conversion Warrants. The issuance of the Note was made pursuant to the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $5,128,650, which consisted of unrealized gain on change in fair value of warrant liability of $9,381,750 and investment income of $105,681 on our amounts held in the Trust Account, offset by $3,782,028 of operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses, foreign currency exchange loss of $1,475 and offering expenses related to warrant issuance of $575,278.
For the period from December 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $5,494, which consists of formation and operation costs.
We classify the Warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering and Private Placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant instruments to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. As part of the reclassification to warrant liability, we reclassed a portion of the offering costs associated with the Initial Public Offering originally charged to shareholders’ equity, to an expense in the statement of operations in the amount of $575,278 based on a relative fair value basis. For the period from the Initial Public Offering to December 31, 2021, the change in fair value of the Warrants was a decrease in the liability of approximately $9,381,750.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the Trust Account of $277,583 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the Trust Account are generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem ordinary shares. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the Trust Account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2021, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, the promissory note of $90,996, which was used to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering and was fully repaid as of the Initial Public Offering date, and the remaining net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants.
We anticipate that the $277,583 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021, together with the $500,000 working capital loan from our sponsor, as described in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Recent Developments”, will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next twelve (12) months from the issuance of the financial statements, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional working capital loans from the initial shareholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to the business combination. Moreover, we will need to raise additional capital through additional loans from our sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of its business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until March 2, 2023 (absent any extensions of such period with shareholder approval) to consummate our initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate our initial business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 2, 2023. We intend to complete our initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by March 2, 2023.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities other than described below.
We have an agreement to pay the sponsor a total of up to $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on February 25, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
We have an agreement to pay the underwriters of our Initial Public Offering a deferred fee of $12,075,000 in the aggregate, which will become payable to them from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase Warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We account for our 14,891,667 Warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering (8,625,000) and Private Placement (6,266,667) as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants has been estimated using Monte Carlo simulations at each measurement date. The fair value of the Public Warrants was initially estimated using Monte Carlo simulations. After the Public Warrants were separately traded, the measurement of the Public Warrants used an observable market quote in an active market.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 14,891,667 potential ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Warrants were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the Warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.