ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of predictive, future-tense or forward-looking terminology, such as “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “estimates,” “plans,” “may,” “intends,” “will,” or similar terms. Investors are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve significant risks and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. The following discussion should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
OVERVIEW
We are a trusted data protection software leader modernizing disaster recovery and backup operations for the hybrid cloud world. The Company enables enterprise customers and managed service providers to secure, migrate, and protect their data while reducing data storage and long-term retention costs by up to 95%. More than 1,000 organizations and managed service providers worldwide standardize on FalconStor as the foundation for their cloud first data protection future. Our products are offered through and supported by a worldwide network of leading managed service providers (“MSPs”), systems integrators, resellers, and original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”).
Our products address a demand for enterprise data protection driven by the manner in which consumers and businesses are increasingly interacting in a digital space through multiple devices, networks and platforms. The onset of the coronavirus pandemic accelerated this shift, as ongoing remote work and work from home arrangements introduced novel challenges to maintaining enterprise data security. The adoption of increased employee mobility and flexible remote work arrangements, such as a broader incorporation of cloud technology and the option for employees to use their own devices, has introduced additional vulnerabilities that businesses must monitor and protect through solutions like ours in order to maintain enterprise data integrity.
Our products are utilized by enterprises and MSPs to address two key areas of enterprise data protection: (i) long-term data retention and recovery, and (ii) data replication to preserve business continuity. Our integration with modern cloud-based data storage environments, such as IBM, AWS and Microsoft Azure, enables our enterprise customers to significantly reduce costs and improve the portability, security and accessibility of their enterprise data. We believe this accessibility is key in our modern world, where data must be protected and intelligently leveraged to facilitate learning, improve product design and drive competitive advantage. Our products can be used regardless of the underlying hardware, cloud and source-data, which enables our enterprise customers to leverage their existing hardware and software investments.
Since the beginning of 2020, we have focused our go to market efforts on long-term data retention and recovery data protection segment, building on the momentum we generated in 2019 and increasing profitability. In 2021, we increased our go-to-market investment within our core regions of the Americas, EMEA, Japan, Korea, and Southeast Asia, and released StorSafeTM, the next generation of our VTL product family built for MSPs.
GAAP subscription revenue increased 40% in year ended 2021 from year ended 2020. Despite the increase in GAAP subscription revenue, GAAP total revenue in the year ended 2021 decreased 4.0% year-over-year. During the year ended 2021, we generated a net income of $0.2 million, compared to a net income of $1.1 million in the year ended 2020.
While uncertainties continue to exist as a result of COVID-19, we have seen our customers and prospects continue to invest in the business critical area of data production in which we sell our solutions.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we continued to deliver innovation and enhance each of our products. Our StorSafeTM solution is a vital backup long-term archive retention tool in enterprise IT departments’ data protection arsenal and for MSPs that provide data protection as a service to enterprise companies. It enables them to modernize their backup and archive environments, leverage efficient hybrid- and public-cloud storage environments, such as those provided by IBM, AWS and Microsoft Azure, save operational costs, and improve restore performance for rapid remote disaster recovery.
Through StorSafeTM, we are making progress expanding our technology to deliver an enterprise-class, highly flexible and efficient backup and long-term data storage optimization solution for the hybrid cloud world.
Beyond our long-term retention and reinstatement products, our StorGuardTM business continuity driven data replication solution gives our customers the ability to move workloads to the right destination, on-premises or in the cloud, with advanced insight. This solution is designed for MSPs and enterprise organizations with complex, heterogeneous IT environments and the full spectrum of data management use cases, including but not limited to large enterprises, universities, health care entities and governmental institutions. StorGuardTM is modern, comprehensive and easy-to-use software solution that enables IT professionals to have complete insight into and control over their organization’s data.
To provide for greater ease of use for all our products, we also made significant enhancements to our central data management console, now called StorSightTM, to interface with each of our products to provide a holistic view of an enterprise’s entire data protection environment - whether on-premises data centers, public cloud and hybrid - as well as the key analytics, reports and dashboards our customers need to continuously optimize their operations.
FalconStor continues to focus on MSPs, enterprise customers, and OEM partners. These markets offer the most significant opportunity and are best suited to realize the value of FalconStor products, and provide an efficient and effective access to broad, worldwide markets. Most of our revenue comes from sales to MSPs and to enterprise customers through resellers.
Our “Business Partner” program for our MSPs and resellers provides financial incentives for those partners that are willing to make a commitment to FalconStor through training, marketing and revenue. As part of our review of all of our operations to maximize savings without sacrificing sales, and in connection with our Business Partner program, we continually review our relationship with each of our partners in all regions. We decided to focus on only those partners who have the expertise, personnel and networks to identify potential customers and to service our end users.
Historically, the majority of our software licenses have been sold on a capacity basis and have included a perpetual right to use the licensed capacity. Now, we also offer our various licenses on a subscription or term-based model, which gives a customer the right to utilize our solutions over a designated period of time. We expect revenue from subscription-based licensing to increase over the next several years.
Fluctuation in our revenue is driven by the volume and mix of sales from period to period. Revenue allocated to perpetual and term software licenses are recognized at a point in time upon electronic delivery of the download link and the license keys, as these products have significant standalone functionality. Product maintenance and support services are satisfied over time as they are stand-ready obligations throughout the support period. As a result, revenues associated with maintenance services are deferred and recognized as revenue ratably over the term of the contract. Revenues associated with professional services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance.
COVID-19
We are closely monitoring the impact of the 2019 novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, on all aspects of our business. In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic and the President of the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. Since then, the COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly spread across the globe and has already resulted in significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. The outbreak of COVID-19 has caused and may continue to cause travel bans or disruptions, and in some cases, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of businesses and greater uncertainty in global financial markets. The impact of COVID-19 is fluid and uncertain, but it has caused and may continue to cause various negative effects, including an inability to meet with actual or potential customers, our end customers deciding to delay or abandon their planned purchases or failing to make payments, and delays or disruptions in our or our partners’ supply chains.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED WITH THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $14.2 million in revenue, as compared to $14.8 million during the prior year period. While total revenue declined by 4%, our strategic shift to subscription-based licenses resulted in a GAAP subscription revenue increase of 40%.
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 7% to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total gross profit decreased $0.7 million, or 6%, to $12.2 million for the current year, compared with $12.9 million for 2020. Total gross margin decreased to 86% for the current year, compared with 88% for 2020. The decrease in our total gross margin percentage was primarily due to a decrease in support and services revenue combined with an increase in support and services costs. Generally, our total gross profits and
total gross margins fluctuate based on several factors, including (i) revenue growth levels, (ii) changes costs to provide support and services, and (iii) our product offerings and mix of sales.
Overall, our total operating expenses increased 4.2% from $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to increases in selling and marketing costs. We will continue to evaluate the appropriate headcount levels to properly align our resources with our current and long-term outlook and to take actions in areas of the Company that are not performing.
Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million, compared with a net income of $1.1 million for the previous year.
Net loss attributable to common stockholders, which includes the effects of the Series A Preferred Stock dividends (including accrued dividends) and accretion, was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with a net loss of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We ended the year with $3.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared to $1.9 million at December 31, 2020 and deferred revenue of $6.1 million as of December 31, 2021, compared with $7.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
Revenue
Product revenue
Product revenue is comprised of sales of both licenses for our software solutions and sales of the platforms on which the software is installed. This includes stand-alone software applications and, on occasion, software integrated with industry standard hardware. We no longer primarily source or sell hardware, rather we facilitate our customers in buying their own hardware. Our products are sold through (i) value-added resellers, (ii) distributors, and/or (iii) directly to end-users. These revenues are recognized when all the applicable criteria under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States are met.
Product revenue increased 2% from $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which resulted from an increase in new customers purchasing both subscription and perpetual licenses. Product revenue represented 51% and 48% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We continue to invest in our product portfolio by refreshing and updating our existing product lines and developing our next generation of innovative product offerings to drive our sales volume in support of our long-term outlook.
Support and services revenue
Support and services revenue is comprised of revenue from (i) maintenance and technical support services, (ii) professional services primarily related to the implementation of our software, and (iii) engineering services. Revenue derived from maintenance and technical support contracts are deferred and recognized ratably over the contractual maintenance term. Revenues associated with professional and engineering services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance. Support and services revenue decreased 10% from $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in support and services revenue from the previous year was attributable to a
decreases in maintenance and technical support services revenue which was slightly offset by an increase in professional services revenue.
Maintenance and technical support services revenue decreased from $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.4 million for the year ended 2021. Our maintenance and technical support service revenue results primarily from (i) the purchase of maintenance and support contracts by our customers, and (ii) the renewal of maintenance and support contracts by our existing and new customers after their initial contracts expire. The decrease in maintenance and technical support service revenue from the previous year reflects a decline in maintenance renewal revenue as a result of customers converting to subscription contracts.
Professional services revenue increased from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Professional services revenue can vary from period to period based upon (i) the number of solutions sold during the existing and previous periods, (ii) the number of our customers who elect to purchase professional services, (iii) the number of professional services contracts that are performed during the period, and (iv) the number of customers who elect to purchase engineering services. We expect professional services revenue to continue to vary from period to period based upon the number of customers who elect to utilize our professional services upon purchasing any of our solutions.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue, gross profit and gross margin
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of hardware and warranty expenses. Cost of support and service revenue consists primarily of personnel and other costs associated with providing software implementations, technical support under maintenance contracts and training.
Total gross profit decreased $0.7 million, or 6%, from $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Total gross margin decreased to 86% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with 88% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was substantially the same at $0.3 million compared with $0.3 million for the same period in 2020. Product gross margin was also essentially unchanged at 96% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with 96% for the same period in 2020. Our cost of support and service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $0.1 million, or 6%, to $1.6 million, compared with $1.5 million for the same period in 2020. Support and service gross margin decreased to 77% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 80% for the same period in 2020. The decrease in support and service gross margin, compared to the previous year, was primarily attributable to a decrease in support and services revenue combined with an increase in consulting services costs related to implementations and technical support.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist primarily of personnel costs for product development, and other related costs associated with the development of new products, enhancements to existing products, quality assurance and testing. Research and development costs increased $0.4 million, or 15%, to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2.5 million in 2020. The increase in research and development costs was primarily related to an increase in professional fees as well as personnel related costs resulting from our reinstatement of workforce that was reduced as part of the 2020 Restructuring Plan implemented in response to the novel coronavirus pandemic. For further information, refer to Note (14) Restructuring Costs to our consolidated financial statements. We continue to provide substantial resources in support of our research and development activities to continue to enhance and to test our core products and in the development of new innovative products, features and options.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of sales and marketing personnel and related costs, travel, public relations expense, marketing literature and promotions, commissions, trade show expenses, and the costs associated with our foreign sales offices. Selling and marketing expenses increased $1.1 million, or 23%, to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in selling and marketing expenses was primarily related to commissions, promotional campaign expenses, contractors, professional fees and additional software support, which are partially offset by a decrease in bonuses in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on Litigation Settlement
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $0.6 million for a legal settlement of a contractual dispute with a marketing/sales firm. For further information, refer to Note (13) Litigation, to our consolidated financial statements.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of general and administrative functions, public company related costs, directors’ and officers’ insurance, legal and professional fees, and other general corporate overhead costs. General and administrative expenses decreased $0.1 million, or 4%, to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was due primarily to reductions in professional and contractor fees which are partially offset by an increase in Board fees during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Restructuring costs
In June 2017, the Board approved the 2017 Plan, a comprehensive plan to increase operating performance. The 2017 Plan resulted in a realignment and reduction in workforce. The 2017 Plan was substantially completed by the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2017 and when combined with previous workforce reductions in the second quarter of Fiscal 2017 reduced our workforce to approximately 81 employees at December 31, 2017. As part of this consolidation effort, the Company vacated a portion of its former Melville, NY office space during the three months ended June 30, 2018. In accordance with accounting standards governing costs associated with exit or disposal activities, expenses related to future rental payments for which the Company no longer intends to receive any economic benefit are accrued, net of any anticipated sublease income, when the Company ceases use of the leased space. As the lease has terminated in April 2021, there are no further restructuring costs associated with this lease.
During the three months ended September 30, 2019, the Company adopted a Plan, a plan to better align the Company’s cost structure with the skills and resources required to more effectively execute the Company’s long-term growth strategy and to support revenue levels the Company expected to achieve on a go forward basis, implement tighter expense controls, cease non-core activities and downsize several facilities (the "2019 Plan"). During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $0 and $0.1 million in severance expense, respectively as a result of this action. The 2019 Plan was substantially completed as of March 31, 2020.
Given the commercial uncertainty caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic, or COVID-19, the Company developed and implemented an even more aggressive expense control plan in March 2020, that it kept in place for the remainder of 2020 (the
"2020 Plan"). The 2020 Plan reduced the Company's annual cash expense run rate by $4.0 million or 29%. The Company furloughed 21 positions worldwide, and 20 of these positions were reinstated by the fourth quarter of 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not incurred severance expense as a result of this action.
Restructuring expense decreased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $0.8 million, compared to a $1.0 million restructuring charge in the prior year period. For further information, refer to Note (14) Restructuring Costs, to our consolidated financial statements.
Gain on Debt Extinguishment
Gain on debt extinguishment increased $754,000, to a gain of $754,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0 in the prior year period. The Company's loan under the PPP was forgiven on March 30, 2021. For further information, refer to Note (7) Notes Payable to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest and Other Expense
Interest and other expense is comprised of interest expense on our term loan, foreign currency gains and losses and the change in fair value our embedded derivatives. Interest and other expense decreased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $0.7 million, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest and other expense primarily relates to payments made on outstanding debt. The fluctuation in interest and other income (loss) from quarter to quarter also relates to foreign currency gains and losses, interest income, and the change in fair value of our embedded derivatives. For more information on our derivative instruments, see Note (3) Fair Value Measurements to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an income tax provision of $526,763, consisting of federal, state and local and foreign taxes. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 72.1%.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Principal Sources of Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents balances generated from operating, investing and financing activities. Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2021 totaled $3.2 million, compared with $1.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
As described in Note (9) Stockholders' Equity to our consolidated financial statements, on June 23, 2021, the Company issued and sold an aggregate of 811,750 shares of its common stock in a public offering underwritten by Roth, which included 86,750 shares purchased by Roth pursuant to the partial exercise of its over-allotment option. At a price of $4.10 per share, the Company received net proceeds of approximately $2.7 million after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses paid by the Company.
Also, as described in Note (9) Stockholders' Equity to our consolidated financial statements, on July 27, 2021 the Company issued and sold an aggregate of 285,000 shares of its common stock in a public offering underwritten by Roth. At a price of $4.10 per share, the Company received net proceeds of approximately $0.9 million after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses paid by the Company.
We are currently a party to the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement. In connection with the then-proposed public offering of the Company as described in the Company's Registration Statement on Form S-1, as amended, originally filed on June 3, 2021, we entered into the Loan Extension Letter Agreement, which provided for an extension of the maturity date on Hale Capital’s portion of the outstanding indebtedness owed under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement to June 30, 2023, which constituted $2.2 million of the $3.5 million principal amount outstanding as of June 2, 2021. The remaining $1.3 million of the principal amount outstanding, which was owed to other lenders, was repaid in full on June 30, 2021. See Note (7) Notes Payable to our consolidated financial statements for more information. Also, as described further in Note (8) Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock to our consolidated financial statements, Hale Capital, HCP-FVA, an affiliated party of Hale Capital, and other affiliates of Hale Capital extended the commencement of the optional redemption date of the Series A Preferred Stock from July 30, 2021 to July 30, 2023. The amendment was approved by our shareholders at our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders and filed with the Delaware Secretary of State on June 25, 2021. If such Series A Preferred Stock was
redeemed at December 31, 2021, the Company would have been required to pay the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock $14.5 million. The Company believes its current cash balances, together with anticipated cash flows from operating activities and the extensions of the maturity of its borrowings and preferred stock, will be sufficient to meet its working capital requirements for at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements were available to be issued.
The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement has customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. The negative covenants include financial covenants relating to in-force annual contract value. The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement also contains customary events of default, including but not limited to payment defaults, cross defaults with certain other indebtedness, breaches of covenants, bankruptcy events and a change of control. In the case of an event of default, as administrative agent under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement, HCP-FVA, an affiliate of Hale Capital may (and upon the written request of lenders holding in excess of 50% of the term loans, which must include HCP-FVA, is required to) accelerate payment of all obligations under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement, and seek other available remedies.
The restrictions in the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement may prevent us from taking actions that we believe would be in the best interests of our business, and may make it difficult for us to successfully execute our business strategy or effectively compete with companies that are not similarly restricted. In addition, our ability to comply with the financial and other covenants and restrictions in the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement will largely depend on the pricing of our products and services, and our ability to successfully implement our overall business strategy. We cannot assure you that we will be granted waivers or amendments to the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement if for any reason we are unable to comply with these covenants and restrictions. The breach of any of these covenants and restrictions could result in a default under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement, which could result in an acceleration of our indebtedness.
As described in Part II, Item 8, Note (7), Notes Payable to our consolidated financial statements, to help ensure adequate liquidity during this period and in light of uncertainties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company entered into the PPP Loan with Peapack-Gladstone Bank on April 28, 2020 which had an aggregate principal amount of $754,000. The PPP Loan was forgiven on March 30, 2021.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital surplus of $1.3 million, which is inclusive of current deferred revenue of $4.6 million, and a stockholders' deficit of $13.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net income of $0.2 million and negative cash flow from operations of $0.9 million. The Company's total cash balance at December 31, 2021 was $3.2 million, an increase of $1.3 million compared to December 31, 2020. On April 28, 2020, the Company entered into the PPP Loan with Peapack-Gladstone Bank in an aggregate principal amount of $754,000, which was forgiven by the Small Business Administration on March 30, 2021. On June 30, 2021, the Company repaid $1.3 million of the $3.5 million principal amount that was outstanding as of June 2, 2021 under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement.
In the third quarter of 2019, the Company adopted the 2019 Plan to better align the Company’s cost structure with the skills and resources required to more effectively execute the Company’s long-term growth strategy and to support revenue levels the Company expected to achieve on a go forward basis. In connection with the 2019 Plan, the Company eliminated 23 positions worldwide, implemented tighter expense controls, ceased non-core activities and downsized several facilities. As of December 31, 2021, the 2020 Plan is considered to be completed.
Given the commercial uncertainty caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic, or COVID-19, the Company developed and implemented the 2020 Plan that it kept in place for the remainder of 2020. This plan reduced the Company's annual cash expense run rate by $4.0 million or 29%. The Company has furloughed 21 positions worldwide, and 20 of these positions were reinstated by December 31, 2021. The 2020 Plan was completed on December 31, 2020.
Based on its projected cash flows from operations, recently completed financing activities, cost cutting measures in place and existing cash on hand, the Company is projecting to have sufficient liquidity and to be cash flow positive through March 10, 2023.
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash flow information is as follows:
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $0.7 million of net cash provided by operating activities in the prior year period. The changes in net cash used in and provided by operating activities for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were primarily due to our net income (loss) and adjustments for net changes in operating assets and liabilities, driven by decreases in our deferred revenue, accrued expenses and operating lease liabilities, partially offset by increases in other assets and prepaid expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with net cash used in investing activities of $0.0 million for the prior year period. Included in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are purchases of property and equipment, intangible assets and cash received from security deposits.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with net used in by financing activities of $0.2 million for the prior year period. The change in net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 included net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, less offering costs, and payments on our debt. The net cash used in financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to the payoff of the term loan which was partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of the PPP Loan.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, our significant commitments are related to (i) the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement, (ii) our operating leases for our office facilities, (iii) dividends (including accrued dividends) on our Series A Preferred Stock, and (iv) the potential redemption of the Series A Preferred Stock as discussed above.
The following is a schedule summarizing our significant obligations to make future payments under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (at such date, the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock had not exercised their redemption rights):
(a) See Note (7) Notes Payable to our consolidated financial statements for further information and for a detailed description of the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement.
(b) Represents our liability for uncertain tax positions. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes.
(c) Represents our potential liability if the holders of our Series A Preferred Stock redeem their shares for cash. The earliest date in which a redemption can occur is July 30, 2023. For further information, see Note (8) Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock to our consolidated financial statements.
(d) Our agreements with the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock provide that such holders will receive quarterly dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock at prime rate plus 5%, subject to a maximum dividend rate of 10%. We also have the ability to accrue and roll over dividends. Due to the lack of sufficient surplus to pay dividends as required by the Delaware General Corporation Law, the Company was not permitted to pay the fourth quarter 2016 dividend in cash or common stock and has been accruing its quarterly dividends since then. This amount represents our potential liability to pay preferred stock dividends in cash on July 30, 2023, which is the earliest date in which the holders of our Series A Preferred Stock can redeem their shares for cash. For further information, see Note (12) Series A Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock to our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable allowances, deferred income taxes, accounting for share-based payments, goodwill and other intangible assets, software development costs, fair value measurements and litigation.
Revenue Recognition. Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct performance obligation. For products and services aside from maintenance and support, we estimate SSP by adjusting the list price by historical discount percentages. SSP for software and hardware maintenance and support fees is based on the stated percentages of the fees charged for the respective products.
Our perpetual and term software licenses have significant standalone functionality and therefore revenue allocated to these performance obligations are recognized at a point in time upon electronic delivery of the download link and the license keys.
Product maintenance and support services are satisfied over time as they are stand-ready obligations throughout the support period. As a result, revenues associated with maintenance services are deferred and recognized as revenue ratably over the term of the contract.
Revenues associated with professional services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance.
Accounts Receivable. We review accounts receivable to determine which receivables are doubtful of collection. In making the determination of the appropriate allowance for uncollectible accounts and returns, we consider (i) historical return rates, (ii) specific past due accounts, (iii) analysis of our accounts receivable aging, (iv) customer payment terms, (v) historical collections, write-offs and returns, (vi) changes in customer demand and relationships, (vii) actual cash collections on our accounts receivables and (viii) concentrations of credit risk and customer credit worthiness. When determining the appropriate allowance for uncollectable accounts and returns each period, the actual customer collections of outstanding account receivable balances impact the required allowance for returns. We recorded an expense of $72,461 and $4,464 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts are included within our consolidated statement of operations in each respective year. Changes in the product return rates, credit worthiness of customers, general economic conditions and other factors may impact the level of future write-offs, revenue and our general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes. As discussed further in Note (5) Income Taxes, to our consolidated financial statements, in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on income taxes, we regularly evaluate our ability to recover deferred tax assets, and report such deferred tax assets at the amount that is determined to be more-likely-than-not recoverable. The Company records income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be realized or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets
and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. In determining the period in which related tax benefits are realized for financial reporting purposes, excess share-based compensation deductions included in net operating losses are realized after regular net operating losses are exhausted.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on income taxes, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return, should be recorded in the financial statements. Pursuant to the authoritative guidance, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it meets the “more likely than not” threshold that the position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position or under statute expirations. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. In addition, the authoritative guidance addresses de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods, and also requires increased disclosures.
Goodwill. As discussed further in Note (1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements, we account for goodwill and other intangible assets in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on goodwill and other intangibles. The authoritative guidance requires an impairment-only approach to accounting for goodwill and other intangibles with an indefinite life. Absent any prior indicators of impairment, we perform an annual impairment analysis during the fourth quarter of each of our fiscal years.
As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $4.2 million of goodwill. As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $0.1 million (net of accumulated amortization), respectively, of other identifiable intangible assets. We do not amortize goodwill, but we assess for impairment at least annually on December 31st and more often if a trigger event occurs. In accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350, "Goodwill and Other" ("ASC 350") our goodwill impairment test includes only one step, which is a comparison of the carrying value of our one reporting unit to its fair value. Pursuant to ASC 350, any excess carrying value, up to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit, is impaired. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of the Company's single reporting unit for purposes of its goodwill impairment test exceeded it carrying value and thus the Company determined there was no impairment of goodwill.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, Consolidated Financial Statements - Note (1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.