Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. The results of operations for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period. This discussion, which presents our results for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes and Part II, Item 7 "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal 2021, filed with the SEC on September 10, 2021, which provides additional information on comparisons of fiscal 2021 and the year ended June 30, 2020 ("fiscal 2020").
Our Business
We are a leading coffee roaster, wholesaler, equipment servicer and distributor of coffee, tea and other allied products manufactured under our owned brands, as well as under private labels on behalf of certain customers. We were founded in 1912, incorporated in California in 1923, and reincorporated in Delaware in 2004. Our principal office is located in Northlake, Texas. We operate in one business segment.
We serve a wide variety of customers, from small independent restaurants and foodservice operators to large institutional buyers like restaurants, department and convenience store retailers, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and gourmet coffee houses, as well as grocery chains with private brand and consumer-branded coffee and tea products, and foodservice distributors. Through our sustainability, stewardship, environmental efforts, and leadership we are not only committed to serving the finest products available, considering the cost needs of the customer, but also insist on their sustainable cultivation, manufacture and distribution whenever possible.
Our product categories consist of a robust line of roast and ground coffee, including organic, Direct Trade, Project D.I.R.E.C.T.®, Fair Trade Certified™ ® and other sustainably-produced offerings; frozen liquid coffee; flavored and unflavored iced and hot teas; including organic and Rainforest Alliance Certified™; culinary products including premium spices, pancake and biscuit mixes, gravy and sauce mixes, soup bases, dressings, syrups and sauces, and coffee-related products such as coffee filters, cups, sugar and creamers; and other beverages including cappuccino, cocoa, granitas, and other blender-based beverages and concentrated and ready-to-drink cold brew and iced coffee. We offer a comprehensive approach to our customers by providing not only a breadth of high-quality products, but also value added services such as market insight, beverage planning, and equipment placement and service.
We operate production facilities in Northlake, Texas and Portland, Oregon. We stopped production in our Houston, Texas facility and exited the facility in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. We distribute our products from our Northlake, Texas; and Portland, Oregon production facilities, as well as separate distribution centers in Portland, Oregon; Northlake, Illinois; Moonachie, New Jersey; and Rialto, California. We opened and started operating the distribution center in Rialto, California in the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Our products reach our customers primarily through our nationwide DSD network of 239 delivery routes and 103 branch warehouses as of June 30, 2022, or direct-shipped via common carriers or third-party distributors. DSD sales are primarily made “off-truck” to our customers at their places of business. We operate a large fleet of trucks and other vehicles to distribute and deliver our products through our DSD network, and we rely on 3PL service providers for our long-haul distribution.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity as the spread of the pandemic and resulting governmental actions have decreased the demand for our products, most notably throughout our DSD network, which consist of small independent restaurants, foodservice operators, large institutional buyers, and convenience store chains, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and foodservice distributors. This has had a material impact on our revenues during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
As local governments across the country eased COVID-19 restrictions, and vaccines have become more widely available, we have continued to see improved sales trends. Although we have experienced improvements in several markets during fiscal 2022, our recovery has been slower in certain regions caused by general COVID-19 related restrictions as well as other indirect issues that some customers face from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic including labor and supply shortages as well as other issues.
Although our Direct Ship sales channel was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact was significantly less due to the types of customers we serve through this channel. These customers include our retail business and products sold by key grocery stores under their private labels, as well as third party e-commerce platforms, which have seen moderate increases in demand that have helped mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Compared to fiscal 2021, our Direct Ship revenues increased
in fiscal 2022 which was mainly driven by price changes to customers utilizing commodity-based pricing arrangements, recently optimized customer base and recovery of several larger accounts.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenues, we instituted several initiatives during fiscal 2020 and 2021 to reduce operating expenses and capital expenditures to help mitigate the significant negative impact of our revenue decline. In addition to the costs saving initiatives, in fiscal 2021 we repaid our existing senior secured revolving credit facility, and entered into our new Credit Facilities, as further described below in the Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Condition section of Part II, Item 7 of this Form 10-K. We believe that the Credit Facilities provide us with increased flexibility to proactively manage our working capital and execute our long term strategy, maintain compliance with our debt financial covenants, lower our cost of borrowing, and preserve financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, while continuing to execute on our strategic initiatives.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its effects on general economic conditions, the extent of the weaker demand for our products, our financial position, results of operations and liquidity, which could be material, remains uncertain. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on future developments, including the availability and cost of labor, global supply chain disruptions, variants of the virus, and the availability and use of vaccines and other treatments for COVID-19, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. While we anticipate that our revenue will continue to recover slowly as local, state and national governments ease COVID-19 related restrictions, and vaccines become more widely accepted, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in returning to the pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels of revenue or profitability for fiscal 2023.
For other impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, please see Liquidity described in Part II, Item 7 and Risk Factors described in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Summary Overview of Fiscal 2022 Results
In fiscal 2022, although both our DSD and Direct Ship sales channels continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, there was significant recovery in these channels throughout fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022. Net sales in fiscal 2022 increased $71.3 million, or 18%, to $469.2 million from $397.9 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in net sales was primarily due to the continued recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both our DSD and Direct Ship sales channels, along with price increases and delivery surcharges implemented during fiscal 2022.
During fiscal 2022, we delivered higher gross margins compared to the prior year primarily due to the pandemic's impact on sales volume, which had a larger impact on our higher margin customers in fiscal 2021. Overall, gross margins increased by 3.8% to 29.2% in fiscal 2022 from 25.4% compared to fiscal 2021 due to the continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic on our DSD channel sales since our DSD channel has higher margins. The increase was also attributable to a decline in our unfavorable production variances and inventory scrap write-downs due to the closure of our aged Houston, Texas plant during fiscal 2021. These improvements were partially offset by higher freight costs due to global supply chain challenges. The price increases and delivery surcharges implemented across our DSD network beginning in the three months ended December 31, 2021 helped mitigate the impact of higher supply chain and product costs.
Operating expenses increased by $12.4 million in fiscal 2022 over the prior year period due to an $11.8 million increase in selling expenses and a $4.2 million increase in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $2.3 million gain on sale of assets. The increase in expenses was primarily due to variable costs, including payroll, associated with the higher sales volumes, as well as operating costs associated with our distribution center in Rialto, California which was opened in fiscal 2021.
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 were $15.2 million as compared to $15.1 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of $0.1 million. This was driven by lower expansionary capital spend of $5.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, offset by a $5.8 million increase in maintenance capital spend in fiscal 2022. Also included in the $15.2 million of capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 was $1.6 million for expansion projects and $10.1 million of coffee brewing equipment spend to execute several key strategic initiatives pertaining to fiscal 2022. The expansionary capital spending reductions were driven by several key initiatives put in place, including a focus on refurbished coffee brewing equipment to drive cost savings, and reductions across some capital categories due to additional cost controls put in place during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of June 30, 2022, the outstanding debt on our Revolver and Term Loan Credit Facilities were $63.0 million and $45.6 million, respectively, an increase of $17.6 million since June 30, 2021. Our cash decreased by $0.4 million to $10.0 million as of June 30, 2022, compared to $10.4 million as of June 30, 2021. These changes were primarily due to our higher investment in inventory as our sales volumes continue to recover from the pandemic, and payments under our 2021 employee incentive program, partially offset by cash proceeds from the sale of three branch properties and realized hedging gains.
Financial Data Highlights (in thousands, except per share data and percentages)
________________
NM - Not Meaningful
(1) EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to their corresponding GAAP measures.
(2) Includes all beverages other than roasted coffee, frozen liquid coffee, and iced and hot tea, including cappuccino, cocoa, granitas, and concentrated and ready-to-drink cold brew and iced coffee.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We have identified factors that affect our industry and business which we expect will play an important role in our future growth and profitability. Some of these factors include:
•Investment in State-of-the-Art Facility and Capacity Expansion. We are focused on leveraging our investment in the Northlake, Texas, facility to produce the highest quality coffee in response to the market shift to premium and specialty coffee, support volume rebalancing across our manufacturing network and create sustainable long-term growth. However, until we further increase the capacity at our Northlake facility, we will continue to experience higher manufacturing costs driven by downtime and inefficiencies.
•Supply Chain Efficiencies and Competition. In order to compete effectively and capitalize on growth opportunities, we must retain and continue to grow our customer base, evaluate and undertake initiatives to reduce costs and streamline our supply chain. We continue to look for ways to deploy our personnel, systems, assets and infrastructure to create or enhance stockholder value. Areas of focus include distribution network optimization, methods of procurement, logistics, inventory management, supporting technology, and real estate assets. The ability to attract and retain a skilled workforce, as well as mitigate current global supply chain challenges, will affect our future growth and profitability.
•Demographic and Channel Trends. Our success is dependent upon our ability to develop new products in response to demographic and other trends to better compete in areas such as premium coffee and tea, including expansion of our product portfolio by investing resources in what we believe to be key growth categories and different formats. We continue to focus on accelerating our Roastery Direct and e-commerce initiatives via a new digital platform.
•Fluctuations in Green Coffee Prices. Our primary raw material is green coffee, an exchange-traded agricultural commodity that is subject to price fluctuations. Over the past five years, coffee “C” market near month price per pound ranged from approximately $0.86 to $2.60. The coffee “C” market near month price as of June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $2.30 and $1.60 per pound, respectively. The price and availability of green coffee directly impacts our results of operations. For additional details, see Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
•Hedging Strategy. We are exposed to market risk of losses due to changes in coffee commodity prices. Our business model strives to reduce the impact of green coffee price fluctuations on our financial results and to protect and stabilize our margins, principally through customer arrangements and derivative instruments, as further explained in Note 4, Derivative Instruments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
•Coffee Brewing Equipment Service & Restoration ("Revive"). With Revive, we offer our customers a comprehensive equipment program and 24/7 nationwide equipment service which we believe differentiates us in the marketplace. We offer a full spectrum of equipment needs, which includes brewing equipment installation, water filtration systems, equipment training, and maintenance services to ensure we are able to meet our customer’s demands.
•Sustainability. With an increasing focus on sustainability across the coffee and foodservice industry, and particularly from the customers we serve, it is important for us to embrace sustainability across our operations, in the quality of our products, as well as, how we treat our coffee growers. We believe that our collective efforts in measuring our social and environmental impact, creating programs for waste, water and energy reduction, promoting partnerships in our supply chain that aim at supply chain stability and food security, and focusing on employee engagement place us in a unique position to help retailers and foodservice operators create differentiated coffee and tea programs that can include sustainable supply chains, direct trade purchasing, training and technical assistance, recycling and composting networks, and packaging material reductions.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information regarding our consolidated results of operations for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
_____________
NM - Not Meaningful
Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021
Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2022 increased $71.3 million, or 18%, to $469.2 million from $397.9 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in net sales was primarily due to the continued recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both our DSD and Direct Ship sales channel, along with price increases and delivery surcharges implemented during fiscal 2022.
On our DSD sales channel, the increase was driven by improved volume of green coffee processed and sold, along with improved volume of other beverages, culinary, spice and tea products sold as we continue to experience higher weekly sales volumes compared to prior periods.
On the Direct Ship sales channel, increase was due to price changes to customers utilizing commodity-based pricing arrangements where the changes in the green coffee commodity costs are passed on to the customer. This was also due to the recently optimized customer base and recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic by some of our larger Direct Ship customers. Our Direct Ship net sales in fiscal 2022 included $23.3 million in price increases to these customers, as compared to $3.9 million in price decreases to these customers in fiscal 2021.
The following table presents the effect of changes in unit sales, unit pricing and product mix for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 (in millions):
Units Sold and Pricing
Unit sales decreased 2.5% and average unit price increased by 20.4% in fiscal 2022 as compared to the same prior year period, resulting in a net increase in net sales of 18%. Average unit price increased during fiscal 2022 due to a mix of products sold via DSD versus our Direct Ship sales channel, along with price increases and delivery surcharges implemented during fiscal 2022. There were no new product category introductions in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, which had a material impact on our net sales.
Gross Profit
Gross profit in fiscal 2022 increased $36.0 million, or 36%, to $136.9 million from $100.9 million in fiscal 2021. Gross
margin increased 3.8% to 29.2% in fiscal 2022 from 25.4% in fiscal 2021. The increase in gross profit in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by higher net sales on both the DSD and Direct Ship sales channel, partially offset by higher freight costs due to global supply chain challenges and higher product costs. Gross margin improved due to the effect of the continued recovery from COVID-19 on our DSD channel sales since our DSD channel has higher margins. The increase was also attributable to a decline in our unfavorable production variances and inventory scrap write-downs due to the closure of our aged Houston, Texas plant during fiscal 2021. The price increases and delivery surcharges implemented across our DSD network during fiscal 2022 helped mitigate the impact of higher supply chain and product costs.
Operating Expenses
In fiscal 2022, operating expenses increased by $12.4 million, or 9%, to $151.5 million from $139.1 million, in fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to $11.8 million increase in selling expenses and a $4.2 million increase in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by $1.2 million decrease in fixed assets impairment and $2.3 million increase in net gains from sale of assets due to sale of branch properties during fiscal 2022.
The increase in selling expenses in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to variable costs, including payroll, associated with the higher net sales, as well as operating costs associated with our distribution center in Rialto, California which was opened in fiscal 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to third party costs related to several supply chain optimization initiatives, partially offset by a decrease of severance costs in the prior year period. The increase in payroll in both selling and general and administrative expenses are predominately due to the expiration of the temporary 15% reduction in base salaries and the expiration of the 401(k) cash match suspension under the Farmer Bros. Co. 401(k) Plan, which were both cost saving actions implemented in fiscal 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Total Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) in fiscal 2022 was $1.3 million of expense compared to $10.1 million of income in fiscal 2021.
The change in total other income (expense) in fiscal 2022 was primarily a result of an absence of the gains due to the post-retirement benefit curtailment in the prior year period associated with the medical plan termination in December 2020. In addition, in June 2021, we announced the amendment of our postretirement death benefit plan effective immediately. The announcement triggered a re-measurement, and resulted in settlement gains of $6.4 million in fiscal 2021. See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for details.
Interest expense in fiscal 2022 decreased $6.4 million to $9.5 million from $16.0 million in the prior year period. The decrease in interest expense in fiscal 2022 was principally due to lower interest rates on our new credit facility entered in April 2021, as well as the amortization of de-designated interest rate swap costs.
In fiscal 2022, Other, net decreased by $11.5 million to $8.2 million compared to $19.7 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease in Other, net, was primarily a result of lower amortized gains on our terminated post-retirement medical benefit plan and mark-to-market net losses on coffee-related derivative instruments not designated as accounting hedges.
Income Taxes
In fiscal 2022, we recorded income tax benefit of $0.3 million as compared to income tax expense of $13.6 million in fiscal 2021. The 2021 tax expense is primarily due to the $13.7 million of previously deferred non-cash tax expense in accumulated other comprehensive income associated with gains on the postretirement medical plan in prior years. Upon termination of this plan during fiscal 2021, the deferred non-cash tax expense was reversed out of other comprehensive income and recorded in continuing operations net income in the second quarter of fiscal 2021. See Note 16, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to net loss determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use the following non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating performance:
“EBITDA” is defined as net (loss) excluding the impact of:
•income tax (benefit) expense;
•interest expense; and
•depreciation and amortization expense.
“EBITDA Margin” is defined as EBITDA expressed as a percentage of net sales.
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as net (loss) excluding the impact of:
•income tax (benefit) expense;
•interest expense;
•depreciation and amortization expense;
•ESOP and share-based compensation expense;
•net gains from sales of assets;
•strategic initiatives;
•severance costs;
•impairment of fixed assets;
•non-recurring costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and severe winter weather; and
•postretirement benefits gains curtailment and pension settlement charge.
“Adjusted EBITDA Margin” is defined as Adjusted EBITDA expressed as a percentage of net sales.
For purposes of calculating EBITDA and EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, we have excluded the impact of interest expense resulting from the adoption of ASU 2017-07, non-cash pretax pension and postretirement benefits resulting from the amendment and termination of certain Farmer Bros. pension and postretirement benefits plans and severance because these items are not reflective of our ongoing operating results.
We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide a useful measure of the Company’s operating results, a meaningful comparison with historical results and with the results of other companies, and insight into the Company’s ongoing operating performance. Further, management utilizes these measures, in addition to GAAP measures, when evaluating and comparing the Company’s operating performance against internal financial forecasts and budgets.
We believe that EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons from period to period by isolating the effects of certain items that vary from period to period without any correlation to core operating performance or that vary widely among similar companies. These potential differences may be caused by variations in capital structures (affecting interest expense), tax positions (such as the impact on periods or companies of changes in effective tax rates or net operating losses) and the age and book depreciation of facilities and equipment (affecting relative depreciation expense). We also present EBITDA and EBITDA Margin because (i) we believe that these measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, (ii) we believe that investors will find these measures useful in assessing our ability to service or incur indebtedness, and (iii) we use these measures internally as benchmarks to compare our performance to that of our competitors.
EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, as defined by us, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We do not intend for non-GAAP financial measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for other measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of reported net loss to EBITDA (unaudited):
____________
(1)Excludes interest expense related to pension plans and postretirement benefits.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of reported net loss to Adjusted EBITDA (unaudited):
________
(1)Excludes interest expense related to pension plans and postretirement benefits.
(2)Includes initiatives related to the consolidation of the Hillsboro and Portland facilities in fiscal 2022 and Houston facility exit and opening of the Rialto distribution center in fiscal 2021.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Condition
The following table summarizes the Company’s debt obligations, excluding unamortized deferred debt financing costs:
Credit Facility
On April 26, 2021, we repaid in full all of the outstanding loans and other amounts payable under a prior amended and restated credit agreement, using proceeds of loans received pursuant to a refinancing under a new senior secured facility composed of a Revolver Credit Facility Agreement and a Term Credit Facility Agreement (the "Credit Facilities") as described in more detail in Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
The revolver under the Credit Facilities has a commitment of up to $80.0 million and a maturity date of April 25, 2025. Availability under the revolver is calculated as the lesser of (a) $80.0 million or (b) the amount equal to the sum of (i) 85% of eligible accounts receivable (less a dilution reserve), plus (ii) the lesser of: (a) 80% of eligible raw material inventory, eligible in-transit inventory and eligible finished goods inventory (collectively, “Eligible Inventory”), and (b) 85% of the net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory, minus (c) applicable reserve. The term loan under the Credit Facilities has a principal amount of $47.5 million and a maturity date of April 25, 2025.
The Credit Facilities contain customary affirmative and negative covenants and restrictions typical for a financing of this type. Non-compliance with one or more of the covenants and restrictions could result in the full or partial principal balance of the Credit Facilities becoming immediately due and payable and termination of the commitments. As of and through June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all of the covenants under the Credit Facilities.
The Credit Facilities provide us with increased flexibility to proactively manage our liquidity and working capital, while maintaining compliance with our debt financial covenants, and preserving financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to execute on key strategic initiatives.
Effective March 27, 2019, we entered into an interest rate swap to manage our interest rate risk on our floating-rate indebtedness. See Note 4, Derivative Instruments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, for details. In connection with the Credit Facilities, we also executed an ISDA agreement to transfer our interest swap to Wells Fargo under substantially the same terms. See Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for details.
At June 30, 2022, we had outstanding borrowings of $98.8 million and utilized $4.1 million of the letters of credit sublimit under the Credit Facilities, and had $12.9 million of availability under our Credit Facilities.
Liquidity
We generally finance our operations through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Credit Facilities. In light of our financial position, operating performance and current economic conditions, including the state of the global capital markets, there can be no assurance as to whether or when we will be able to raise capital by issuing securities. We believe that the Credit Facilities, to the extent available, in addition to our cash flows from operations, collectively, will be sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months.
At June 30, 2022, we had $9.8 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Liquidity
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity as the spread of the pandemic and resulting governmental actions have decreased the demand for our products, most notably throughout our DSD network, which consist of small independent restaurants, foodservice operators, large institutional buyers, and convenience store chains, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and foodservice distributors. The COVID-19 pandemic had a material impact on our revenues during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
In response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we instituted several initiatives during fiscal 2020 and 2021 to reduce operating expenses and capital expenditures to help mitigate the significant negative impact of our revenue decline. In addition to the costs saving initiatives, in fiscal 2021 we also repaid our existing senior secured revolving credit facility, and entered into the Credit Facilities. We believe that the Credit Facilities provide us with increased flexibility to
proactively manage our working capital and execute our long term strategy, maintain compliance with our debt financial covenants, lower our cost of borrowing, and preserve financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, while continuing to execute on our strategic initiatives.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its effects on general economic conditions, the extent of the weaker demand for our products, our financial position, results of operations and liquidity, which could be material, remains uncertain. The ultimate impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on future developments, including the availability and cost of labor, global supply chain disruptions, variants of the virus, and the availability and use of vaccines and other treatments for COVID-19, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. While we anticipate that our revenue will continue to recover slowly as local, state and national governments ease COVID-19 related restrictions, and vaccines become more widely accepted, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in returning to the pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels of revenue or profitability for fiscal 2023.
Cash Flows
The significant captions and amounts from our consolidated statements of cash flows are summarized below:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities in fiscal 2022 increased $10.0 million as compared to fiscal 2021 primarily attributable to changes in working capital related to inventory and accounts receivables, as well as employee compensation payments made in fiscal 2021 as part of our employee incentive program. These outflows were partially offset by realized gains from our coffee-related derivative instruments for fiscal year 2022.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2022 was $6.0 million as compared to net cash used of $10.7 million during fiscal 2021. The $4.7 million change is primarily due to the sale of assets during fiscal 2022 resulting in net cash proceeds of $9.1 million and lower expansion capital expenditures, partially offset by higher maintenance capital expenditures and coffee brewing equipment purchases in fiscal 2022 as we continued to focus on refurbished coffee brewing equipment to drive cost savings and other spending reductions.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2022 was $17.1 million as compared to of $37.4 million of cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2022 included $17.6 million in net proceeds under our current credit facilities compared to $31.0 million in net payments in fiscal 2021. These changes primarily resulted from the drawdown and repayments on our Revolver in fiscal 2021.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from our operations and borrowing capacity currently available under our Credit facilities. We generally finance our obligations through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Credit Facilities. We believe that the Credit Facilities, to the extent available, in addition to our cash flows from operations, collectively, will be sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months.
At June 30, 2022, we had $9.8 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. At June 30, 2022, we had $12.9 million of availability under our Credit Facilities.
The following table contains information regarding total contractual obligations as of June 30, 2022, which we expect to fund primarily with operating cash flows:
______________
(1) See Note 5, Leases, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
(2) See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
(3) Purchase commitments include commitments under coffee purchase contracts for which all delivery terms have been finalized but the related coffee has not been received as of June 30, 2022. Amounts shown in the table above: (a) include all coffee purchase contracts that the Company considers to be from normal purchases; and (b) do not include amounts related to derivative instruments that are recorded at fair value on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. See Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
(4) See Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Capital Expenditures
For fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, our capital expenditures paid were $15.2 million and $15.1 million respectively. In fiscal 2023, we anticipate capital expenditures will be between $18.0 million and $20.0 million. We expect to finance these expenditures through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Revolving Facility.
Depreciation and amortization expense was $23.8 million and $27.6 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a summary of recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards and their related effects or anticipated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (1) the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made, and (2) changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, or use of different estimates that we reasonably could have used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Our significant accounting estimates are discussed in additional detail in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K. We believe that our significant accounting estimates involve a higher degree of judgment and/or complexity for the reasons discussed below:
Fair value of coffee-related derivative instruments
We are exposed to commodity price risk arising from changes in the market price of green coffee. In general, increases in the price of green coffee could cause our cost of goods sold to increase and, if not offset by product price increases, could negatively affect our financial condition and results of operations. As a result, our business model strives to reduce the impact of green coffee price fluctuations on our financial results and to protect and stabilize our margins, principally through customer arrangements and derivative instruments.
We utilize derivative instruments to reduce the impact of changing green coffee commodity prices. We purchase over-the-counter coffee derivative instruments to enable us to lock in the price of green coffee commodity purchases. These derivative instruments may be entered into at the direction of the customer under commodity-based pricing arrangements to effectively lock in the purchase price of green coffee under such customer arrangements, in certain cases up to 18 months or longer in the future. Notwithstanding this customer direction, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC“) 815, “Derivatives and
Hedging,” we are considered the owner of these derivative instruments and, therefore, we are required to account for them as such. In the event the customer fails to purchase the products associated with the underlying derivative instruments for which the price has been locked-in on behalf of the customer, we expect that such derivative instruments will be assigned to, and assumed by, the customer in accordance with contractual terms or, in the absence of such terms, in accordance with standard industry custom and practice. In the event the customer fails to assume such derivative instruments, we will remain obligated on the derivative instruments at settlement. We generally settle derivative instruments to coincide with the receipt of the purchased green coffee or apply the derivative instruments to purchase orders effectively fixing the cost of in-bound green coffee purchases. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had 4.7 million and 21.5 million pounds of green coffee covered under coffee-related derivative instruments, respectively. We do not purchase any derivative instruments to hedge cost fluctuations of any commodities other than green coffee.
The fair value of derivative instruments is based upon broker quotes. We account for certain coffee-related derivative instruments as accounting hedges in order to minimize the volatility created in our quarterly results from utilizing these derivative contracts and to improve comparability between reporting periods. The change in fair value of the derivative is reported in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (“AOCI”) on our consolidated balance sheet and subsequently reclassified into cost of goods sold in the period or periods when the hedged transaction affects earnings. At June 30, 2022, approximately 89% of our outstanding coffee-related derivative instruments, representing 4.2 million pounds of forecasted green coffee purchases, were designated as cash flow hedges. At June 30, 2021, approximately 68% of our outstanding coffee-related derivative instruments, representing 14.6 million pounds of forecasted green coffee purchases, were designated as cash flow hedges. The portion of open hedging contracts that are not designated as accounting hedges are marked to period-end market price and unrealized gains or losses based on whether the period-end market price was higher or lower than the price we locked-in are recognized in our financial results.
Single Employer Pension Plan
The estimation of our single employer Farmer Bros. pension plan requires that we make use of various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. Material changes in pension costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. Plan obligations and expenses are based on existing retirement plan provisions.
The assumptions used in developing the required estimates include the following key factors:
•Discount rates. We utilize a yield curve analysis to determine the discount rates for our defined benefit plans’ obligations. The yield curve considers pricing and yield information for high quality bonds with maturities matched to estimated payouts of future pension benefits.
•Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The expected return on plan assets is based on our expectation of the long-term rates of return on each asset class based on the current asset mix of the funds, considering the historical returns earned on the type of assets in the funds.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions for the Farmer Bros. pension plan, holding all other assumptions constant:
See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further discussions of our various pension plans.