Item
7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The
following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of B. Riley Principal 150 Merger
Corp. should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain
information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary
Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes forward-looking statements. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. Forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in the Risk Factors section of our final prospectus (the “Prospectus”) for our Public Offering, the Risk Factors section of this Annual Report, the Risk Factors section of the Registration Statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC on January 7, 2022 (File No. 333-262047) in connection with the Proposed Transaction, and in our other SEC filings. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, we disclaim any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We
are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange,
asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Initial
Business Combination”).
We
intend to effectuate an Initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering that closed on February 23,
2021 and the Private Placement Units sold in a private placement that closed on February 23, 2021, simultaneously with the closing of
the Public Offering, and from additional issuances of, if any, our capital stock and our debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Our
business activities from inception to December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our preparation for our Public Offering that was completed
on February 23, 2021 and, since the offering on February 23, 2021, identification and evaluation of prospective acquisition targets for
an Initial Business Combination, including FaZe, and the negotiation of, and efforts to consummate, the Proposed Transaction with FaZe.
As
of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $43,324 and current liabilities of $2,813,168 and a warrant liability of $8,599,233. Further,
we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete
the Proposed Transaction or another Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent
Developments
Proposed
Transaction
On
October 24, 2021, the Company, entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and FaZe, pursuant to which, subject to the satisfaction
or waiver of certain conditions set forth therein, Merger Sub will merge with and into FaZe, with FaZe surviving the Merger as a wholly
owned subsidiary of the Company. At the closing of the Proposed Transaction, the Company will change its name to “FaZe Holdings
Inc.”
Concurrently
with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company entered into subscription agreements with investors (including investors related
to or affiliated with the Sponsor and an investor related to or affiliated with existing FaZe stockholders) for an aggregate investment
$118,000,000. The closing of the PIPE Investment is conditioned upon, among other things, the satisfaction or waiver of all conditions
precedent to the PIPE Investment and the substantially concurrent consummation of the Proposed Transaction. The Subscription Agreements
provide for certain customary registration rights for the PIPE Investors. Affiliates of the Sponsor have subscribed to purchase 2,200,000
shares of Class A common stock at $10.00 per share in the PIPE Investment, for an aggregate purchase price of $22,000,000.
For
more information about the Merger Agreement and the Proposed Transaction, see our Registration Statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC
on January 7, 2022 (File No. 333-262047). Unless specifically stated, this Annual Report does not give effect to the Proposed Transaction
and does not contain the risks associated with the Proposed Transaction. Such risks and effects relating to the Proposed Transaction
are included in the Registration Statement, which includes a preliminary proxy statement/prospectus relating to the Proposed Transaction.
The
Proposed Transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2022, following the receipt of required approval by the stockholders
of the Company and FaZe, required regulatory approvals and the fulfilment or waiver of other conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement,
and the effectiveness of the Registration Statement filed with the SEC in connection with the Proposed Transaction.
Results
of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $6,867,161. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted of interest income earned in the amount of $16,200 on funds held in the Trust Account, loss from operations in the amount of $3,445,690, warrant issue costs of $115,404, and an unrealized loss on the change in fair value of warrants in the amount of $3,322,267. For the three months ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,448 which is comprised of miscellaneous operating expenses.
Liquidity
and Capital Resources
Until
the closing of the Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial sale of Founder Shares to our Sponsor, and the proceeds
of a promissory note (the “Note”) from the Sponsor, in the amount of $300,000. The Note was repaid in full upon the
closing of the Public Offering.
As
of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $43,324 and working capital deficit of $1,957,395. The working capital deficit of $1,957,395 excludes
Delaware franchise taxes payable of $200,000 (which is included in accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021) as franchise taxes are paid
from the Trust Account from interest income earned.
We completed the sale of 17,250,000 Public Units at an offering price of $10.00 per Public Unit in the Public Offering. The Sponsor subscribed to purchase an aggregate of 520,000 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement that closed on February 23, 2021 simultaneously with the Public Offering. The sale of the Public Units generated gross proceeds of $172,500,000, less underwriting commissions of $3,450,000 (2% of gross proceeds) and other offering costs of $485,257. The sale of the Private Placement Units generated $5,200,000 of proceeds.
Income
on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes.
If
our funds are insufficient to meet the expenditures required for operating our business through the consummation of the Proposed Transaction
or another Initial Business Combination as more fully described in Note 1 to our financial statements or in the event that that the Proposed
Transaction or another Initial Business Combination is not consummated, we will likely need to raise additional funds in order to meet
the expenditures required for operating our business. We may not be able to obtain additional financing or raise additional capital to
finance our ongoing operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve
liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction
and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable
terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through February 23, 2023,
the scheduled liquidation date. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets
or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Administrative
Services Agreement
As
of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. On
February 18, 2021, we entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which we have agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor
a total of $3,750 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the Proposed
Transaction or another Initial Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Business
Combination Marketing Agreement
We
have engaged B. Riley Securities, Inc. as advisors in connection with Initial Business Combinations, including the Proposed Transaction,
to assist us in arranging meetings with stockholders to discuss a potential Initial Business Combination and the target business’
attributes, introduce us to potential investors that may be interested in purchasing our securities, assist us in obtaining stockholder
approval for the Proposed Transaction or another Initial Business Combination and assist us with the preparation of press releases and
public filings in connection with the Proposed Transaction or other Initial Business Combination. We will pay B. Riley Securities, Inc.
for such services upon the consummation of the Proposed Transaction or other Initial Business Combination a cash fee in an amount equal
to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). Pursuant
to the terms of the business combination marketing agreement, no fee will be due if we do not complete the Proposed Transaction or another
Initial Business Combination.
Additionally, we engaged B. Riley Securities as the placement agent for the PIPE Investment. Pursuant to this engagement, at the closing of the Proposed Transaction, we will pay B. Riley Securities a fee of $3,471,625. If the Proposed Transaction is not consummated, B. Riley Securities Inc. will not receive such fee.
Registration
Rights Agreement
The
holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Units and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if
any, (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Units or working capital warrants)
are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Public Offering. These holders
are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with
the filing of any such registration statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We
have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate
in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest
entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We
have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any
debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Critical
Accounting Policies
The
preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported.
Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant
Derivative Liability
In accordance with FASB ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging: Contracts in an Entities Own Equity, an entity must consider whether to classify contracts that may be settled in its own stock, such as warrants, as equity of the entity or as an asset or liability. If an event that is not within the entity’s control could require net cash settlement, then the contract should be classified as an asset or a liability rather than as equity. We have determined because the terms of Public Warrants include a provision that entitles all warrantholders to cash for their Public Warrants in the event of a qualifying cash tender offer, while only certain of the holders of the underlying shares of common stock would be entitled to cash, our Public Warrants should be classified as derivative liability measured at fair value, with changes in fair value each period reported in earnings. Further if our Private Placement Warrants are held by someone other than initial purchasers of the Private Placement Warrants or their permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants. Because the terms of the Private Placement Warrants and Public Warrants are so similar, we classified both types of Warrants as a derivative liability measured at fair value. Volatility in our Public Shares and Public Warrants may result in significant changes in the value of the derivatives and resulting gains and losses on our statement of operations.
Earnings
(Loss) per Common Share
Basic
earnings (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding during the period. All shares of Class B common stock are assumed to convert to shares of Class A common
stock on a one-for-one basis. Consistent with FASB ASC 480, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, as well as
their pro rata share of undistributed trust earnings consistent with the two-class method, have been excluded from the calculation of
loss per common share for the three months and the year ended December 31, 2021. Such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their
pro rata share of trust earnings. Diluted earnings (loss) per share includes the incremental number of shares of common stock to be issued
in connection with the conversion of Class B common stock or to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method. For the
three months and year ending December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could,
potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock. As a result, diluted earnings (loss) per common share is the same as basic
earnings (loss) per common share for all periods presented.
Redeemable
Shares
All
of the 17,250,000 Public Shares sold as part of the Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the Final Prospectus.
In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control
of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including
shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption
upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A
common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered
to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 17,250,000
shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount were presented at redemption value as temporary
equity, outside of stockholders’ equity on our Condensed Balance Sheet.