Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. The known risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those identified and described in detail under the caption “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Forte Biosciences, Inc. and its subsidiaries (www.fortebiorx.com) (“Forte”, “we”, “our”) is a biopharmaceutical company that had been advancing through clinical trials its product candidate, FB-401, which is a topical live biotherapeutic for the treatment of inflammatory skin diseases, including pediatric and adult patients with atopic dermatitis (“AD”). FB401 was developed in collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services (“DHHS”), as represented by the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”), and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (“NIAID”). On September 2, 2021, Forte announced that the clinical trial of FB-401 for the treatment of AD failed to achieve statistical significance for its primary endpoint of EASI-50 (the proportion of patients with at least a 50% improvement in atopic dermatitis disease severity as measured by EASI). Following the announcement of the FB-401 trial results, our board of directors commenced a process of evaluating strategic alternatives to maximize stockholder value including the in-licensing or acquisition of assets, a merger, asset sales, a collaboration or other arrangements. We had $42.0M in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021. We have scaled back our clinical and manufacturing operations to conserve cash as we pursue strategic alternatives. The Company also has been developing its FB-102 program that addresses certain autoimmune diseases such as vitiligo and alopecia areata. FB-102 is currently in preclinical development.
On June 15, 2020, Forte completed a business combination (“Merger”) with Tocagen, Inc. (“Tocagen”), a publicly traded biotechnology company, with Forte being the surviving business. As part of the Merger, the then outstanding Tocagen common stock was adjusted with a reverse split ratio of 1-for-15 and each share of Forte’s common stock was converted into the right to receive approximately 3.1624 shares of Tocagen common stock (prior to giving effect to the Merger). Immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the Tocagen legal entity that survived the Merger changed its name to Forte Biosciences, Inc. Our common stock is publicly traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol FBRX. Prior to the Merger, Forte was a privately held company incorporated in Delaware on May 3, 2017.
On September 4, 2020, we entered into an “at-the-market” equity offering program (“ATM Facility”), as amended on October 28, 2020, whereby we may from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock during the term of the ATM Facility. We did not issue any shares of common stock under the ATM Facility which expired in May 2021. We subsequently filed a new "shelf" registration statement on Form S-3 that went effective in June 2021 which will allow us to raise up to $300 million in additional capital. We incurred $106 thousand in offering costs related to this shelf registration statement which is recorded in Other Assets in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. We have not issued any securities under the new shelf registration statement as of the filing date of this Form 10-K.
On November 2, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 1,614,035 shares of common stock at $28.50 per share, which included the over-allotment option exercised by the underwriters to purchase an additional 210,526 shares. Total net proceeds were $42.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses of approximately $3.3 million.
We issued 673,463, 560,402 and 655,409 shares of our common stock pursuant to cashless exercises by certain warrant holders in February, June and September of 2021, respectively.
Intellectual Property
In December 2017, Forte entered into an exclusive license agreement with the DHHS, as amended in May 2020. Under the agreement, the DHHS granted Forte an exclusive, sublicensable and worldwide license to certain rights in 12 patents under which we may develop and commercialize pharmaceutical and biological compositions comprising Gram-negative bacteria for the topical treatment of dermatological diseases and conditions. On February 1, 2022, the Company notified the DHHS of its intent to terminate the license agreement with an effective termination date of April 2, 2022.
We own one US patent for administering a combination of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria along with metabolites for treatment of a wide variety of skin conditions. The patent’s estimated expiration date is 2039.
COVID-19
The pandemic caused by an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus, or COVID-19 and its variants, has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant national and global economic disruption and may adversely affect our operations. We are actively monitoring the impact of COVID-19 and the possible effects on our financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. However, the full extent, consequences, and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting impact on us cannot currently be predicted. We will continue to evaluate the impact that these events could have on our operations, financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale or in active development and have not generated any revenue from product sales. In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales, royalties on product sales, license fees, milestones, or other upfront payments if we enter into any collaborations or license agreements. We expect that our future revenue will fluctuate from quarter to quarter for many reasons, including the uncertain timing and amount of any such payments and sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and benefits of research and development personnel and costs related to research activities, preclinical studies, clinical trials, drug manufacturing, and, in 2021, wind down costs incurred following the announcement of our unfavorable clinical trial results and the write-off of manufacturing property and equipment. Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used in future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and are only expensed when the goods have been received or when the service has been performed rather than when the payment is made.
Drug manufacturing and clinical trial costs are a component of research and development expenses. The Company expenses costs for its drug manufacturing activities performed by Contract Manufacturing Organizations (“CMOs”), costs for its preclinical and clinical trial activities performed by Contract Research Organizations (“CROs”) and other service providers, as they are incurred, based upon estimates of the work completed over the life of the individual study in accordance with associated agreements. The Company uses information it receives from internal personnel and outside service providers to estimate the percentage of completion and therefore the expense to be incurred.
The Company has significantly reduced its research and development expenses as it considers its future plans regarding FB-401 and strategic alternatives.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional fees for legal, auditing, tax and business consulting services, personnel expenses and travel costs. We expect to incur significant costs associated with being a SEC registrant such as legal fees, costs associated with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums, and other expenses. Our general and administrative expenses may increase due to increases in professional and advisory fees as we evaluate our strategic alternatives.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expense
The Company acquired in-process research and development assets in connection with its Merger with Tocagen. As the acquired in-process research and development assets were deemed to have no current or alternative future use, an expense of $32.1 million was recognized in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses, net
Other expense, net, consists of net foreign exchange losses and franchise taxes, partially offset by interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents balances.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that may be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and commitments, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed for us and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our research and development expenses in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. If our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differs from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees, directors and non-employees in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Stock Compensation. Stock-based awards issued by us have been primarily stock options and restricted stock units with time-based or performance-based vesting. ASC 718 requires the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair value-based method, for costs related to all stock-based awards. To determine the grant-date fair value of stock options, we utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the fair value of our common stock as well as other variables including, but not limited to, the expected term that stock-based awards will remain outstanding, expected common stock price volatility over the expected term of the stock-based awards, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends.
Prior to the Merger with Tocagen, there was no public market for Forte Biosciences’ common stock. As such, the estimated fair values of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards were determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the grant date, including a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. Valuations of our common stock were prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “Practice Aid”).
For stock-based awards with time-based vesting which includes stock options and restricted stock units, stock-based compensation is recognized over the period during which an awardee is required to provide services in exchange for the stock-based award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For time-based stock awards, stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on the fair value determined on the date of grant. For stock-based awards with performance-based vesting, the fair value of the award is recognized as expense when the achievement of the associated performance criteria becomes probable.
The Company has an employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”). The fair value of each purchase under the ESPP is estimated at the beginning of the offering period using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Estimates of the fair value of stock-based awards as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model are affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. If we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
These inputs are:
Expected term - The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method which is based on the mid-point between the vesting period and the end of the contractual term. We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock-based awards.
Expected volatility - Due to the Company’s limited trading of its common stock and lack of company-specific historical or implied volatility data, the Company has based its estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies in the life sciences industry whose shares are publicly traded. The Company selects the peer group based on comparable characteristics, including development stage, product pipeline, and enterprise value. The Company computes historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards. The Company will continue to apply this process until sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its own stock price become available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the stock-based awards.
Expected Dividend - We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, net operating loss and credit carryforwards, and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
Due to our lack of earnings history and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses (“NOLs”). Utilization of NOLs may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables summarize our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $10.0 million during the same period in 2020. The increase of $3.8 million was primarily due to a net increase of approximately $1.6 million of manufacturing, clinical and regulatory expenses as we advanced our FB-401 program through FDA clinical trials, the subsequent wind down costs incurred following the announcement of our unfavorable clinical trial results, and an increase of approximately $2.2 million in payroll and related expenses including stock-based compensation expense as we increased our average headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.2 million for the same period of 2020. This increase of $3.4 million was primarily due to an increase of approximately $2.6 million in payroll and related expenses including stock-based compensation expense as we increased our average headcount and an increase of approximately $0.8 million in legal, professional, insurance and other expenses as a result of being a public company.
Our general and administrative expenses may increase due to increases in professional and advisory fees as we evaluate our strategic alternatives.
In-process research and development assets acquired
In connection with the Merger, we recognized a charge of $32.1 million of acquired in-process research and development expenses for assets with no alternative use for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses, net
Other expenses, net increased by $17 thousand during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in franchise taxes of $85 thousand partially offset by reduced foreign currency transaction losses of $65 thousand from contracts denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar as a result of differences between the exchange rates on the billing dates and the payment dates and an increase in interest income of $3 thousand as a result higher average cash and cash equivalents.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales or out-licenses. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. Our net loss was approximately $21.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $73.2 million. We expect to incur expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we evaluate our strategic alternatives.
Prior to the closing of the Merger, we raised net cash proceeds of approximately $9.9 million in a Series A financing round from a private placement of preferred stock. In connection with the Merger, we issued 3,804,817 shares of our common stock (after giving effect to the exchange ratio and reverse split), and warrants to purchase 2,752,546 shares of our common stock (after giving effect to the exchange ratio and reverse split) for net proceeds of $19.4 million. In addition, on June 16, 2020, we issued an additional 411,112 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $4.6 million.
On September 4, 2020, we entered into an “at-the-market” equity offering program (“ATM Facility”), as amended on October 28, 2020, whereby we could from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock during the term of the ATM Facility. We did not issue any shares of common stock under the ATM Facility which expired in May 2021. We subsequently filed a new "shelf" registration statement on Form S-3 that went effective in June 2021 which will allow us to raise up to $300 million in additional capital. We incurred $106 thousand in offering costs related to this shelf registration statement which is recorded in Other Assets in the consolidated balance sheet for the period ended December 31, 2021. We have not issued any securities under the new shelf registration statement as of the filing date of this Form 10-K.
On November 2, 2020, we completed a public offering of 1,614,035 shares of our common stock at $28.50 per share, which included the over-allotment option exercised by the underwriters to purchase an additional 210,526 shares. Total net proceeds were $42.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses of approximately $3.3 million.
We issued 673,463, 560,402 and 655,409 shares of our common stock pursuant to cashless exercises by certain warrant holders in February, June and September of 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, no Concurrent Financing Warrants were outstanding (see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report).
We had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $42.0 million as of December 31, 2021. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Form 10-K.
Future Capital Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales or from out-licensing. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue. We expect to incur ongoing expenses as we evaluate our plans for FB-401 and strategic alternatives after we announced on September 2, 2021 that the clinical trial of FB-401 for the treatment of atopic dermatitis failed to meet statistical significance for its primary endpoint. We have paused further advancement of the development of FB-401 and have no other product candidate undergoing clinical trials. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to the terms and timing of any strategic alternatives including a merger or business combination, asset acquisitions or sales, collaborations or licensing arrangements.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing may impose upon us covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any equity or debt financing may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials.
See “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Summary Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.7 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $21.7 million adjusted for non-cash stock-based compensation of $4.2 million, depreciation and impairment charges on property and equipment of $0.1 million and a decrease in net operating assets of $0.7 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year end December 31, 2020 was $18.4 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $46.5 million adjusted for non-cash items primarily related to acquired in-process research and development expense of $30.9 million, depreciation and stock-based compensation expense of $1.0 million, and cash used by increases in net operating assets of $3.8 million.
Investing activities
There was no cash flow from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash provided by investing activities of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of cash acquired from the reverse merger with Tocagen, Inc. that closed on June 15, 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $44 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of $106 thousand in payments related to our shelf registration, partially offset by $62 thousand of proceeds received for the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $66.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily from net proceeds of $66.7 million received from the sale of shares of the Company’s common stock, $0.3 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, and cash used for financing costs of $0.3 million.
Indemnification
As permitted under Delaware law and in accordance with our bylaws, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving in such capacity pursuant to indemnification agreements. We believe the fair value of the indemnification rights and agreements is minimal. Accordingly, we have not recorded any liabilities for these indemnification rights and agreements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Contractual Obligations
See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.