Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Fortress Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 27, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). Although we may pursue an acquisition in any industry or geography, we intend to capitalize on the ability of our management team to identify, acquire and operate a business that may provide opportunities for attractive risk-adjusted returns. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. Our sponsor is Fortress Capital Acquisition Sponsor LLC (the “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 12, 2021. On January 15, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 40,000,000 Units, which included the issuance of 5,000,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $400,000,000 and incurring offering costs of $22,764,787, inclusive of $14,000,000 in deferred underwriting commissions. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one Public Warrant. Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment.
Substantially concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 7,333,333 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11,000,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, $400,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) of the aggregate net cash proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account, maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee. The cash proceeds held in the Trust Account were subsequently invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds held in the Trust Account as described below.
In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be only $10.00 per share initially held in the Trust Account (or less than that in certain circumstances). In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has agreed to be liable to the Company, if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or products sold to the Company, or a prospective target business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the Trust Account. This liability will not apply with respect to any claims by a third party who executed a waiver of any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to any monies held in the Trust Account or to any claims under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act. Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is deemed to be unenforceable against a third party, our Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third-party claims.
The Company will seek to reduce the possibility that our Sponsor will have to indemnify the Trust Account due to claims of creditors by endeavoring to have all third parties, service providers (other than the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm), prospective target businesses or other entities with which the Company does business, execute agreements with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to monies held in the Trust Account.
On March 2, 2021, we announced that, commencing March 5, 2021, the holders of our Units may elect to separately trade the Class A ordinary shares and Public Warrants comprising the Units. Those Units not separated will continue to trade on the NYSE under the symbol “FCAX.U”, and each of the Class A ordinary shares and Public Warrants that were separated trade on the NYSE under the symbols “FCAX” and “FCAX WS”, respectively.
Results of Operations
Since the Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $10,921,932 which consisted of $45,051 in interest income and a non-cash $18,729,892 decrease in fair value of warrant liabilities, partially offset by a non-cash $5,502,271 loss on the excess of fair value over cash received for the Private Placement Warrants, $929,159 in offering costs related to warrant liabilities and $1,421,581 in general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were primarily comprised of insurance expense and administrative fees.
For the period from August 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $16,315 which consisted of general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were comprised of professional fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources, Mandatory Redemption Date and Going Concern
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had $657,343 in cash and $684,005 of accounts payable and accrued expenses. As such, we do not believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet our current and future estimated financial obligations. Our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide working capital loans (“Working Capital Loans”) to us as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans through December 31, 2021. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant of the post-business combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. There were no Working Capital Loans outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Additionally, if our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, or the amount of interest available to us from the Trust Account is less than we expect as a result of the current interest rate environment, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our initial Business Combination. Following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination by January 15, 2023, we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidation, unless there is an extension on our period to complete a Business Combination. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” the requirement to complete a Business Combination by January 15, 2023 raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we were unable to continue as a going concern.
Other Related Party Transactions
Founder shares
In September 2020, we issued an aggregate of 8,625,000 Founder Shares to our Sponsor in exchange for an aggregate capital contribution of $25,000. On January 12, 2021, we effected a share dividend with respect to the Founder Shares, resulting in 10,000,000 Founder Shares issued and outstanding. Our Sponsor had agreed to forfeit an aggregate of up to 1,250,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters. On January 15, 2021, the underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full. As a result, the 1,250,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture. The Founder Shares will automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares upon the consummation of our Business Combination, on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment.
Note payable-related party
Our Sponsor loaned us an aggregate of $287,250 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note. The promissory note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due on the earlier of July 31, 2021 or the closing of the Initial Public Offering. We repaid the promissory note in full on January 14, 2021.
Office space and related support services
During January 2021, we entered into an agreement with an affiliate of our Sponsor to pay a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space and related support services. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred and paid $232,258 in expenses for services provided by an affiliate of our Sponsor in connection with the aforementioned agreement.
Contractual Obligations
Registration rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed prior to the closing date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of $0.35 per Unit, or $14,000,000, which will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”. Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 40,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption at the redemption value were presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. As of December 31, 2020, there were no Class A ordinary shares issued and outstanding.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. The Company’s statements of operations includes a presentation of net income (loss) per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of net income (loss) per ordinary share. Earnings and losses are shared pro-rata between the two classes of shares. Remeasurement adjustment associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares for the year ended December 31, 2021 was calculated by dividing (i) the allocation of net income of $8,737,545 by (ii) the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares for the year ended December 31, 2021 was calculated by dividing (i) the allocation of net income of $2,184,387 by (ii) the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares for the period from August 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 was calculated by dividing (i) net loss of $16,315 by (ii) the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
The Company has not considered the effect of the Warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the exercise of the over-allotment option) and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,333,333 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the Warrants into Class A ordinary shares is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Warrant liabilities
The Company accounts for its outstanding Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in FASB ASC Subtopic 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity,” and determined that the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder. As such, each warrant must be recorded as a liability and is subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value is recorded in the Company’s statements of operations. One of the more significant accounting estimates included in these financial statements is the determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.