Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview of Current Operations
Findit continues as a premium content management platform that enables members to post and manage status updates, podcasts and music, pictures, and video. All posted contented is optimized for SEO and sharing to social networks. Findit also indexes all content in its own search engine for easy retrieval and content discovery. Members can create their own, unique internet URL on Findit to further optimize indexing, search results placement and citation in internet search engines. Findit is an open platform meaning that all content is discoverable by search engines for indexing. Findit is focused on the development of monetized internet-based web products and content.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized revenues of $198,584. For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized revenues of $404,392.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred total operating expenses of $363,148, which consisted of $81,115 in general and administrative expenses. This compares to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, where the Company incurred total operating expenses of $580,943, which consisted of $71,488 in general and administrative expenses.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had other income of $68,245, from the settlement of claims with a former commissioned sales agent in connection with the sale of CBD oil, as compared to the prior fiscal year when the Company had other expense of $58,088, which consisted of a loss on impairment of investment.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a loss applicable to common shareholders of $(261,873) or $(0.00) per common share basic and diluted, as compared to a loss applicable to common shareholders of $(84,604) or $(0.00) per common share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used net cash of $(119,517) in operations, no cash was used in investing activities and $50,000 was provided by financing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used net cash of $(94,100) in operations and $150,000 was provided by financing activities.
Going Concern
Our ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon the successful completion of additional financing arrangements and our ability to achieve and maintain profitable operations.
Therefore, management plans to raise equity capital to finance the operating and capital requirements of the Company. While the Company is devoting its best efforts to achieve the above plans, there is no assurance that any such activity will generate funds that will be available for operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Summary of any product research and development that we will perform for the term of our plan of operation.
At this time, the Company has no product research, nor development taking place, pending funding. As such, research is not required at this time.
Significant changes in the number of employees
We currently have a total of five employees, two of which serve as our officers, one employee who serves as the Company controller and two employees who work in the engineering and design facility. We are dependent upon our officers for our future business development. As our operations expand we anticipate the need to hire additional employees, consultants and professionals; however, the exact number is not quantifiable at this time.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $24,358. At the same date, the Company had total current liabilities of $14,159.
Management intends to raise additional debt or equity financing to fund ongoing operations and for necessary working capital. However, there is no assurance that such financing plans will be successful or be obtained in amounts sufficient to meet the Company’s needs.
Notwithstanding, the Company anticipates generating losses and therefore may be unable to continue operations in the future. The Company anticipates it will require additional capital in order to develop its business. The Company may use a combination of equity and/or debt instruments or enter into a strategic arrangement with a third party. Management has yet to find a solution to its funding requirements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results or operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition: The Company recognizes revenue related to product sales when (i) persuasive evidence of the arrangement exists, (ii) shipment has occurred, (iii) the fee is fixed or determinable, and (iv) collectability is reasonably assured.
Recent Pronouncements
The Company's management has evaluated all the recently issued accounting pronouncements through the filing date of these financial statements and does not believe that any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company's current financial position and results of operations.