ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
ORGANIZATION OF INFORMATION
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition (“MD&A”) of FedEx Corporation (“FedEx” or the “Company”) is composed of three major sections: Results of Operations and Outlook, Financial Condition, and Critical Accounting Estimates. These sections include the following information:
•Results of operations includes an overview of our consolidated 2022 results compared to 2021 results. This section also includes a discussion of key actions and events that impacted our results, as well as our outlook for 2023. Discussion and analysis of 2020 results and year-over-year comparisons between 2021 results and 2020 results can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Annual Report”) for the year ended May 31, 2021.
•The overview is followed by a financial summary and analysis (including a discussion of both historical operating results and our outlook for 2023) for each of our transportation segments.
•Our financial condition is reviewed through an analysis of key elements of our liquidity and capital resources, financial commitments, and liquidity outlook for 2023.
•Critical accounting estimates discusses those financial statement elements that we believe are most important to understanding the material judgments and assumptions incorporated in our financial results.
The discussion in MD&A should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report, particularly “Item 1. Business,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
- 44 -
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS SEGMENTS
We provide a broad portfolio of transportation, e-commerce, and business services through companies competing collectively, operating collaboratively, and innovating digitally, under the respected FedEx brand. Our primary operating companies are Federal Express Corporation (“FedEx Express”), the world’s largest express transportation company; FedEx Ground Package System, Inc. (“FedEx Ground”), a leading North American provider of small-package ground delivery services; and FedEx Freight Corporation (“FedEx Freight”), a leading North American provider of less-than-truckload (“LTL”) freight transportation services. These companies represent our major service lines and, along with FedEx Corporate Services, Inc. (“FedEx Services”), constitute our reportable segments. Our FedEx Services segment provides sales, marketing, information technology, communications, customer service, technical support, billing and collection services, and certain back-office functions that support our operating segments. The operating costs of the FedEx Services segment are allocated to the business units it serves. See “Reportable Segments” for further discussion and refer to “Item 1. Business” for a more detailed description of each of our operating companies.
The key indicators necessary to understand our operating results include:
•the overall customer demand for our various services based on macroeconomic factors and the global economy;
•the volumes of transportation services provided through our networks, primarily measured by our average daily volume and shipment weight and size;
•the mix of services purchased by our customers;
•the prices we obtain for our services, primarily measured by yield (revenue per package or pound or revenue per shipment or hundredweight for LTL freight shipments);
•our ability to manage our cost structure (capital expenditures and operating expenses) to match shifting volume levels; and
•the timing and amount of fluctuations in fuel prices and our ability to recover incremental fuel costs through our fuel surcharges.
Many of our operating expenses are directly impacted by revenue and volume levels, and we expect these operating expenses to fluctuate on a year-over-year basis consistent with changes in revenue and volumes. Therefore, the discussion of operating expense captions focuses on the key drivers and trends impacting expenses other than those factors strictly related to changes in revenue and volumes. The line item “Other operating expense” includes costs associated with outside service contracts (such as facility services and cargo handling, temporary labor, and security), insurance, professional fees, and operational supplies.
Except as otherwise specified, references to years indicate our fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 or ended May 31 of the year referenced and comparisons are to the corresponding period of the prior year. References to our transportation segments include, collectively, the FedEx Express segment, the FedEx Ground segment, and the FedEx Freight segment.
- 45 -
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND OUTLOOK
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS
The following table compares summary operating results (dollars in millions, except per share amounts) for the years ended May 31:
The following table shows changes in revenue and operating results by reportable segment for 2022 compared to 2021 (in millions):
(1)The following is a summary of the effects of the (costs) benefits of certain items affecting our financial results for the years ended May 31 (in millions):
Overview
We experienced revenue and operating income growth in 2022 resulting from yield management actions, including the favorable net impact of fuel at all of our transportation segments. In addition, our results were positively affected by a mix shift to our higher yielding services due to strategic actions to improve revenue quality. Lower variable incentive compensation expense, as well as severe winter weather experienced in the prior year, also benefited year-over-year operating income in 2022.
- 46 -
Our operating results for 2022 were negatively affected by the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic, labor market challenges, and inflationary cost pressures. Labor market challenges contributed to global supply chain disruptions and affected the availability and cost of labor resulting in network inefficiencies, higher purchased transportation costs, and higher wage rates. In addition, global recovery from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic slowed with the onset of new variants, which resulted in reduced shipping demand and caused network disruptions, particularly at FedEx Express during 2022.
Our 2022 results include business realignment costs of $278 million ($214 million, net of tax, or $0.80 per diluted share) associated with our workforce reduction plan in Europe announced in 2021. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for more information. Our 2022 results also include a $210 million charge ($160 million, net of tax, of $0.60 per diluted share) recognized in the fourth quarter related to pre- and post-judgment interest in connection with a FedEx Ground legal matter. The amount is included in “Corporate, other, and eliminations.” See Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
We incurred TNT Express integration expenses totaling $132 million ($103 million, net of tax, or $0.39 per diluted share) in 2022, a decrease of $78 million from 2021. The integration expenses are predominantly incremental costs directly associated with the integration of TNT Express, primarily related to professional and legal fees. Internal salaries and wages are included only to the extent the individuals are assigned full-time to integration activities. These costs were recognized at FedEx Express and FedEx Corporation. The identification of these costs as integration-related expenditures is subject to our disclosure controls and procedures. Integration expenses do not include costs associated with our business realignment activities (discussed above).
Consolidated net income includes a pre-tax, noncash loss of $1.6 billion in 2022 ($1.2 billion, net of tax, or $4.49 per diluted share) and a gain of $1.2 billion in 2021 ($895 million, net of tax, or $3.33 per diluted share) associated with our MTM retirement plans accounting adjustments. See the “Retirement Plans MTM Adjustments” section of this MD&A and Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated net income in 2021 also includes a loss on debt extinguishment of $393 million ($297 million, net of tax, or $1.11 per diluted share) associated with our capital allocation strategy, which includes reducing outstanding debt. See the “Other Income and Expense” section of this MD&A and Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Net income for 2022 includes a $142 million ($0.53 per diluted share) tax benefit related to revisions of prior year estimates identified during the preparation of U.S. and foreign tax returns. In 2021, we recognized a tax benefit of $279 million ($1.04 per diluted share) related to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which allows tax losses to be offset against income from prior years that was taxed at higher rates, and a tax benefit of $66 million ($0.25 per diluted share) from a tax rate increase in the Netherlands applied to our deferred tax asset balances. See the “Income Taxes” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
In December 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a new stock repurchase program of up to $5 billion of FedEx common stock (in addition to a 25 million share repurchase program authorized in 2016), and we entered into an accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreement with a bank to repurchase an aggregate of $1.5 billion of our common stock. Share repurchases had a benefit of $0.13 per diluted share in 2022. See Note 1 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the “Financial Condition-Liquidity” section of this MD&A for additional information on our repurchase programs (defined below).
- 47 -
The following graphs for FedEx Express, FedEx Ground, and FedEx Freight show selected volume trends (in thousands) for the years ended May 31:
(1)International domestic average daily package volume relates to our international intra-country operations. International export average daily package volume relates to our international priority and economy services.
(2)Ground commercial average daily volume is calculated on a 5-day-per-week basis, while home delivery and economy average daily package volumes are calculated on a 7-day-per-week basis. 2020 and 2021 statistical information has been revised to conform to the current year presentation. Total FedEx Ground average daily volume was 8,952 for 2019.
(3)International average daily freight pounds relate to our international priority, economy, and airfreight services.
- 48 -
The following graphs for FedEx Express, FedEx Ground, and FedEx Freight show selected yield trends for the years ended May 31:
(1)International export revenue per package relates to our international priority and economy services. International domestic revenue per package relates to our international intra-country operations.
(2)International revenue per pound relates to our international priority, economy, and airfreight services.
- 49 -
Revenue
Revenue increased 11% in 2022 primarily due to yield management actions, including higher fuel surcharges, as well as commercial and home delivery volume growth at FedEx Ground and volume growth at FedEx Freight. In addition, we experienced severe winter weather in the prior year which positively affected the year-over-year comparisons in 2022.
Revenue at FedEx Express increased 9% in 2022 due to global package and international priority freight yield improvement, partially offset by decreased international and U.S. domestic package volume, as well as lower U.S. average daily freight pounds. At FedEx Ground, revenue increased 9% in 2022 primarily due to yield improvement, two additional ground commercial operating days, a mix shift to higher-yielding services, and growth in our commercial services. FedEx Freight revenue increased 22% in 2022 primarily due to higher revenue per shipment and increased average daily shipments. Revenue at Corporate, other, and eliminations increased 33% in 2022 primarily due to higher yields at FedEx Logistics, Inc. (“FedEx Logistics”) as a result of market capacity constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fuel Surcharges
While fluctuations in fuel surcharge percentages can be significant from period to period, fuel surcharges represent one of the many individual components of our pricing structure that impact our overall revenue and yield. See the “Fuel” section of this MD&A for more information.
Business Realignment Costs
In 2021, FedEx Express announced a workforce reduction plan in Europe related to the network integration of TNT Express. The plan will affect approximately 5,000 employees in Europe across operational teams and back-office functions. The execution of the plan is subject to a works council consultation process that will occur through 2023 in accordance with local country processes and regulations.
We incurred costs of $278 million ($214 million, net of tax, or $0.80 per diluted share) in 2022 and $116 million ($90 million, net of tax, or $0.33 per diluted share) in 2021 associated with our business realignment activities. These costs are related to certain employee severance arrangements. Payments under this program totaled approximately $225 million in 2022 and approximately $15 million in 2021. We expect the pre-tax cost of our business realignment activities to be approximately $420 million through 2023. We expect savings from our business realignment activities to be between $275 million and $350 million on an annualized basis beginning in 2024. The actual amount and timing of business realignment costs and related cost savings resulting from the workforce reduction plan are dependent on local country consultation processes and regulations and negotiated social plans and may differ from our current expectations and estimates.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares operating expenses expressed as dollar amounts (in millions) and as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
(1)Includes TNT Express integration expenses of $132 million in 2022 and $210 million in 2021.
(2)Includes costs associated with the workforce reduction plan in Europe.
(3)Includes a $210 million charge in 2022 related to pre- and post-judgment interest in connection with a FedEx Ground legal matter.
- 50 -
The challenging labor market and inflationary pressures contributed to increases in purchased transportation, salaries and employee benefits, and other operating expenses in 2022. Higher fuel surcharges also contributed to increased purchased transportation costs. Salaries and employee benefits expense also increased in 2022 due to merit increases, partially offset by lower variable incentive compensation expense. Higher self-insurance accruals, increased costs related to information technology expenses, a charge related to pre- and post-judgment interest in connection with a FedEx Ground legal matter, and additional volume-related expenses also contributed to an increase in other operating expense in 2022. Rentals and landing fees increased in 2022 primarily driven by increased vehicle and aircraft leases at FedEx Express, as well as network expansion at FedEx Ground.
Fuel
We apply a fuel surcharge on our air and ground services, most of which are adjusted on a weekly basis. The fuel surcharge is based on a weekly fuel price from two weeks prior to the week in which it is assessed. Some FedEx Express international fuel surcharges incorporate a timing lag of approximately six to eight weeks. We routinely review our fuel surcharges and periodically update the tables used to determine our fuel surcharges at all of our transportation segments. The net impact of fuel on operating income described below and for each segment below does not include the impact from these ordinary-course table changes.
While fluctuations in fuel surcharge percentages can be significant from period to period, fuel surcharges represent one of the many individual components of our pricing structure that impact our overall revenue and yield. Additional components include the mix of services sold, the base price, and extra service charges we obtain for these services and level of pricing discounts offered.
In order to provide information about the impact of fuel surcharges on the trend in revenue and yield growth, we have included the comparative weighted-average fuel surcharge percentages in effect for 2022 and 2021 in the accompanying discussions of each of our transportation segments.
Fuel expense increased 77% during 2022 due to higher fuel prices. In addition to variability in usage and market prices, the manner in which we purchase fuel also influences the net impact of fuel on our results. For example, our contracts for jet fuel purchases at FedEx Express are tied to various indices, including the U.S. Gulf Coast index. While many of these indices are aligned, each index may fluctuate at a different pace, driving variability in the prices paid for jet fuel. Furthermore, under these contractual arrangements, approximately 70% of our jet fuel is purchased based on the index price for the preceding week, with the remainder of our purchases tied primarily to the index price for the preceding month and preceding day, rather than based on daily spot rates. These contractual provisions mitigate the impact of rapidly changing daily spot rates on our jet fuel purchases.
Because of the factors described above, our operating results may be affected should the market price of fuel suddenly change by a significant amount or change by amounts that do not result in an adjustment in our fuel surcharges, which can significantly affect our earnings either positively or negatively in the short-term. For more information, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The net impact of fuel had a significant benefit to operating income in 2022 as higher fuel surcharges outpaced increased fuel prices. The net impact of fuel on our operating results does not consider the effects that fuel surcharge levels may have on our business, including changes in demand and shifts in the mix of services purchased by our customers. In addition, our purchased transportation expense is impacted by fuel costs.
Other Income and Expense
Interest expense decreased $104 million in 2022 primarily due to the 2021 debt extinguishment transactions further discussed in the “Liquidity” section of this MD&A and Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. During 2021, we issued $3.25 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement and used the net proceeds to redeem outstanding debt. In connection with our debt restructuring, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $393 million ($297 million, net of tax, or $1.11 per diluted share) in 2021. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Retirement Plans MTM Adjustments
In 2022, we incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM loss of $1.6 billion ($1.2 billion, net of tax, or $4.49 per diluted share), which includes a net loss of $1.3 billion ($1.0 billion, net of tax, or $3.76 per diluted share) related to the year-end actuarial adjustments of pension and postretirement healthcare plans’ assets and liabilities. These actuarial adjustments were due to lower than expected asset returns, demographic experience, and an update to the mortality assumption, partially offset by higher discount rates.
In addition, we incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM net loss of $260 million ($195 million, net of tax, or $0.73 per diluted share) in the second quarter of 2022, of which $224 million was related to the termination of the TNT Express Netherlands Pension Plan. Effective October 1, 2021, the responsibility of all pension assets and liabilities of this plan was transferred to a separate, multi-employer pension plan. The remaining $36 million net loss was related to the U.S. FedEx Freight Pension Plan and consisted of a $75 million MTM loss due to a lower discount rate in the second quarter of 2022, partially offset by a $39 million curtailment gain.
- 51 -
In 2021, we incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM gain of $1.2 billion ($936 million, net of tax, or $3.48 per diluted share) related to the year-end actuarial adjustments of pension and postretirement healthcare plans’ assets and liabilities. These actuarial adjustments were due to higher than expected asset returns and an improved discount rate.
Additionally, in 2021, we incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM net loss of $52 million ($41 million, net of tax, or $0.15 per diluted share) related to amendments to the TNT Express Netherlands Pension Plan. Benefits for approximately 2,100 employees were frozen effective December 31, 2020. On January 1, 2021, these employees began earning pension benefits under a separate, multi-employer pension plan. This $52 million net loss consisted of a $106 million MTM loss due to a lower discount rate and a $54 million curtailment gain.
For more information, see the “Critical Accounting Estimates” section of this MD&A and Note 1 and Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
The 2022 tax provision was favorably impacted by a benefit of $142 million related to revisions of prior year tax estimates identified during the preparation of U.S. and foreign tax returns. The 2022 tax provision was also favorably impacted by changes in our corporate legal entity structure.
The 2021 tax provision includes a benefit of $279 million from an increase in our 2020 tax loss that the CARES Act allowed to be carried back to 2015, when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%. The 2021 tax provision also includes a benefit of $66 million from a tax rate increase in the Netherlands applied to our deferred tax asset balances and was unfavorably impacted by an increase in uncertain tax positions for matters in multiple jurisdictions.
We are subject to taxation in the U.S. and various U.S. state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. We are currently under examination by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) for the 2016 through 2019 tax years. It is reasonably possible that certain income tax return proceedings will be completed during the next 12 months and could result in a change in our balance of unrecognized tax benefits. However, we believe we have recorded adequate amounts of tax, including interest and penalties, for any adjustments expected to occur.
During 2021, we filed suit in U.S. District Court for the Western District of Tennessee challenging the validity of a tax regulation related to the one-time transition tax on unrepatriated foreign earnings, which was enacted as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”). Our lawsuit seeks to have the court declare this regulation invalid and order the refund of overpayments of U.S. federal income taxes for 2018 and 2019 attributable to the denial of foreign tax credits under the regulation. We have recorded a cumulative benefit of $215 million through 2022 attributable to our interpretation of the TCJA and the Internal Revenue Code. We continue to pursue this lawsuit; however, if we are ultimately unsuccessful in defending our position, we may be required to reverse the benefit previously recorded.
For more information on income taxes, see the “Critical Accounting Estimates” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Business Acquisitions
See Note 4 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of business acquisitions.
Equity Investment
On December 8, 2021, FedEx Express entered into equity and commercial agreements with Delhivery Limited (“Delhivery”). As part of the collaboration, FedEx Express made a $100 million equity investment in Delhivery, FedEx Express sold certain assets pertaining to its domestic business in India to Delhivery, and the companies entered into a long-term commercial agreement. FedEx Express will focus on international export and import services to and from India, and Delhivery will, in addition to FedEx, sell FedEx Express international services in the India market and provide pickup-and-delivery services across India. This transaction was recorded in the third quarter of 2022 and was not material to our results of operations.
- 52 -
Russia and Ukraine Conflict
The conflict in Russia and Ukraine that began in February 2022 continues as of the date of this Annual Report. The safety of our team members in Ukraine is our top priority. We are providing team members in Ukraine with financial assistance and other resources. We have provided more than $2.3 million in humanitarian aid to support those impacted by the conflict in Ukraine, which includes $1 million of in-kind shipping to organizations who are transporting supplies into the area. As we focus on the safety of our team members, we have suspended all services in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus, which has not had and is not expected to have a material impact on our business or results of operations. For more information about the conflict between Russia and Ukraine and its effect on FedEx’s business and results of operations, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report.
Outlook
During 2023, we anticipate revenue and operating income growth will be driven by improved yields and cost control actions, as we continue to focus on yield management and revenue quality to help mitigate the impact of slowing economic conditions on our volumes and inflationary pressures on our costs. We will continue to manage network capacity to demand levels, flexing our network and making adjustments as needed to align operating costs to volumes. We will also continue executing targeted actions to improve productivity and lower costs both through advanced technology and optimization of operations.
During 2023, we expect to continue our ongoing initiatives aimed to transform and optimize the FedEx Express international business, particularly in Europe. These actions are focused on reducing the complexity and fragmentation of our international business, improving efficiency to meet changing customer expectations and business dynamics, lowering costs, increasing profitability, and improving service levels. As part of this strategy, in 2021 we announced a workforce reduction plan in Europe, which we expect to be substantially complete in 2023, with aggregate spend through the completion of the program anticipated to be approximately $420 million in cash expenditures. We expect savings from our business realignment activities to be between $275 million and $350 million on an annualized basis beginning in 2024. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for additional information.
Our capital expenditures for 2023 are expected to be consistent with 2022 at approximately $6.8 billion. We expect increased investment in replacement vehicles including our vehicle electrification initiative, information technology, and strategic initiatives aimed to optimize operations across our networks to be offset with lower aircraft fleet modernization spend. Our expected capital expenditures for 2023 also include investments in facilities and equipment at FedEx Ground, and the FedEx Express Indianapolis and Memphis hub expansion and modernization programs.
We will continue to evaluate our investments in critical long-term strategic projects to ensure our capital expenditures are expected to generate high returns on investment and are balanced with our outlook for global economic conditions. For additional details on key 2023 capital projects, refer to the “Financial Condition - Capital Resources” and “Financial Condition - Liquidity Outlook” sections of this MD&A.
The uncertainty of a slowing global economy, geopolitical challenges including the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and the continuing effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the impact these factors will have on the rate of growth of global trade, supply chains, fuel prices, and our business in particular, make any expectations for 2023 inherently less certain. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for more information.
See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of these and other potential risks and uncertainties that could materially affect our future performance.
Seasonality of Business
Our businesses are cyclical in nature, as seasonal fluctuations affect volumes, revenue, and earnings. Historically, the U.S. express package business experiences an increase in volumes in late November and December. International business, particularly in the Asia-to-U.S. market, peaks in October and November in advance of the U.S. holiday sales season. Our first and third fiscal quarters, because they are summer vacation and post winter-holiday seasons, have historically experienced lower volumes relative to other periods. Normally, the fall is the busiest shipping period for FedEx Ground, while late December, June and July are the slowest periods. For FedEx Freight, the spring and fall are the busiest periods and the latter part of December through February is the slowest period. Shipment levels, operating costs, and earnings for each of our companies can also be adversely affected by inclement weather, particularly the impact of severe winter weather in our third fiscal quarter. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for more information.
RECENT ACCOUNTING GUIDANCE
See Note 2 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting guidance.
- 53 -
REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
FedEx Express, FedEx Ground, and FedEx Freight represent our major service lines and, along with FedEx Services, constitute our reportable segments. Our reportable segments include the following businesses:
During the third quarter of 2022, FedEx Cross Border Holdings, Inc. was merged into FedEx Express.
FEDEX SERVICES SEGMENT
The FedEx Services segment provides direct and indirect support to our operating segments, and we allocate all of the net operating costs of the FedEx Services segment to reflect the full cost of operating our businesses in the results of those segments. We review and evaluate the performance of our transportation segments based on operating income (inclusive of FedEx Services segment allocations). For the FedEx Services segment, performance is evaluated based on the impact of its total allocated net operating costs on our operating segments.
Operating expense for each of our transportation segments include the allocations from the FedEx Services segment to the respective transportation segments. These allocations include charges and credits for administrative services provided between operating companies. The allocations of net operating costs are based on metrics such as relative revenue or estimated services provided. We believe these allocations approximate the net cost of providing these functions. Our allocation methodologies are refined periodically, as necessary, to reflect changes in our businesses.
CORPORATE, OTHER, AND ELIMINATIONS
Corporate and other includes corporate headquarters costs for executive officers and certain legal and finance functions, including certain other costs and credits not attributed to our core business, as well as certain costs associated with developing our innovate digitally strategic pillar through our FedEx Dataworks, Inc. (including ShopRunner, Inc.) (“FedEx Dataworks”) operating segment. FedEx Dataworks is focused on creating solutions to transform the digital and physical experiences of our customers and team members.
Also included in Corporate and other are the FedEx Office and Print Services, Inc. operating segment, which provides an array of document and business services and retail access to our customers for our package transportation businesses, and the FedEx Logistics operating segment, which provides integrated supply chain management solutions, specialty transportation, customs brokerage, and global ocean and air freight forwarding.
The results of Corporate, other, and eliminations are not allocated to the other business segments.
In 2022, the increase in operating results in Corporate, other, and eliminations was primarily due to improved operating income at FedEx Logistics. Market capacity constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic drove higher revenue due to increased yields, partially offset by higher purchased transportation costs. In addition, 2022 operating results in Corporate, other, and eliminations include a $210 million charge recognized in the fourth quarter of 2022 related to pre- and post-judgment interest in connection with a FedEx Ground legal matter. See Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Certain FedEx operating companies provide transportation and related services for other FedEx companies outside their reportable segment in order to optimize our resources. For example, during 2022 FedEx Ground provided delivery support for certain FedEx Express packages as part of our last-mile optimization efforts, and FedEx Freight provided road and intermodal support for both FedEx Ground and FedEx Express. In addition, FedEx Express is working with FedEx Logistics to secure air charters for U.S. customers. Billings for such services are based on negotiated rates, which we believe approximate fair value, and are reflected as revenue of the billing segment. These rates are adjusted from time to time based on market conditions. Such intersegment revenue and expenses are eliminated in our consolidated results and are not separately identified in the following segment information because the amounts are not material.
- 54 -
FEDEX EXPRESS SEGMENT
FedEx Express offers a wide range of U.S. domestic and international shipping services for delivery of packages and freight including priority, deferred, and economy services, which provide delivery on a time-definite or day-definite basis. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin, and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
(1)International domestic revenue relates to our international intra-country operations.
- 55 -
The following table compares selected statistics (in thousands, except yield amounts) for the years ended May 31:
(1)International domestic statistics relate to our international intra-country operations.
FedEx Express Segment Revenue
FedEx Express segment revenue increased 9% in 2022 primarily due to global package and international priority freight yield management actions, including higher fuel surcharges. These factors were partially offset by decreased international domestic package volume driven by yield management actions. Additionally, we experienced lower U.S. average daily freight pounds primarily due to decreased demand and a reduction in charter flights, as well as decreased U.S. domestic package volume due to a decline in our deferred service offerings, reflecting year-over-year impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumer behavior in 2022.
Yield improvement, including higher fuel surcharges, drove increases in international export package yield of 13%, U.S. domestic package yield of 13%, composite freight yield of 12%, and international domestic package yield of 13% in 2022. International export average daily volumes increased 3% primarily due to growth in our international priority service offering, as industry-wide capacity constraints and actions to prioritize premium-yielding products drove a mix shift from international economy to international priority services. Total average daily freight pounds decreased 5% primarily due to decreased demand and a reduction in charter flights. This decrease was partially offset by higher international priority freight pounds resulting from increased demand for international freight capacity in 2022.
- 56 -
FedEx Express’s U.S. domestic and outbound fuel surcharge and international fuel surcharges ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Express Segment Operating Income
FedEx Express segment operating income increased 4% in 2022 primarily due to yield management actions, including the favorable net impact of fuel, lower variable incentive compensation expense, and less severe weather experienced in 2022, partially offset by higher operating expenses related to labor market challenges and inflationary pressures. The COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical uncertainty negatively impacted our operations in 2022 as we experienced reduced shipping demand and network disruptions, particularly in the second half of the year. In addition, we experienced lower U.S. average daily freight pounds due to decreased demand and a reduction in charter flights in 2022.
FedEx Express prior year operating results included a pre-tax benefit of approximately $165 million from a reduction in aviation excise taxes provided by the CARES Act, which expired on December 31, 2020 and negatively affected year-over-year comparisons in 2022.
FedEx Express segment results include business realignment costs of $278 million in 2022 associated with our workforce reduction plan in Europe. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for more information. FedEx Express segments results also include approximately $115 million of TNT Express integration expenses in 2022, a decrease of $61 million from 2021.
Purchased transportation expense increased 10% in 2022 primarily due to higher utilization of third-party transportation providers and increased rates. Other operating expense increased 8% in 2022 primarily due to higher outside service contract expense, which includes variable costs driven by the constrained labor market, as well as additional volume-related expenses. Rentals and landing fees expense increased 12% in 2022 primarily due to increased vehicle and aircraft leases. Salaries and employee benefits expense increased 1% in 2022 primarily due to higher labor costs related to the constrained labor market and wage pressures, partially offset by lower variable incentive compensation expense.
Fuel expense increased 80% in 2022 due to increased fuel prices. The net impact of fuel had a significant benefit to operating income in 2022 as higher fuel surcharges outpaced increased fuel prices. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
FedEx Express Segment Outlook
In 2023, we will focus on actions to improve global network efficiencies and lower our cost to serve as we expect rising uncertainty from the slowing economic environment, including inflationary pressures and geopolitical conditions, to impact our business. In addition, we will execute our disciplined revenue management strategy and implement cost control actions to drive improved revenue and operating income. We will focus on returning to industry-leading service to support yield improvement.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Express are expected to be relatively flat in 2023, with an increase in capital spend primarily related to vehicle purchases including our vehicle electrification initiative, investments in information technology, and package handling equipment, offset by a decrease in aircraft spend. We continue to make multi-year investments in our facilities to expand and modernize the Indianapolis hub and the Memphis World Hub.
- 57 -
FEDEX GROUND SEGMENT
FedEx Ground service offerings include day-certain delivery to businesses in the U.S. and Canada and to 100% of U.S. residences. Prior year statistical information has been revised to conform to the current year presentation. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin, selected package statistics (in thousands, except yield amounts), and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
(1)Ground commercial ADV is calculated on a 5-day-per-week basis, while home delivery and economy ADV are calculated on a 7-day-per-week basis.
FedEx Ground Segment Revenue
FedEx Ground segment revenue increased 9% in 2022 due to yield management actions, including higher fuel surcharges, as well as two additional ground commercial operating weekdays. In addition, a mix shift to higher yielding services due to strategic actions to improve revenue quality and growth in our commercial services as business returned to pre-pandemic levels contributed to the increase in revenue in 2022.
FedEx Ground yield increased 10% in 2022 primarily due to higher fuel surcharges, product mix, and revenue management actions. Average daily volume decreased 1% in 2022 driven by lower economy volume, partially offset by growth in ground commercial and home delivery services. Strategic actions to improve revenue quality and prioritize capacity for higher yielding business-to-consumer volume drove a mix shift from economy to home delivery services in 2022. Commercial services experienced growth in 2022 as business returned to pre-pandemic levels.
The FedEx Ground fuel surcharge is based on a rounded average of the national U.S. on-highway average price for a gallon of diesel fuel, as published by the Department of Energy. The fuel surcharge ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
- 58 -
FedEx Ground Segment Operating Income
FedEx Ground segment operating income decreased 17% in 2022 primarily due to higher operating expenses related to labor market challenges and inflationary pressures, as well as incremental costs associated with changes to our product mix. The constrained labor market affected the availability and cost of labor resulting in higher purchased transportation costs, network inefficiencies, and higher wage rates. In addition, higher self-insurance accruals and increased costs resulting from network expansion negatively impacted operating income in 2022. These factors were partially offset by yield management actions, including the favorable net impact of fuel, a favorable mix shift to higher yielding services, growth in commercial services, and two additional ground commercial operating weekdays in 2022.
Purchased transportation expense increased 8% in 2022 due to higher fuel surcharges, as well as the challenging labor market resulting in increased rates, higher utilization of third-party service providers, and network inefficiencies. Salaries and employee benefits expense increased 17% in 2022 due to inflationary pressures and network inefficiencies related to the constrained labor market. Other operating expense increased 23% in 2022 primarily due to higher self-insurance accruals, higher variable costs associated with the constrained labor market, and additional volume-related expenses. Rentals expense increased 21% in 2022 due to network expansion.
The net impact of fuel had a significant benefit to operating income in 2022 as higher fuel surcharges outpaced increased fuel prices. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
FedEx Ground Segment Outlook
In 2023, FedEx Ground will focus on specific productivity and workforce initiatives to optimize operations and reduce cost to serve. In addition, we are making strategic technology investments to improve safety and efficiency within our operations, as well as executing targeted actions to enhance the hiring process, improve retention, and align staffing levels with network demands. We will also continue executing pricing initiatives to mitigate slowing market demand and network capacity dynamics, while delivering consistently superior service and improving the recipient experience to retain and grow the customer base. We anticipate these actions, as well as cost control measures, will result in improved revenue and operating income in 2023.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Ground are expected to decrease in 2023 primarily related to lower spending on trailers and investments in information technology.
- 59 -
FEDEX FREIGHT SEGMENT
FedEx Freight LTL service offerings include priority services when speed is critical and economy services when time can be traded for savings. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin, selected statistics, and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Freight Segment Revenue
FedEx Freight segment revenue increased 22% in 2022 primarily due to yield management actions, including higher fuel surcharges, as well as increased average daily shipments.
Revenue per shipment increased 18% in 2022 primarily due to revenue quality initiatives, including higher fuel surcharges, which more than offset the effect of slightly lower weight per shipment. Average daily shipments increased 3% in 2022 due to higher demand for our service offerings.
The weekly indexed fuel surcharge is based on the average of the U.S. on-highway prices for a gallon of diesel fuel, as published by the Department of Energy. The indexed FedEx Freight fuel surcharge ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Freight Segment Operating Income
FedEx Freight segment operating income increased significantly in 2022 driven by continued focus on revenue quality and profitable growth. Severe winter weather experienced in the prior year, as well as one additional operating day, benefited our year-over-year operating income comparisons in 2022. Higher purchased transportation costs and wage rates as a result of constrained labor market conditions negatively affected results in 2022.
- 60 -
Salaries and employee benefits increased 13% in 2022 primarily due to merit increases, higher volumes, and higher labor costs in the constrained labor market. Purchased transportation increased 18% in 2022 primarily due to the challenging labor market resulting in higher utilization of third-party service providers and increased rates, as well as higher fuel surcharges.
Fuel expense increased 66% in 2022 primarily due to increased fuel prices. The net impact of fuel had a significant benefit to operating income in 2022 as higher fuel surcharges outpaced increased fuel prices. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
FedEx Freight Segment Outlook
We expect higher revenue and operating income for 2023 as we continue to utilize technology to improve the customer experience and deliver profitable growth. We remain focused on safety, revenue quality, and improving operational productivities and efficiencies to mitigate the impact of slowing economic conditions on our business. We will continue to invest in FedEx Freight Direct, a service to meet the needs of the growing e-commerce market for delivery of heavy, bulky products to or through the door for residences and businesses, and expect profitable growth in 2023. We will continue to capitalize on opportunities to collaborate with FedEx Ground and FedEx Express by providing road, pickup-and-delivery, dock, and intermodal support.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Freight are expected to increase in 2023 primarily due to fleet modernization and strategic investments in our network to support our focus on the security of our people, assets, and customers’ freight.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
LIQUIDITY
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $6.9 billion at May 31, 2022, compared to $7.1 billion at May 31, 2021. The following table provides a summary of our cash flows for the years ended May 31 (in millions):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Cash flows from operating activities decreased $0.3 billion in 2022 primarily due to timing of variable incentive compensation payments and a decrease in other tax liabilities, including prior year relief from certain taxes in the U.S. pursuant to the CARES Act, partially offset by lower accounts receivable due to the prior year effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as higher net income (net of noncash items).
- 61 -
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Capital expenditures were 15% higher in 2022 primarily due to increased spending on package handling equipment, vehicles and trailers, facilities, and information technology, partially offset by decreased aircraft spending. See “Capital Resources” below for a more detailed discussion of capital expenditures during 2022.
Financing Activities. In January 2016, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program of up to 25 million shares (the “2016 repurchase program”). In December 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a new stock repurchase program of up to $5 billion of FedEx common stock (the “2022 repurchase program” and together with the 2016 repurchase program, the “repurchase programs”). As part of the repurchase programs, we entered into an ASR agreement with a bank in December 2021 to repurchase an aggregate of $1.5 billion of our common stock. During 2022, the ASR transaction was completed, and 6.1 million shares were delivered under the ASR agreement. We repurchased 2.8 million additional shares of our common stock during 2022.
The following table provides a summary of repurchases of our common stock for the periods ended May 31 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts):
As of May 31, 2022, $4.1 billion remained available to be used for repurchases under the 2022 repurchase program. No shares remain available for repurchase under the 2016 repurchase program. Shares under the 2022 repurchase program may be repurchased from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The program does not have an expiration date and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. See Note 1 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
During 2021, we issued $3.25 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement and used the net proceeds to redeem $5.8 billion of outstanding debt and pay associated redemption premiums of $393 million, eliminating all debt maturities through 2025 and one maturity in 2027. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on the terms of the senior unsecured debt, including the Sustainability Notes (defined in Note 7), as well as the debt maturities redeemed.
Additionally, during 2021, FedEx Express issued $970 million of Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2020-1AA (the “Certificates”) with a fixed interest rate of 1.875% due in February 2034 utilizing pass-through trusts. The Certificates are secured by 19 Boeing aircraft. The payment obligations of FedEx Express in respect of the Certificates are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by FedEx. FedEx Express is using the proceeds from the issuance for general corporate purposes. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the Certificates.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our operations are capital intensive, characterized by significant investments in aircraft, package handling and sort equipment, vehicles and trailers, technology, and facilities. The amount and timing of capital investments depend on various factors, including pre-existing contractual commitments, anticipated volume growth, domestic and international economic conditions, new or enhanced services, geographical expansion of services, availability of satisfactory financing, and actions of regulatory authorities.
The following table compares capital expenditures by asset category and reportable segment for the years ended May 31 (in millions):
- 62 -
Capital expenditures increased $0.9 billion during 2022 primarily due to increased spending on package handling equipment at all transportation segments, higher spending on vehicles and trailers, as well as facilities at FedEx Ground and FedEx Express, and higher information technology spending at FedEx Services, partially offset by decreased aircraft spending at FedEx Express.
GUARANTOR FINANCIAL INFORMATION
We are providing the following information in compliance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X, “Financial Disclosures about Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities” with respect to our senior unsecured debt securities and the Certificates.
The $19.1 billion principal amount of the senior unsecured notes were issued by FedEx under a shelf registration statement and are guaranteed by certain direct and indirect subsidiaries of FedEx (“Guarantor Subsidiaries”). FedEx owns, directly or indirectly, 100% of each Guarantor Subsidiary. The guarantees are (1) unsecured obligations of the respective Guarantor Subsidiary, (2) rank equally with all of their other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness, and (3) are full and unconditional and joint and several. If we sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of all of the capital stock or all or substantially all of the assets of a Guarantor Subsidiary to any person that is not an affiliate of FedEx, the guarantee of that Guarantor Subsidiary will terminate, and holders of debt securities will no longer have a direct claim against such subsidiary under the guarantee.
Additionally, FedEx fully and unconditionally guarantees the payment obligation of FedEx Express in respect of the $892 million principal amount of the Certificates. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the Certificates.
The following tables present summarized financial information for FedEx (as Parent) and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after transactions and balances within the combined entities have been eliminated.
Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries
The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information as of May 31, 2022 (in millions):
The following table presents the summarized statement of income information as of May 31, 2022 (in millions):
The following tables present summarized financial information for FedEx (as Parent Guarantor) and FedEx Express (as Subsidiary Issuer) on a combined basis after transactions and balances within the combined entities have been eliminated.
Parent Guarantor and Subsidiary Issuer
The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information as of May 31, 2022 (in millions):
- 63 -
The following table presents the summarized statement of income information as of May 31, 2022 (in millions):
LIQUIDITY OUTLOOK
In response to current business and economic conditions as referenced above in the “Outlook” section of this MD&A, we are continuing to actively manage and optimize our capital allocation in a challenging macroeconomic environment due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, labor availability and supply chain constraints, inflationary pressures, rising fuel prices, and geopolitical conflicts. We had $6.9 billion in cash at May 31, 2022 and have $3.5 billion in available liquidity under our $2.0 billion five-year credit agreement (the “Five-Year Credit Agreement) and $1.5 billion three-year credit agreement (the “Three-Year Credit Agreement” and together with the Five-Year Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements”), and we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, and available financing sources will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs, which include operational requirements, expected capital expenditures, voluntary pension contributions, dividend payments, and stock repurchases.
We expect to repurchase $1.5 billion of our common stock in 2023.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at May 31, 2022 includes $2.9 billion of cash in foreign jurisdictions associated with our permanent reinvestment strategy. We are able to access the majority of this cash without a material tax cost and do not believe that the indefinite reinvestment of these funds impairs our ability to meet our U.S. domestic debt or working capital obligations.
Our 2023 capital expenditures are expected to be consistent with 2022 at approximately $6.8 billion. We expect increased investment in replacement vehicles including our vehicle electrification initiative, information technology, and strategic investments aimed to optimize operations across our networks to be offset with lower aircraft fleet modernization spend. Included within our expected 2023 capital expenditures are our continued investments in the FedEx Express Indianapolis hub and FedEx Express Memphis World Hub, which are expected to total $1.5 billion each over the life of each project. Our expected capital expenditures for 2023 also include $1.7 billion for delivery of aircraft and related equipment and progress payments toward future aircraft deliveries at FedEx Express. While we continue to invest in our business, the capital intensity relative to revenue is expected to remain below historical levels.
We have additional obligations as part of our ordinary course of business, beyond those committed for capital expenditures, which consist of debt obligations, lease obligations, and obligations and commitments for purchases of goods and services. Refer to Note 7, Note 8, and Note 18 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information. In addition, we have certain tax positions that are further discussed in Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We do not have any guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, which we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
We have several aircraft modernization programs underway that are supported by the purchase of Boeing 777 Freighter and Boeing 767-300 Freighter aircraft. These aircraft are significantly more fuel-efficient per unit than the aircraft types previously utilized, and these expenditures are necessary to achieve significant long-term operating savings and to replace older aircraft. Our ability to delay the timing of these aircraft-related expenditures is limited without incurring significant costs to modify existing purchase agreements.
We have a shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) that allows us to sell, in one or more future offerings, any combination of our unsecured debt securities and common stock and allows pass-through trusts formed by FedEx Express to sell, in one or more future offerings, pass-through certificates.
The Five-Year Credit Agreement expires in March 2026 and includes a $250 million letter of credit sublimit. The Three-Year Credit Agreement expires in March 2025. The Credit Agreements are available to finance our operations and other cash flow needs. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of the terms and significant covenants of the Credit Agreements.
- 64 -
We made a voluntary contribution of $400 million to our tax qualified U.S. domestic pension plans (“U.S. Pension Plans”) in June 2023 and anticipate making $400 million of additional voluntary contributions during the remainder of 2023. There are currently no anticipated required minimum contributions to our U.S. Pension Plans based on our funded status and the fact we have a credit balance related to our cumulative excess voluntary pension contributions over those required that exceeds $3.5 billion. The credit balance is subtracted from plan assets to determine the minimum funding requirements. Therefore, we could eliminate all required contributions to our principal U.S. Pension Plans for several years if we were to choose to waive part of that credit balance in any given year. Our U.S. Pension Plans have ample funds to meet expected benefit payments.
On June 14, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $1.15 per share of common stock. The dividend was paid on July 11, 2022 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on June 27, 2022. Each quarterly dividend payment is subject to review and approval by our Board of Directors, and we evaluate our dividend payment amount on an annual basis. There are no material restrictions on our ability to declare dividends, nor are there any material restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to transfer funds to us in the form of cash dividends, loans, or advances.
Standard & Poor’s has assigned us a senior unsecured debt credit rating of BBB, a Certificates rating of AA-, a commercial paper rating of A-2, and a ratings outlook of “stable.” Moody’s Investors Service has assigned us an unsecured debt credit rating of Baa2, a Certificates rating of Aa3, a commercial paper rating of P-2, and a ratings outlook of “stable.” If our credit ratings drop, our interest expense may increase. If our commercial paper ratings drop below current levels, we may have difficulty utilizing the commercial paper market. If our senior unsecured debt credit ratings drop below investment grade, our access to financing may become limited.
OTHER BUSINESS MATTERS
On June 24, 2019, FedEx filed suit in U.S. District Court in the District of Columbia seeking to enjoin the U.S. Department of Commerce (the “DOC”) from enforcing prohibitions contained in the Export Administration Regulations against FedEx. On September 11, 2020, the court granted the DOC’s motion to dismiss the lawsuit. On November 5, 2020, we appealed this decision. On July 8, 2022, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit affirmed the dismissal of the lawsuit.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make significant judgments and estimates to develop amounts reflected and disclosed in the financial statements. In many cases, there are alternative policies or estimation techniques that could be used. We maintain a thorough process to review the application of our accounting policies and to evaluate the appropriateness of the many estimates that are required to prepare the financial statements of a complex, global corporation. However, even under optimal circumstances, estimates routinely require adjustment based on changing circumstances and new or better information.
The estimates discussed below include the financial statement elements that are either the most judgmental or involve the selection or application of alternative accounting policies and are material to our results of operations and financial condition. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of our Board of Directors and with our independent registered public accounting firm.
RETIREMENT PLANS
The rules for pension accounting are complex and can produce volatility in our earnings, financial condition, and liquidity. Our defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans are measured using actuarial techniques that reflect management’s assumptions for expected returns on assets (“EROA”), discount rate, and demographic experience such as salary increases, expected retirement, mortality, employee turnover, and future increases in healthcare costs. Differences between these assumptions and actual experience are recognized in our earnings through MTM accounting. The components of the MTM adjustments for the period ended May 31 are as follows (presented as loss (gain) in millions):
- 65 -
Our annual MTM adjustment is highly sensitive to the discount rate and EROA assumptions, which are as follows:
The following sensitivity analysis shows the impact of a 50-basis-point change in the EROA and discount rate assumptions for our largest pension plan and the resulting increase (decrease) in our projected benefit obligation (“PBO”) as of May 31, 2022 and expense for the year ended May 31, 2022 (in millions):
See Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information about our retirement plans.
INCOME TAXES
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our income taxes are a function of our income, tax planning opportunities available to us, statutory tax rates, and the income tax laws in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. These tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by us and the respective governmental taxing authorities. As a result, significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties. Also, our effective tax rate is significantly affected by the earnings generated in each jurisdiction, so unexpected fluctuations in the geographic mix of earnings could significantly impact our tax rate. Our intercompany transactions are based on globally accepted transfer pricing principles, which align profits with the business operations and functions of the various legal entities in our international business.
We evaluate our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. These evaluations are based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax laws or their interpretations, audit activity, and changes in our business. In addition, management considers the advice of third parties in making conclusions regarding tax consequences.
Tax contingencies arise from uncertainty in the application of tax rules throughout the many jurisdictions in which we operate. Despite our belief that our tax return positions are consistent with applicable tax laws, taxing authorities could challenge certain positions. We record tax benefits for uncertain tax positions based upon management’s evaluation of the information available at the reporting date. To be recognized in the financial statements, a tax benefit must be at least more likely than not of being sustained based on the technical merits. The benefit for positions meeting the recognition threshold is measured as the largest benefit more likely than not of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required in making these determinations and adjustments to unrecognized tax benefits may be necessary to reflect actual taxes payable upon settlement.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings, and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income rely heavily on estimates to make this determination, and as a result there is a risk that these estimates will have to be revised as new information is received. To the extent we do not consider it more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered, a valuation allowance is established. We believe we will generate sufficient future taxable income to realize the tax benefits related to the remaining net deferred tax assets in our consolidated balance sheets that are not subject to valuation allowances. We record the taxes for global intangible low-taxed income as a period cost.
- 66 -
Our income tax positions are based on currently enacted tax laws. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. Treasury Department, the IRS, and other standard-setting bodies, any resulting changes to our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance.
For more information, see the “Income Taxes” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
SELF-INSURANCE ACCRUALS
Our self-insurance reserves are established for estimates of ultimate loss on all incurred claims, including incurred-but-not-reported claims. Components of our self-insurance reserves included in this critical accounting estimate are workers’ compensation claims, vehicle accidents, property and cargo loss, general business liabilities, and benefits paid under employee disability programs. These reserves are primarily based on the actuarially estimated cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. These estimates include judgment about severity of claims, frequency and volume of claims, healthcare inflation, seasonality, and plan designs. The use of any estimation technique in this area is inherently sensitive given the magnitude of claims involved and the length of time until the ultimate cost is known, which may be several years.
We believe our recorded obligations for these expenses are consistently measured on a conservative basis. Nevertheless, changes in accident frequency and severity, healthcare costs, insurance retention levels, and other factors can materially affect the estimates for these liabilities and affect our results of operations. Self-insurance accruals reflected in our balance sheet for the period ended May 31 are as follows (in millions):
A five-percent reduction or improvement in the assumed claim severity used to estimate our self-insurance accruals would result in an increase or decrease of approximately $230 million in our reserves and expenses as of and for the year ended May 31, 2022.
LONG-LIVED ASSETS
USEFUL LIVES AND SALVAGE VALUES. Our business is capital intensive, with approximately 55% of our owned assets invested in our transportation and information system infrastructures.
The depreciation or amortization of our capital assets over their estimated useful lives, and the determination of any salvage values, requires management to make judgments about future events. Because we utilize many of our capital assets over relatively long periods (the majority of aircraft costs are depreciated over 15 to 30 years), we periodically evaluate whether adjustments to our estimated service lives or salvage values are necessary to ensure these estimates properly match the economic use of the asset. These evaluations consider usage, maintenance costs, and economic factors that affect the useful life of an asset. This evaluation may result in changes in the estimated lives and residual values used to depreciate our aircraft and other equipment.
For our aircraft, we consider actual experience with the same or similar aircraft types and future volume projections in estimating the useful lives and expected salvage values. We typically assign no residual value due to the utilization of our aircraft in cargo configuration, which results in little to no value at the end of their useful life. These estimates affect the amount of depreciation expense recognized in a period and, ultimately, the gain or loss on the disposal of the asset. Changes in the estimated lives of assets will result in an increase or decrease in the amount of depreciation recognized in future periods and could have a material impact on our results of operations (as described below). Historically, gains and losses on disposals of operating equipment have not been material. However, such amounts may differ materially in the future due to changes in business levels, technological obsolescence, accident frequency, regulatory changes, and other factors beyond our control.
IMPAIRMENT. As of May 31, 2022, the FedEx Express global air network included a fleet of 696 aircraft (including approximately 300 supplemental aircraft) that provide delivery of packages and freight to more than 220 countries and territories through a wide range of U.S. and international shipping services. While certain aircraft are utilized in primary geographic areas (U.S. versus international), we operate an integrated global network, and utilize our aircraft and other modes of transportation to achieve the lowest cost of delivery while maintaining our service commitments to our customers. Because of the integrated nature of our global network, our aircraft are interchangeable across routes and geographies, giving us flexibility with our fleet planning to meet changing global economic conditions and maintain and modify aircraft as needed.
- 67 -
Because of the lengthy lead times for aircraft manufacture and modifications, we must anticipate volume levels and plan our fleet requirements years in advance, and make commitments for aircraft based on those projections. Furthermore, the timing and availability of certain used aircraft types (particularly those with better fuel efficiency) may create limited opportunities to acquire these aircraft at favorable prices in advance of our capacity needs. These activities create risks that asset capacity may exceed demand. At May 31, 2022, we had two purchased aircraft that were not yet placed into service.
We evaluate our long-lived assets used in operations for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the undiscounted cash flows to be generated by that asset group are less than the carrying amounts of the asset group and may not be recoverable. If the cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, the asset must be adjusted to its current fair value. We operate integrated transportation networks, and accordingly, cash flows for most of our operating assets are assessed at a network level, not at an individual asset level for our analysis of impairment. Further, decisions about capital investments are evaluated based on the impact to the overall network rather than the return on an individual asset. We make decisions to remove certain long-lived assets from service based on projections of reduced capacity needs or lower operating costs of newer aircraft types, and those decisions may result in an impairment charge. Assets held for disposal must be adjusted to their estimated fair values less costs to sell when the decision is made to dispose of the asset and certain other criteria are met. The fair value determinations for such aircraft may require management estimates, as there may not be active markets for some of these aircraft. Such estimates are subject to revision from period to period.
In the normal management of our aircraft fleet, we routinely idle aircraft and engines temporarily due to maintenance cycles and adjustments of our network capacity to match seasonality and overall customer demand levels. Temporarily idled assets are classified as available-for-use, and we continue to record depreciation expense associated with these assets. These temporarily idled assets are assessed for impairment and remaining life on a quarterly basis. The criteria for determining whether an asset has been permanently removed from service (and, as a result, is potentially impaired) include, but are not limited to, our global economic outlook and the impact of our outlook on our current and projected volume levels, including capacity needs during our peak shipping seasons; the introduction of new fleet types or decisions to permanently retire an aircraft fleet from operations; and changes to planned service expansion activities. At May 31, 2022, we had eight aircraft temporarily idled. These aircraft have been idled for an average of 24 months and are expected to return to revenue service in order to meet expected demand.
LEASES. We utilize operating leases to finance certain of our aircraft, facilities, and equipment. Such arrangements typically shift the risk of loss on the residual value of the assets at the end of the lease period to the lessor. In accordance with the new lease accounting standard adopted in 2020, we had approximately $17 billion in operating lease liabilities and related right-of-use assets on the balance sheet as of May 31, 2022. The weighted-average remaining lease term of all operating leases outstanding at May 31, 2022 was approximately 10 years.
Our leases generally contain options to extend or terminate the lease. We reevaluate our leases on a regular basis to consider the economic and strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options, and how they align with our operating strategy. Therefore, substantially all the renewal option periods are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability as the options to extend are not reasonably certain at lease commencement. Short-term leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recognized in the right-to-use asset and lease liability on the consolidated balance sheets.
The lease liabilities are measured at the lease commencement date and determined using the present value of the minimum lease payments not yet paid and our incremental borrowing rate, which approximates the rate at which we would borrow, on a collateralized basis, over the term of a lease in the applicable currency environment. The interest rate implicit in the lease is generally not determinable in transactions where we are the lessee.
The determination of whether a lease is accounted for as a finance lease or an operating lease requires management to make estimates primarily about the fair value of the asset and its estimated economic useful life. In addition, our evaluation includes ensuring we properly account for build-to-suit lease arrangements and making judgments about whether various forms of lessee involvement during the construction period allow the lessee to control the underlying leased asset during the construction period. We believe we have well-defined and controlled processes for making these evaluations, including obtaining third-party appraisals for material transactions to assist us in making these evaluations.
GOODWILL. We had $6.5 billion of recorded goodwill at May 31, 2022 and $7.0 billion of recorded goodwill at May 31, 2021 from our business acquisitions, representing the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Several factors give rise to goodwill in our acquisitions, such as the expected benefits from synergies of the combination and the existing workforce of the acquired business.
- 68 -
Goodwill is reviewed at least annually for impairment. In our evaluation of goodwill impairment, we perform a qualitative assessment that requires management judgment and the use of estimates to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. An entity has an unconditional option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. An entity may resume performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. We performed both qualitative and quantitative assessments of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2022 and 2021. This included comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value (including attributable goodwill). Fair value is estimated using standard valuation methodologies (principally the income or market approach classified as Level 3 within the fair value hierarchy) incorporating market participant considerations and management’s assumptions on revenue growth rates, operating margins, discount rates, and expected capital expenditures. Estimates used by management can significantly affect the outcome of the impairment test. Changes in forecasted operating results and other assumptions could materially affect these estimates.
As part of our qualitative assessment, we consider changes in the macroeconomic environment such as the general economic conditions, limitations on accessing capital, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, and other developments in equity and credit markets.
The market approach uses observable market data of comparable public companies to estimate fair value utilizing financial metrics such as operating value to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. We apply judgment to select appropriate comparison companies based on the business operations, growth, size, and risk profile relative to our reporting units. Changes to our selection of comparable companies may result in changes to the estimates of fair value of our reporting units.
Our reporting units with significant recorded goodwill include FedEx Express, FedEx Ground, and FedEx Freight. We evaluated these reporting units during the fourth quarters of 2022 and 2021 and the estimated fair value of each of these reporting units exceeded their carrying values as of the end of 2022 and 2021; therefore, we do not believe that any of these reporting units were impaired as of the balance sheet dates.
LEGAL AND OTHER CONTINGENCIES
We are subject to various loss contingencies in connection with our operations. Contingent liabilities are difficult to measure, as their measurement is subject to multiple factors that are not easily predicted or projected. Further, additional complexity in measuring these liabilities arises due to the various jurisdictions in which these matters occur, which makes our ability to predict their outcome highly uncertain. Moreover, different accounting rules must be employed to account for these items based on the nature of the contingency. Accordingly, significant management judgment is required to assess these matters and to make determinations about the measurement of a liability, if any. Certain pending loss contingencies are described in Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In the opinion of management, the aggregate liability, if any, of individual matters or groups of related matters not specifically described in Note 19 is not expected to be material to our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. The following describes our methods and associated processes for evaluating these matters.
Because of the complex environment in which we operate, we are subject to numerous legal proceedings and claims, including those relating to general commercial matters, governmental enforcement actions, employment-related claims, and FedEx Ground’s service providers. Accounting guidance for contingencies requires an accrual of estimated loss from a contingency, such as a non-income tax or other legal proceeding or claim, when it is probable (i.e., the future event or events are likely to occur) that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. This guidance also requires disclosure of a loss contingency matter when, in management’s judgment, a material loss is reasonably possible or probable.
During the preparation of our financial statements, we evaluate our contingencies to determine whether it is probable, reasonably possible, or remote that a liability has been incurred. A loss is recognized for all contingencies deemed probable and estimable, regardless of amount. For unresolved contingencies with potentially material exposure that are deemed reasonably possible, we evaluate whether a potential loss or range of loss can be reasonably estimated.
Our evaluation of these matters is the result of a comprehensive process designed to ensure that accounting recognition of a loss or disclosure of these contingencies is made in a timely manner and involves our legal and accounting personnel, as well as external counsel where applicable. The process includes regular communications during each quarter and scheduled meetings shortly before the completion of our financial statements to evaluate any new legal proceedings and the status of existing matters.
- 69 -
In determining whether a loss should be accrued or a loss contingency disclosed, we evaluate, among other factors:
•the current status of each matter within the scope and context of the entire lawsuit or proceeding (e.g., the lengthy and complex nature of class-action matters);
•the procedural status of each matter;
•any opportunities to dispose of a lawsuit on its merits before trial (i.e., motion to dismiss or for summary judgment);
•the amount of time remaining before a trial date;
•the status of discovery;
•the status of settlement, arbitration, or mediation proceedings; and
•our judgment regarding the likelihood of success prior to or at trial.
In reaching our conclusions with respect to accrual of a loss or loss contingency disclosure, we take a holistic view of each matter based on these factors and the information available prior to the issuance of our financial statements. Uncertainty with respect to an individual factor or combination of these factors may impact our decisions related to accrual or disclosure of a loss contingency, including a conclusion that we are unable to establish an estimate of possible loss or a meaningful range of possible loss. We update our disclosures to reflect our most current understanding of the contingencies at the time we issue our financial statements. However, events may arise that were not anticipated and the outcome of a contingency may result in a loss to us that differs materially from our previously estimated liability or range of possible loss.
Despite the inherent complexity in the accounting and disclosure of contingencies, we believe that our processes are robust and thorough and provide a consistent framework for management in evaluating the potential outcome of contingencies for proper accounting recognition and disclosure.