Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to “we,” “us,” “company” or “our company” are to Fintech Ecosystem Development Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the unaudited condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on FORM 10-K
includes forward-looking
statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-
looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking
statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking
statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking
statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target, and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of this offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. For additional detail regarding our initial public offering and related transactions, see “Note 1- Description Of Organization And Business Operations.”
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a business combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in this offering;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
•
could cause a change of control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock, rights and/or warrants. Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of such covenants;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry, and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes, and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $9,652,677. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On October 21, 2021, Fintech Ecosystem Development Corp. (the “Company”) consummated its initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 11,500,000 units (the “Units”), including the issuance of 1,500,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock of the Company, par value of $0.0001 per share (“Class A Common Stock”), one right of the Company (a “Right”) and one-half of
one redeemable warrant of the Company (a “Warrant”). The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $115,000,000.
Substantially concurrently with the closing of the IPO, the Company completed the sale, in a private placement, of 3,900,250 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”), to the Company’s sponsor, Revofast LLC, at an aggregate price of, and generating gross proceeds to the Company of, $3,900,250, $2,923,400 of which was placed in the trust account referred to in Item 8.01. The Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the Company’s initial business combination, and will have certain registration rights.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $612,750 in its operating bank account, $116,152,113 in its trust account, and working capital of approximately $519,936.
The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover for certain offering costs on the Company’s behalf in exchange for issuance of Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5), and a loan from the Sponsor of approximately $141,768 under the Note (as defined in Note 5). The $141,748 loan was fully repaid as of December 31, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
We may also need to obtain additional financing either to complete a business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of shares of our Class A common stock upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with the business combination.
Based on the foregoing, management does not believe that we will have sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this Report. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable and accrued liabilities, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination. We believe we may need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating the business. Furthermore, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate the business prior to the initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete the initial business combination or to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Our sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. The factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that result from our inability to continue as a going concern.
There is no assurance that our plans to consummate an initial business combination will be successful by October 21, 2022 (or by April 21, 2023 if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by the full amount of time). The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the period from March 5, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $1,882,603, which consisted of $102,600 offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, $1,538,267 non-operating
loss resulting from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities and forward purchase agreement, $102,466 franchise tax expense, and $141,383 in general and administrative expense. These loss and expenses were offset by $2,113 interest income generated from the cash held in the trust account.
Related Party Transactions
Please refer to Note 5, Related Party Transactions, in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of our related party transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management makes a number of significant estimates, assumptions and judgments in the preparation of our financial statements. See “Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of the estimates and judgments necessary in our accounting for common stock subject to possible redemption, and net income (loss) per common share. Any new accounting policies or updates to existing accounting policies as a result of new accounting pronouncements have been included in the notes to our condensed financial statements contained in this Annual Report on FORM 10-K.
The application of our critical accounting policies may require management to make judgments and estimates about the amounts reflected in the condensed financial statements. Management uses historical experience and all available information to make these estimates and judgments. Different amounts could be reported using different assumptions and estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their anticipated effect on our business.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and, under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions, we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that the PCAOB may adopt regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.