Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As used in this discussion and analysis, the words “we,” “us,” “our” and the “Company” are used to refer to Flushing Financial Corporation (the “Holding Company”) and its direct and indirect wholly owned subsidiaries, Flushing Bank (the “Bank”), Flushing Service Corporation, FSB Properties Inc., and Flushing Preferred Funding Corporation, which was dissolved as of June 30, 2021. Discussion and analysis of our 2020 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2020 financial performance to 2019, are located under Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021, which is available on our investor relations website at FlushingBank.com and the SEC’s website at sec.gov.
General
We are a Delaware corporation organized in 1994. The Bank was organized in 1929 as a New York State-chartered mutual savings bank. Today the Bank operates as a full-service New York State commercial bank. The primary business of the Holding Company has been the operation of the Bank. The Bank owned three subsidiaries during all or a portion of 2021: Flushing Service Corporation, FSB Properties Inc., and Flushing Preferred Funding Corporation, which was dissolved as of June 30, 2021. The Bank also operates an internet branch, which operates under the brands of iGObanking® and BankPurely® (the “Internet Branch”). The Bank’s primary regulator is the New York State Department of Financial Services, and its primary federal regulator is the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”). The Bank’s deposits are insured to the maximum allowable amount by the FDIC.
The Holding Company also owns Flushing Financial Capital Trust II, Flushing Financial Capital Trust III, and Flushing Financial Capital Trust IV (the “Trusts”), which are special purpose business trusts formed during 2007 to issue a total of $60.0 million of capital securities, and $1.9 million of common securities (which are the only voting securities). The Holding Company owns 100% of the common securities of the Trusts. The Trusts used the proceeds from the issuance of these securities to purchase junior subordinated debentures from the Holding Company. The Trusts are not included in our consolidated financial statements, as we would not absorb the losses of the Trusts if losses were to occur.
The following discussion of financial condition and results of operations includes the collective results of the Holding Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”), but reflects principally the Bank’s activities. Management views the Company as operating as a single unit - a community bank. Therefore, segment information is not provided.
Overview
Our principal business is attracting retail deposits from the general public and investing those deposits together with funds generated from ongoing operations and borrowings, primarily in (1) originations and purchases of multi-family residential properties, commercial business loans, commercial real estate mortgage loans and, to a lesser extent, one-to-four family (focusing on mixed-use properties, which are properties that contain both residential dwelling units and commercial units); (2) construction loans; (3) Small Business Administration (“SBA”) loans; (4) mortgage loan surrogates such as mortgage-backed securities; and (5) U.S. government securities, corporate fixed-income securities and other marketable securities. We also originate certain other consumer loans including overdraft lines of credit. Our results of operations depend primarily on net interest income, which is the difference between the income earned on its interest-earning assets and the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is the result of our interest rate margin, which is the difference between the average yield earned on interest-earning assets and the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities, adjusted for the difference in the average balance of interest-earning assets as compared to the average balance
of interest-bearing liabilities. We also generate non-interest income from loan fees, service charges on deposit accounts, mortgage servicing fees, and other fees, income earned on Bank Owned Life Insurance (“BOLI”), dividends on Federal Home Bank of New York (“FHLB-NY”) stock and net gains and losses on sales of securities and loans. Our operating expenses consist principally of employee compensation and benefits, occupancy and equipment costs, other general and administrative expenses and income tax expense. Our results of operations also can be significantly affected by our periodic provision for credit losses and specific provision for losses on real estate owned.
Management Strategy. Our strategy is to continue our focus on being an institution serving consumers, businesses, and governmental units in our local markets. In furtherance of this objective, we intend to:
● manage cost of funds and continue to improve funding mix;
● resume historical loan growth while achieving appropriate risk adjusted returns;
● enhance earnings power by improving scalability and efficiency;
● manage credit risk;
● remain well capitalized;
● increase our commitment to the multi-cultural marketplace, with a particular focus on the Asian community;
● attract, retain and develop human capital; and
● manage enterprise-wide risk.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to effectively implement this strategy. Our strategy is subject to change by the Board of Directors.
Manage cost of funds and continue to improve funding mix. We have a relatively stable retail deposit base drawn from our market area through our full-service offices. Although we seek to retain existing deposits and maintain depositor relationships by offering quality service and competitive interest rates to our customers, we also seek to keep deposit growth within reasonable limits and our strategic plan. In order to implement our strategic plan, we have built multi-channel deposit gathering capabilities. In addition to our full-service branches we gather deposits through our Internet Branch and a government banking unit. The Internet Branch currently offers savings accounts, money market accounts, checking accounts, and certificates of deposit. This allows us to compete on a national scale without the geographical constraints of physical locations. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, total deposits at our Internet Branch were $188.0 million and $221.7 million, respectively.
The government banking unit provides banking services to public municipalities, including counties, cities, towns, villages, school districts, libraries, fire districts, and the various courts throughout the New York City metropolitan area. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, total deposits in our government banking unit totaled $1,618.8 million and $1,615.4 million, respectively. Additionally, we have a business banking group which was designed specifically to develop full business relationships thereby bringing in lower-costing checking and money market deposits. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, deposits balances in the business banking group were $540.4 million and $298.9 million, respectively. We also obtain deposits through brokers and the IntraFi Network.
Management intends to balance its goal to maintain competitive interest rates on deposits while seeking to manage its overall cost of funds to finance its strategies. We generally rely on our deposit base as our principal source of funding. During 2021, we realized an increase in due to depositors of $242.8 million, as core deposits increased $434.6 million and certificates of deposit decreased $191.8 million.
We continue to focus on obtaining additional deposits from our lending customers and originating additional loans to our deposit customers. Product offerings were expanded and are expected to be further expanded to accommodate perceived customer demands. In addition, specific employees are assigned responsibilities of generating these additional deposits and loans by coordinating efforts between lending and deposit gathering departments.
Resume historical loan growth while achieving appropriate risk adjusted returns. During 2021, gross loans declined by $67.8 million, or 1.0% to $6,633.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $6,701.6 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily PPP loan forgiveness by the SBA.
We have emphasized the strategic growth of multi-family residential mortgage loans, non-owner occupied commercial mortgage loans and floating rate commercial business loans. The commercial business and other loans have increased to 20.19% of the gross loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021 compared to 19.45% at December 31, 2020. In the multi-family portfolio, we allowed loans to prepay rather than refinance at a rate below our criteria. We no longer originate or hold taxi medallion loans.
The following table shows loan originations and purchases during 2021, and loan balances as of December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, multi-family residential, commercial business and other loans and commercial real estate loans, totaled 84.9% of our gross loans. We have repositioned our loan growth to reduce credit risk; however, our concentration in these types of loans could require us to increase our provisions for credit losses and to maintain an allowance for credit losses as a percentage of total loans in excess of the allowance currently maintained.
Enhance earnings power by improving scalability and efficiency. We are improving scalability and efficiency by converting our branches to the Universal Banker model with our unique video banker service that gives customers face-to-face video chat access from 7am to 11pm daily via at our ATM terminals. The Universal Banker model provides customers with cutting-edge technology, including state-of-the-art ATMs and a higher-quality service experience, all while further reducing overall costs. We have been rolling this model out across our network as branches are renovated and new branches are opened. In the branches that have been converted to the Universal Banker model, almost 50% of customer transactions were completed at our high powered ATMs.
Manage credit risk. By adherence to our conservative underwriting standards, we have been able to minimize net losses from non-performing loans. We recorded net charge-offs of $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net charge-offs of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net charge-offs recorded in 2021 were primarily due to the write-off of our remaining taxi medallion portfolio. We seek to minimize losses by adhering to our defined underwriting standards, which among other things generally requires a debt service coverage ratio of at least 125% and loan to value ratio of 75% or less. The average loan to value for the real estate dependent loan portfolio was less than 38% and the average loan to value for non-performing loans collateralized by real estate was 30.4% at December 31, 2021. We seek to maintain our loans in performing status through, among other things, disciplined collection efforts, and consistently monitoring non-performing assets in an effort to return them to performing status. To this end, we review the quality of our loans and report to the Loan Committee of the Board of Directors of the Bank on a monthly basis. We sold 33 delinquent loans totaling $28.6 million, 2 delinquent loans totaling $0.6 million, and 11 delinquent loans totaling $13.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. There can be no assurances that we will continue this strategy in future periods, or if continued, we will be able to find buyers to pay adequate consideration. Non-performing loans totaled $14.9 million and $21.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Non-performing assets as a percentage of total assets were 0.19% and 0.26% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Remain well capitalized. The Bank faces several minimum capital requirements imposed by federal regulation. Failure to adhere to these minimums could limit the dividends the Bank is allowed to pay, including the payment of dividends to the Holding Company, and could limit the annual growth of the Bank. Under the Dodd Frank Act, banks with assets greater than $10 billion in total assets are required to complete stress tests, which predict capital levels under certain stress levels. Although, our total assets are currently $8.0 billion, as a best practice, we completed these tests. As of December 31, 2021, under all stress scenarios, we remained well capitalized per current regulations.
Increase Our Commitment to the Multi-Cultural Marketplace, with a Particular Focus on the Asian Community. Our branches are all located in the New York City metropolitan area with particular concentration in the borough of Queens. Queens is characterized with a high level of ethnic diversity. An important element of our strategy is to service multi-ethnic consumers and businesses. We have a particular presence and concentration in Asian communities, including in particular the Chinese and Korean populations. Both groups are noted for high levels of savings, education and entrepreneurship. In order to service these and other important ethnic groups in our market, our staff speaks more than 20 languages. We have an Asian advisory board to help broaden our links to the community by providing guidance and fostering awareness of our active role in the local community. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our acquisition of Empire, which expanded our branch footprint in Long Island. As of December 31, 2021, we had six branches which have a particular focus on the Asian community, of which four are in the borough of Queens, one is in the borough of Manhattan and one on Long Island, with deposits and loans totaling in excess of $966.4 million and $709.3 million, respectively, in these locations.
Manage Enterprise-Wide Risk. We identify, measure and attempt to mitigate risks that affect, or have the potential to affect, our business. Due to past economic crises and recent increases in government regulation, we devote significant resources to risk management. We have a seasoned risk officer to provide executive risk leadership, and an enterprise-wide risk management program. Several enterprise risk management analytical products are in use which include key risk indicators. We also have had a chief information security officer even before one was required by NYDFS rulemaking. Our management of enterprise-wide risk enables us to recognize and monitor risks and establish procedures to disseminate the risk information across our organization and to our Board of Directors. The objective is to have a robust and focused risk management process capable of identifying and mitigating emerging threats to the Bank’s safety and soundness.
Trends and Contingencies. Our operating results are significantly affected by national and local economic and competitive conditions, including changes in market interest rates, the strength of the local regional economy, government policies and actions of regulatory authorities. We have remained strategically focused on the origination of multi-family residential mortgages, commercial mortgages and commercial business loans with a full banking relationship. Because of this strategy, we were able to continue to achieve a higher yield on our mortgage portfolio than we would have otherwise experienced.
Loan originations and purchases were $1,254.0 million, $1,004.1 million, and $1,162.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. While we primarily rely on originating our own loans, we purchased $262.1 million, $193.3 million, and $221.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We purchase loans when the loans complement our loan portfolio strategy. Loans purchased must meet our underwriting standards when they were originated.
During the three-year period ended December 31, 2021, the allocation of our loan portfolio has remained fairly consistent with a steady increase in non-mortgage loans. The majority of our loans are collateralized by real estate, which comprised 78.4% of our portfolio at December 31, 2021 compared to 78.0% at December 31, 2020 and 81.3% at December 31, 2019, while non-mortgage loans comprised 21.6% of our portfolio at December 31, 2021 compared to 22.0% at December 31, 2020 and 18.7% at December 31, 2019.
Due to depositors increased $242.8 million, $1,068.7 million, and $106.1 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Lower-costing core deposits increased $434.6 million, $1,368.2 million, and $231.5 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Higher-costing certificates of deposit decreased $191.8 million during 2021 compared to decreases of $299.5 million in 2020 and $125.4 million in 2019. Brokered deposits represented 9.8%, 17.5%, and 7.7% of total deposits at December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. During 2018, Section 29 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act was amended to no longer consider reciprocal deposits held by an FDIC-insured depository institution brokered deposits. At December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, reciprocal deposits totaled $763.7 million, $735.4 million, and $805.6 million, respectively.
Prevailing interest rates affect the extent to which borrowers repay and refinance loans. In a declining interest rate environment, the number of loan prepayments and loan refinancing tends to increase, as do prepayments of mortgage-backed securities. Call provisions associated with our investments in U.S. government agency and corporate securities may also adversely affect yield in a declining interest rate environment. Such prepayments and calls may adversely affect the yield of our loan portfolio and mortgage-backed and other securities as we reinvest the prepaid funds in a lower interest rate environment. However, we typically receive additional loan fees when existing loans are refinanced, which partially offsets the reduced yield on our loan portfolio resulting from prepayments. In periods of low interest rates, our level of core deposits also may decline if depositors seek higher-yielding instruments or other investments not offered by us, which in turn may increase our cost of funds and decrease our net interest margin to the extent alternative funding sources, are utilized. By contrast, an increasing interest rate environment would tend to extend the average lives of lower yielding fixed rate mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, which could adversely affect net interest income. In addition, depositors tend to open longer term, higher costing certificate of deposit accounts which could adversely affect our net interest income if rates were to subsequently decline. Additionally, adjustable rate residential mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities generally contain interim and lifetime caps that limit the amount the interest rate can increase at re-pricing dates.
Net interest income increased $52.8 million or 27.0% to $248.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 from $195.2 million for the prior year, as a 39 basis points increase in the net interest margin to 3.24% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was coupled with balance sheet growth. The increase in the net interest margin for 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in our funding costs, partially offset by a decrease in the yield of our interest-earning assets. The decrease in the yield of our interest earning assets was primarily due to loans being both originated and repriced at lower rates. During 2021, the cost of borrowed funds increased 27 basis points to 2.24% from 1.97% in the comparable period while the cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 55 basis points to 0.37% from 0.92% for the prior year. The cost of money market, NOW and certificates of deposits accounts decreased 57 basis points, 33 basis points and 84 basis points, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 from the prior year. The cost of deposits declined as we decreased the rates we pay resulting from the Federal Reverse lowering rates.
We are unable to predict the direction or timing of future interest rate changes. Approximately 80% of our certificates of deposit accounts and borrowings will reprice or mature during the next year. Also, in an increasing interest rate environment, mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities may prepay at slower rates than experienced in the past, which could result in a reduction of prepayment penalty income.
On October 30, 2020, the Company completed its acquisition of 100% of the outstanding voting and non-voting shares of Empire. The shareholders of Empire received total consideration of $87.5 million which consisted of $54.8 million in cash and 2,557,028 shares of Flushing Financial Corporation common stock. As of December 31, 2021, the combined company has $8.0 billion in assets, $6.6 billion in loans, $6.3 billion in deposits, and 24 branches in Queens, Brooklyn, Manhattan, and on Long Island.
Interest Rate Risk
Economic Value of Equity Analysis. The Consolidated Statements of Financial Position have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in fair value of certain investments due to changes in interest rates. Generally, the fair value of financial investments such as loans and securities fluctuates inversely with changes in interest rates. As a result, increases in interest rates could result in decreases in the fair value of the Company’s interest-earning assets which could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations if such assets were sold, or, in the case of securities classified as available for sale, decreases in the Company’s stockholders’ equity, if such securities were retained.
The Company quantifies the net portfolio value should interest rates immediately go up 200 basis points or down 100 basis points, assuming the yield curves of the rate shocks will be parallel to each other. Net portfolio value is defined as the market value of assets net of the market value of liabilities. The market value of assets and liabilities is determined using a discounted cash flow calculation. The net portfolio value ratio is the ratio of the net portfolio value to the market value of assets. The changes in value are measured as percentage changes from the net portfolio value at the base interest rate scenario. The base interest rate scenario assumes interest rates at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Various estimates regarding prepayment assumptions are made at each level of rate shock. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company was within the guidelines set forth by the Board of Directors for each interest rate level.
The following table presents the Company’s interest rate shock as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Income Simulation Analysis. The Company manages the mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on a continuous basis to maximize return and adjust its exposure to interest rate risk. On a quarterly basis, management provides a report for review by the ALCO Investment Committee of the Board of Directors. This report quantifies the potential changes in net interest income and net portfolio value through various interest rate scenarios.
The starting point for the net interest income simulation is an estimate of the next twelve month’s net interest income assuming that both interest rates and the Company’s interest-sensitive assets and liabilities remain at period-end levels. The net interest income simulation assumes that changes in interest rates change gradually in equal increments over the twelve-month period. Prepayment penalty income is excluded from this analysis. Based on these assumptions, net interest income would be reduced by 4.2% from a 100 basis point increase in rates over the next twelve months. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had a derivative portfolio with a notional value totaling $1.5 billion. This portfolio is designed to provide protection against rising interest rates. See Note 21 (“Derivative Financial Instruments”) of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
A portion of this portfolio is comprised of forward swaps on certain short-term advances and brokered CDs totaling $996.5 million. At December 31, 2021, $591.5 million of the forward swaps are effective swaps at a weighted average rate of 1.95% that largely mature by the end of 2023 and $405.0 million of the forward swaps become effective at different points through 2024, at an average rate of 0.77%. A summary of maturity dates and effective dates of our forward swaps on short-term advances and brokered CDs held at December 31, 2021, are shown in the table below:
The net interest income simulation incorporates the next twelve months (through December 31, 2022) and only a portion of the effective swap maturities and the forward starting swaps are included in this period. Assuming another equal increment ramp of 100 basis points increase in rates in the second year (through December 31, 2023), for a total of 200 basis points over two years, the total derivative portfolio has a 1.7% benefit to net interest income (versus the base case) in the first year and a cumulative benefit of 4.9% by the second year.
Analysis of Net Interest Income
Net interest income represents the difference between income on interest-earning assets and expense on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income depends upon the relative amount of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the interest rate earned or paid on them.
The following table sets forth certain information relating to our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition and Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, and reflects the average yield on assets and average cost of liabilities for the periods indicated. Such yields and costs are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of assets or liabilities, respectively, for the periods shown. Average balances are derived from average daily balances. The yields include amortization of fees that are considered adjustments to yields.
(1) Average balances include non-accrual loans.
(2) Loan interest income includes loan fee income (which includes net amortization of deferred fees and costs, late charges, and prepayment penalties) of approximately $10.6 million, $2.3 million, and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. In addition, it includes net gains (losses) from fair value adjustments in qualifying hedges of $2.1 million, $(1.2) million and $(1.7) million for December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(3) Interest and yields are calculated on the tax equivalent basis using statutory federal income tax rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
(4) Interest rate spread represents the difference between the average rate on interest-earning assets and the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(5) Net interest margin represents net interest income before the provision for credit losses divided by average interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the impact of changes in interest rates and in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on the Company’s interest income and interest expense during the periods indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to (1) changes attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior rate), (2) changes attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by the prior volume) and (3) the net change. The changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
General. Net income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $81.8 million, an increase of $47.1 million, or 135.9%, compared to $34.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Diluted earnings per common share were $2.59 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.41, or 119.5%, from $1.18 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Return on average equity increased to 12.60% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, from 5.98% for the comparable prior year period. Return on average assets increased to 1.00% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 from 0.48% for the comparable prior year period.
Interest Income. Interest income increased $24.2 million, or 9.2%, to $288.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $264.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest income was primarily due to an increase of $810.2 million in the average balance of interest-earning assets to $7,673.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6,862.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a decrease of 9 basis points in the yield of interest-earning assets to 3.77% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 3.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 9 basis point decrease in the yield of interest-earning assets was primarily due to a 44 basis point decrease in the yield of total securities to 1.72% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a decline in the yield on interest-earning deposits and federal funds sold of 24 basis points to 0.11% in for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 0.35% in for the comparable prior year period, as the yield on loans
was stable at 4.13% in both periods. Excluding prepayment penalty income from loans and securities, net recoveries/(reversals) of interest from non-accrual loans, net gains (losses) from fair value adjustments on qualifying hedges, and purchase accounting adjustments, the yield on total loans, net, decreased 12 basis points to 3.95% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 4.07% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $28.5 million, or 41.3%, to $40.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $69.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a decrease of 53 basis points in the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities to 0.63% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 1.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 53 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities was primarily due to the 55 basis point decline in the yield on interest-bearing deposits to 0.37% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 0.92% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased due to a decline of $456.5 million in the average balance of higher costing borrowed funds to $905.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,361.6 million for the comparable prior year period.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $248.0 million, an increase of $52.8 million, or 27.0%, from $195.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a 44 basis point increase in the net interest spread to 3.14% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 from 2.70% for the comparable prior year period. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 53 basis points to 0.63% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 1.16% for the comparable prior year period, partially offset by a decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets of nine basis points to 3.77% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 3.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This resulted in the net interest margin increasing 39 basis points to 3.24% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2.85% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in net interest income was prepayment penalty income from loans and securities totaling $6.4 million and $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net recovered interest from non-accrual loans totaling $0.3 million and $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net gains (losses) from fair value adjustments on qualifying hedges totaling $2.1 million and ($1.2) million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and purchase accounting income adjustments of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Excluding all of these items, the net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 3.08%, an increase of 28 basis points, from to 2.80% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(Benefit) Provision for Credit Losses. Benefit for credit losses was $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision for credit losses of $23.1 million during the prior year. The change was primarily the result of an improving economy. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, non-accrual loans decreased $3.4 million to $14.9 million from $18.3 million at December 31, 2020. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Bank recorded net charge-offs totaling $3.1 million. The average loan-to-value ratio for our non-performing loans collateralized by real estate was 30.4% at December 31, 2021. The Bank continues to maintain conservative underwriting standards.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $3.7 million, a decrease of $7.4 million, or 66.6%, from $11.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Non-interest income decreased primarily due to an increase in non-cash net losses from fair value adjustments of $10.9 million, partially offset by an increase of $2.1 million in other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the comparable prior year period.
Non-Interest Expense. Non-interest expense was $147.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $9.4 million, or 6.8%, from $137.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in non-interest expense was primarily due to a $14.1 million increase in salaries and employee benefits and a $4.2 million increase in other operating expense primarily due to the growth of the Bank.
Income Tax Provisions. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $17.0 million, or 161.6%, to $27.5 million, compared to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the $64.1 million increase in income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable prior year period. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 25.2% compared to 23.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (1)
Liquidity, Regulatory Capital and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Resources. Liquidity is the ability to economically meet current and future financial obligations. The Company’s primary objectives in terms of managing liquidity is to maintain the ability to originate and purchase loans, repay borrowings as they mature, satisfy financial obligations that arise in the normal course of business and meet our customer’s deposit withdrawal needs. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, borrowings, principal and interest payments on loans, mortgage-backed and other securities, and proceeds from sales of securities and loans. Deposit flows and mortgage prepayments, however, are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. The Company has other sources of liquidity, including unsecured overnight lines of credit, brokered deposits and other types of borrowings.
Liquidity management is both a short and long-term function of business management. During 2021, funds were provided by the Company’s operating activities, which were used to fund our investing and financing activities. Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents, which include cash and due from banks, overnight interest-earning deposits and federal funds sold with original maturities of 90 days or less. The level of these assets is dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $81.7 million, a decrease of $75.7 million from December 31, 2020. We also held marketable securities available for sale with a market value of $777.2 million at December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, the Bank was able to borrow up to $3,635.2 million from the FHLB-NY in Federal Home Loan Bank advances and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank had $1,429.6 million outstanding in combined balances of FHLB-NY advances and letters of credit. At December 31, 2021, the Bank also has unsecured lines of credit with other commercial banks totaling $593.0 million, with $25.0 million outstanding amount. In addition, the Holding Company has subordinated debentures with a principal balance totaling $125.0 million and junior subordinated debentures with a face amount of $61.9 million and a carrying amount of $56.5 million (which are both included in Borrowed Funds). (See Note 10 (“Borrowed Funds”) of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.) Management believes its available sources of funds are sufficient to fund current operations.
At December 31, 2021, we had commitments to extend credit (principally real estate mortgage loans) of $88.7 million and open lines of credit for borrowers (principally business lines of credit and home equity loan lines of credit) of $384.2 million. Since generally all of the loan commitments are expected to be drawn upon, the total loan commitments approximate future cash requirements, whereas the amounts of lines of credit may not be indicative of our future cash requirements. The loan commitments generally expire in 90 days, while construction loan lines of credit mature within 18 months and home equity loan lines of credit mature within 10 years. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance-sheet instruments.
Our total interest expense and non-interest expense in 2021 were $40.6 million and $147.3 million, respectively.
We maintain three postretirement defined benefit plans for our employees: a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan which was frozen as of September 30, 2006, a contributory medical plan, and a noncontributory life insurance plan. The life insurance plan was amended to discontinue providing life insurance benefits to future retirees after January 1, 2010 and the medical plan was frozen to future retirees as of January 1, 2011. We also maintain a noncontributory defined benefit plan for certain of our non-employee directors, which was frozen as of January 1, 2004. The employee pension plan is the only plan that we have funded. During 2021, we incurred cash expenditures of $0.1 million for each of the medical and life insurance plans and the non-employee director plan. We did not make a contribution to the employee pension plan in 2021. We expect to pay similar amounts for these plans in 2022. (See Note 13 (“Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plan”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
(1) - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021, which is available on our investor relations website at www.flushingbank.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov
The amounts reported in our financial statements are obtained from reports prepared by independent actuaries and are based on significant assumptions. The most significant assumption is the discount rate used to determine the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (“APBO”) for these plans. The APBO is the present value of projected benefits that employees and retirees have earned to date. The discount rate is a single rate at which the liabilities of the plans are discounted into today’s dollars and could be effectively settled or eliminated. The discount rate used is based on the FTSE Pension Discount Curve (formerly the Citigroup Pension Liability Index) and reflects a rate that could be earned on bonds over a similar period that we anticipate the plans’ liabilities will be paid. An increase in the discount rate would reduce the APBO, while a reduction in the discount rate would increase the APBO. During the past several years, when interest rates have been at historically low levels, the discount rate used for our plans has declined from 7.25% for 2001 to 2.58% for 2021. This decline in the discount rate has resulted in an increase in our APBO.
The Company’s actuaries use several other assumptions that could have a significant impact on our APBO and periodic expense for these plans. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, expected rate of return on plan assets, future increases in medical and life insurance premiums, turnover rates of employees, and life expectancy. The accounting standards for postretirement plans involve mechanisms that serve to limit the volatility of earnings by allowing changes in the value of plan assets and benefit obligations to be amortized over time when actual results differ from the assumptions used, there are changes in the assumptions used, or there are plan amendments. At December 31, 2021, our employee pension plan had an unrecognized loss of $1.4 million and the medical and life insurance plan had an unrecognized loss of $0.9 million. At December 31, 2021, the non-employee director plan had an unrecognized gain of $0.4 million due to experience different from what had been estimated and changes in actuarial assumptions. The employee pension plan’s and medical and life insurance plan’s unrecognized losses are primarily attributed to the reduction in the discount rate. In addition, the medical and life insurance plan has a past service credit of less than $0.1 million due to plan amendments. The net after tax effect of the unrecognized gains and losses associated with these plans has been recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss in stockholders’ equity, resulting in a reduction of stockholders’ equity of $1.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
The change in the discount rate, the pension plan’s mortality table and the reduction in medical premiums are the only significant changes made to the assumptions used for these plans for each of the three years ended December 31, 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the actual (loss) return on the employee pension plan assets was approximately (154%), 311%, and 372%, respectively, of the assumed return used to determine the periodic pension expense for that respective year.
The market value of the assets of our employee pension plan is $26.1 million at December 31, 2021, which is $4.0 million more than the projected benefit obligation. We do not anticipate a change in the market value of these assets which would have a significant effect on liquidity, capital resources, or results of operations.
At the time of the Bank’s conversion from a federally chartered mutual savings bank to a federally chartered stock savings bank, the Bank was required by its primary regulator to establish a liquidation account which is reduced as and to the extent that eligible account holders reduce their qualifying deposits. Upon completion of the merger, the liquidation account was assumed by the Bank. The balance of the liquidation account at December 31, 2021 was $0.4 million. In the unlikely event of a complete liquidation of the Bank, each eligible account holder will be entitled to receive a distribution from the liquidation account. The Bank is not permitted to declare or pay a dividend or to repurchase any of its capital stock if the effect would be to cause the Bank’s regulatory capital to be reduced below the amount required for the liquidation account but approval of the NYDFS Superintendent is required if the total of all dividends declared by the Bank in a calendar year would exceed the total of its net profits for that year combined with its retained net profits for the preceding two years less prior dividends paid. The Holding Company is subject to the same regulatory restrictions on the declaration of dividends as the Bank.
We have significant obligations that arise in the normal course of business. We finance our assets with deposits and borrowings. We also use borrowings to manage our interest-rate risk. Borrowings with call provisions are included in the period of the next call date. We have the means to refinance these borrowings as they mature or are called through financing arrangements with the FHLB-NY and our ability to arrange repurchase agreements with broker-dealers and the FHLB-NY. (See Note 9 (“Deposits”) and Note 10 (“Borrowed Funds”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report. At December 31, 2021, we had borrowings obligations of $815.5 million of which $653.7
million represents our current obligations within one year. At December 31, 2021, we had deposits obligations of $6.385.4 million of which $6,194.7 million represents our current obligations within one year.
We focus our balance sheet growth on the origination of loans. At December 31, 2021, we had commitments to extend credit and lines of credit of $472.9 million for mortgage and other loans. These loans will be funded through principal and interest payments received on existing loan portfolio and mortgage-backed securities, growth in customer deposits, and, when necessary, additional borrowings. (See Note 17 (“Commitments and Contingencies”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
At December 31, 2021, the Bank had 24 branches, which were all leased. In addition, we lease our executive offices. We currently outsource our data processing, loan servicing and check processing functions. We believe that this is the most cost effective method for obtaining these services. These arrangements are usually volume dependent and have varying terms. The contracts for these services usually include annual increases based on the increase in the consumer price index. At December 31, 2021 we had Operating lease and purchasing obligations totaling $85.4 million.
Pension and other postretirement benefits reflects our directors’ pension plan and amounts due under our plan for medical and life insurance benefits for retired employees. At December 31, 2021 we had pension and other postretirement benefits obligations totaling $5.4 million.
We currently provide a non-qualified deferred compensation plan for officers who have achieved the designated level and completed one year of service. However, certain officers who have not reached the designated level but were already participants remain eligible to participate in the Plan. In addition to the amounts deferred by the officers, we match 50% of their contributions, generally up to a maximum of 5% of the officer’s salary. These plans generally require the deferred balance to be credited with earnings at a rate earned by certain mutual funds. At December 31, 2021 we had deferred compensation plan obligations of $24.8 million. This expense is provided in the Consolidated Statements of Income, and the liability has been provided in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Regulatory Capital Position. Under applicable regulatory capital regulations, the Bank and the Company are required to comply with each of four separate capital adequacy standards: leverage capital, common equity Tier I risk-based capital, Tier I risk-based capital and total risk-based capital. Such classifications are used by the FDIC and other bank regulatory agencies to determine matters ranging from each institution’s quarterly FDIC deposit insurance premium assessments, to approvals of applications authorizing institutions to grow their asset size or otherwise expand business activities. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank and the Company exceeded each of their four regulatory capital requirements. (See Note 15 (“Regulatory Capital”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statement in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and changes in assumptions could have a significant effect on the consolidated financial statements. Our critical accounting policies that require us to make significant judgments or estimates are described below. For more information on these critical accounting policies and other significant accounting policies, see the Note titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Use of Estimates” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company’s accounting policies are integral to understanding the results of operations and statement of financial condition. These policies are described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Several of these policies require management’s judgment to determine the value of the Company’s assets and liabilities. The Company has established detailed written policies and control procedures to ensure consistent application of these policies. The Company has identified four accounting policies that require significant management valuation judgment: the allowance for credit losses, fair value of financial instruments, goodwill impairment and income taxes.
Allowance for Credit Losses. An allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) is provided to absorb probable estimated losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Management reviews the adequacy of the ACL by reviewing individual loans when it has disparate risk characteristics from the rest of the loan portfolio. These loans include non-accrual and troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) loans, while the remainder of the portfolio is grouped by categories with similar risk characteristics. The amount of the ACL is based upon a loss rate model that considers multiple factors which reflects management’s assessment of the credit quality of the loan portfolio. Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The factors are both quantitative and qualitative in nature including, but not limited to, historical losses, economic conditions, trends in delinquencies, value and adequacy of underlying collateral, volume and portfolio mix, and internal loan processes Judgment is required to determine how many years of historical loss experience are to be included when reviewing historical loss experience. A full credit cycle must be used, or loss estimates may be inaccurate. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revisions as more information becomes available.
The quantitative allowance is calculated using a number of inputs and assumptions. The process and guidelines were developed using, among other factors, the guidance from federal banking regulatory agencies and GAAP. The results of this process, support management’s assessment as to the adequacy of the ACL at each balance sheet date.
Notwithstanding the judgment required in assessing the components of the ACL, the Company believes that the ACL is adequate to cover losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The policy has been applied on a consistent basis for all periods presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Notes 2 (“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”) and 4 (“Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments. The Company carries certain financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value under the fair value option. Fair value is considered the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The securities portfolio also consists of mortgage-backed and other securities for which the fair value election was not selected. These securities are classified as available for sale or held-to-maturity. Securities classified as available for sale are carried at fair value in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, with changes in fair value recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss. Securities held-to-maturity are carried at their amortized cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Financial assets and financial liabilities reported at fair value are required to be measured based on the following alternatives: (1) quoted prices in active markets for identical financial instruments (Level 1), (2) significant other observable inputs (Level 2), or (3) significant unobservable inputs (Level 3). Judgment is required in selecting the appropriate level to be used to determine fair value. The majority of financial assets and financial liabilities for which the fair value election was made, and the majority of investments classified as available for sale and held-to-maturity, were measured using Level 2 inputs, which require judgment to determine the fair value. The trust preferred securities held in the investment portfolio, and the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, were measured using Level 3 inputs due to the inactive market for these securities. The significant inputs used in the fair value measurement of the Company’s trust preferred securities and junior subordinated debentures are the effective yields used in a cash flow models. See Notes 2 (“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”), 7 (“Securities”) and 20 (“Fair Value of Financial Instruments”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Goodwill Impairment. Goodwill is presumed to have an indefinite life and is tested for impairment, rather than amortized, on at least an annual basis. For the purpose of goodwill impairment testing, management has concluded that Company has one reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment of goodwill.
Quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence of fair value and are to be used as the basis for measurement, when available. Other acceptable valuation methods include an asset approach, which determines a fair value based upon the value of assets net of liabilities, an income approach, which determines fair value using one or more
methods that convert anticipated economic benefits into a present single amount, and a market approach, which determines a fair value based on the similar businesses that have been sold.
As described above, fair value of our reporting unit is derived using a combination of an asset approach, an income approach and a market approach. These valuation techniques consider several other factors beyond our market capitalization, such as the estimated future cash flows of our reporting unit, the discount rate used to present value such cash flows and the market multiples of comparable companies. Changes to input assumptions used in the analysis could result in materially different evaluations of goodwill impairment. See Notes 2 (“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Income Taxes. The Company estimates its income taxes payable based on the amounts it expects to owe to the various taxing authorizes (i.e., federal, state and local). In estimating income taxes, management assesses the relative merits and risks of the tax treatment of transactions, taking into account statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance in the context of the Company’s tax position. Management also relies on tax opinions, recent audits, and historical experience.
The Company also recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. A valuation allowance is required for deferred tax assets that the Company estimates are more likely than not to be unrealizable, based on evidence available at the time the estimate is made. These estimates can be affected by changes to tax laws, statutory tax rates, and future income levels. See Notes 2 (“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”) and 11 (“Income Taxes”) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.