ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and information included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this annual report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis and set forth elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Unless context denotes otherwise, the terms “Company,” “FGF,” “we,” “us,” and “our,” refer to FG Financial Group, Inc., and its subsidiaries.
Overview
FG Financial Group, Inc. (“FGF”, the “Company”, “we”, or “us”) is a reinsurance and investment management holding company. We focus on opportunistic collateralized and loss-capped reinsurance, while allocating capital in partnership with Fundamental Global® to SPAC and SPAC sponsor-related businesses. The Company’s principal business operations are conducted through its subsidiaries and affiliates. The Company also provides investment management services. From our inception in October 2012 through December 2019, we operated as an insurance holding company, writing property and casualty insurance throughout the states of Louisiana, Florida, and Texas. On December 2, 2019, we sold our three former insurance subsidiaries, and embarked upon our current strategy focused on reinsurance and asset management.
As of December 31, 2021, Fundamental Global GP, LLC, a privately owned investment management company, and its affiliates, or “FG,” beneficially owned approximately 56% of our common stock. D. Kyle Cerminara, Chairman of our Board of Directors, serves as Chief Executive Officer, Co-Founder and Partner of FG.
Sale of Insurance Business
On December 2, 2019, we completed the sale of our insurance subsidiaries to FedNat Holding Company for a combination of cash and FedNat common stock. For more information on the Asset Sale and the Company’s future plans, see “Item 1. Business.”
Coronavirus Impact
Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the circumstances, it is difficult to predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel and other matters affecting the general work environment have negatively impacted and could continue to harm our business and our business strategy. The extent to which our operations and investments may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new developments concerning the severity of the pandemic and actions by government authorities to contain the pandemic or treat its impact. Furthermore, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to and volatility in the financial markets remain unknown. In the event of a major disruption caused by the pandemic, we may lose the services of our employees, experience system interruptions or face challenges accessing the capital or credit markets, which could lead to diminishment of our business operations. Any of the foregoing could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. The business and economic uncertainty resulting from the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has made such estimates and assumptions difficult to calculate. Set forth below is qualitative and quantitative information necessary to understand the estimation uncertainty and the impact the critical accounting estimate has had or is reasonably likely to have on financial condition or results of operations, to the extent the information is material and reasonably available.
Investments in Equity Securities
Investments in equity securities are carried at fair value with subsequent changes in fair value recorded to the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of net investment income.
Other Investments
Other investments consist, in part, of equity investments made in privately held companies accounted for under the equity method. We utilize the equity method to account for investments when we possess the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control, over the operating and financial policies of the investee. The ability to exercise significant influence is presumed when the investor possesses more than 20% of the voting interests of the investee. This presumption may be overcome based on specific facts and circumstances that demonstrate that the ability to exercise significant influence is restricted. We apply the equity method to investments in common stock and to other investments when such other investments possess substantially identical subordinated interests to common stock.
In applying the equity method, we record the investment at cost and subsequently increase or decrease the carrying amount of the investment by our proportionate share of the net earnings or losses and other comprehensive income of the investee. We record dividends or other equity distributions as reductions in the carrying value of the investment. Should net losses of the investee reduce the carrying amount of the investment to zero, additional net losses may be recorded if other investments in the investee are at-risk, even if we have not committed to provide financial support to the investee. Such additional equity method losses, if any, are based upon the change in our claim on the investee’s book value.
As of December 31, 2020, other investments also consisted of private placement securities reported at fair value and characterized under Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as promulgated by the Financial Accounting and Standards Board.
Other investments also consist of equity we have purchased in a limited partnership and a limited liability company for which there does not exist a readily determinable fair value. The Company accounts for these investments at their cost, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investment of the same issuer. Any profit distributions the Company receives on these investments are included in net investment income.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities
The determination of whether or not to consolidate a variable interest entity under GAAP requires a significant amount of judgment concerning the degree of control over an entity by its holders of variable interests. To make these judgments, management has conducted an analysis, on a case-by-case basis, of whether we are the primary beneficiary and are therefore required to consolidate the entity. Upon the occurrence of certain events, such as modifications to organizational documents and investment management agreements, management will reconsider its conclusion regarding the status of an entity as a variable interest entity.
Valuation of Net Deferred Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is calculated based on the expected tax treatment of transactions recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. In determining its provision for income taxes, the Company interprets tax legislation in a variety of jurisdictions and makes assumptions about the expected timing of the reversal of deferred income tax assets and liabilities and the valuation of net deferred income taxes.
The ultimate realization of the deferred income tax asset balance is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which the Company’s temporary differences reverse and become deductible. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred income tax asset balance will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, management considers all available positive and negative evidence affecting specific deferred income tax asset balances, including the Company’s past and anticipated future performance, the reversal of deferred income tax liabilities, and the availability of tax planning strategies. To the extent a valuation allowance is established in a period, an expense must be recorded within the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
Premium Revenue Recognition
The Company participates in a quota-share contract under a Funds at Lloyds (“FAL”) transaction and estimates the ultimate premiums for the contract period. These estimates are based on information received from the ceding companies, whereby premiums are recorded as written in the same periods in which the underlying insurance contracts are written and are based on cession statements from cedents. These statements are received quarterly, in arrears and thus for any reporting lag, premiums written are estimated based on the portion of the ultimate estimated premiums relating to the risks underwritten during the lag period.
Premium estimates are reviewed by management periodically. Such review includes a comparison of actual reported premiums to expected ultimate premiums. Based on management’s review, the appropriateness of the premium estimates is evaluated, and any adjustments to these estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined. Changes in premium estimates, including premiums receivable, are not unusual and may result in significant adjustments in any period. A significant portion of amounts included in the caption “Reinsurance balances receivable” in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets represent estimated premiums written, net of commissions, brokerage, and loss and loss adjustment expense, and are not currently due based on the terms of the underlying contracts.
Premiums written are generally recognized as earned over the contract period in proportion to the risk covered. Additional premiums due on a contract that has no remaining coverage period are earned in full when written. Unearned premiums represent the unexpired portion of reinsurance provided.
Policy Acquisition Costs
Policy acquisition costs are costs that vary with, and are directly related to, the successful production of new and renewal business, and consist principally of commissions, taxes, and brokerage expenses. If the sum of a contract’s expected losses and loss expenses and deferred acquisition costs exceeds associated unearned premiums and expected investment income, a premium deficiency is determined to exist. In this event, deferred acquisition costs are written off to the extent necessary to eliminate the premium deficiency. If the premium deficiency exceeds deferred acquisition costs, then a liability is accrued for the excess deficiency. There were no premium deficiency adjustments recognized during the periods presented herein.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves
Loss and loss adjustment expense reserve estimates are based on estimates derived from reports received from ceding companies. These estimates are periodically reviewed by the Company’s management and adjusted as necessary. Since reserves are estimates, the final settlement of losses may vary from the reserves established and any adjustments to the estimates, which may be material, are recorded in the period they are determined.
Loss estimates may also be based upon actuarial and statistical projections, an assessment of currently available data, predictions of future developments, estimates of future trends and other factors. The final settlement of losses may vary, perhaps materially, from the reserves recorded. All adjustments to the estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined. U.S. GAAP does not permit establishing loss reserves, which include case reserves and IBNR loss reserves, until the occurrence of an event which may give rise to a claim. As a result, only loss reserves applicable to losses incurred up to the reporting date are established, with no allowance for the establishment of loss reserves to account for expected future loss events.
Generally, the Company obtains regular updates of premium and loss related information for the current and historical periods, which are utilized to update the initial expected loss ratio. We also experience lag between (i) claims being reported by the underlying insured to the Company’s cedent and (ii) claims being reported by the Company’s cedent to the Company. This lag may impact the Company’s loss reserve estimates. Client reports have pre-determined due dates (for example, thirty days after each month end). As a result, the lag depends in part upon the terms of the specific contract. The timing of the reporting requirements is designed so that the Company receives premium and loss information as soon as practicable once the client has closed its books. Accordingly, there should be a short lag in such reporting. Additionally, most of the contracts that have the potential for large single event losses have provisions that such loss notifications are provided to the Company immediately upon the occurrence of an event.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The Company uses the fair-value method of accounting for stock-based compensation awards granted. The Company has determined the fair value of its outstanding stock options on their grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model along with multiple Monte Carlo simulations to determine a derived service period as the options vest based upon meeting certain performance conditions. The Company determines the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) on their grant date using the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date the RSUs were issued (for those RSU which vest solely based upon the passage of time), as well as using multiple Monte Carlo simulations for those RSUs with market-based vesting conditions. The fair value of these awards is recorded as compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the expected period over which the awards will vest, with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in capital. When the stock options are exercised, or correspondingly, when the RSUs vest, the amount of proceeds together with the amount recorded in additional paid-in capital is recorded in shareholders’ equity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8, Note 3 - Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Standards in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect, if any, on the Company.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Analysis of Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
Investments
The table below summarizes, by type, the Company’s investments held at fair value as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
FedNat Common Stock
As of December 31, 2021, the Company held 1,007,871 shares of FedNat Holding Company common stock (Nasdaq: FNHC). Of the total 1,773,102 shares of FedNat common stock which the Company had received as consideration for the Asset Sale, the Company has disposed of 765,231 shares. The first transaction occurred on September 15, 2020, whereby the Company sold 330,231 shares of FedNat common stock to the Hale Parties as further discussed in Note 9 - Related Party Transactions. Additionally, during the fourth quarter 2021, the Company sold an additional 435,000 shares of FedNat common stock on the open market. Pursuant to the Standstill Agreement entered into between the Company and FedNat at the closing of the Asset Sale, the Company is restricted as to the number of FedNat shares it can dispose of.
Private Placements
Private placements listed in the table above consist of the $4.0 million invested in FG New America Investors, LLC (the “Sponsor”) as part of a total $8.6 million of risk capital used to launch FG New America Acquisition Corp (“FGNA”), a special purpose acquisition company, which consummated its initial public offering on October 2, 2020. On July 20, 2021, FGNA completed its definitive business combination with Opportunity Financial, LLC and began operating as OppFi Inc. (“OppFi”), with OppFi’s common stock trading on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “OPFI”. The Sponsor interests currently represent beneficial ownership of approximately 0.86 million common shares of OPFI as well as approximately 0.36 million warrants to purchase common shares of OPFI at a price of $11.50 per share. We are restricted from selling our OPFI common shares until the earlier of i) July 20, 2022; or ii) the date upon which the closing price of OPFI stock is greater than or equal to $12.00 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day window.
Deconsolidation of Subsidiary
The investment into the Sponsor was made by FG Special Situations Fund, LP (the “Fund”), a Delaware limited partnership in which the Company had initially invested in through its general partner. At the time of the Company’s initial investment into the Fund, in September 2020, the Company had determined that its investment represented an investment in a variable interest entity (“VIE”), in which the Company was the primary beneficiary, and, as such, had consolidated the financial results of the Fund through November 30, 2021. At each reporting date, the Company evaluates whether it remains the primary beneficiary and continuously reconsiders that conclusion. On December 1, 2021, the Company’s investment became that of a limited partner, and it no longer had the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the Fund and accordingly derecognized the related assets, liabilities, and noncontrolling interests of the Fund as of that date. The Company did not receive any consideration in the deconsolidation of the Fund, nor did it record any gain, or loss upon deconsolidation. The assets and liabilities of the Fund, over which the Company lost control are as follows:
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
While the Company’s investments in the Fund are no longer consolidated, the Company has retained all of the investments held at the Fund, including its beneficial ownership of approximately 0.86 million common shares of OPFI and approximately 0.36 million warrants to purchase common shares of OPFI at $11.50 per share. Effective December 1, 2021, the Company began accounting for its investment in the Fund via the equity method of accounting.
Equity Method Investments
Equity method investments included our investment of $4.0 million in FGI Metrolina Property Income Fund, LP (“Metrolina”), which invested in real estate through a real estate investment trust that was wholly owned by Metrolina. We have recorded equity method earnings from our investment in Metrolina of approximately $326,000 and $186,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the third quarter 2021, Metrolina indicated that it would be liquidating and returning investor capital. Accordingly, in the fourth quarter 2021, we received approximately $5.0 million in cash from Metrolina, representing our initial investment of $4.0 million plus approximately $1.0 million in distributed earnings. As a result, our investment in Metrolina was fully liquidated as of December 31, 2021.
Equity method investments also include our investment in FG SPAC Partners, LP (“FGSP”). We formed FGSP in January 2021, to co-sponsor newly formed SPACs with their founders or partners. The Company is the sole managing member of the general partner of FGSP and holds an approximate 46% limited partner interest in FGSP. Subsequently, FGSP bought founders shares in Aldel Financial, Inc. (“Aldel”) as well as warrants to purchase Aldel Class A common stock, at an exercise price of $15.00 per share (the “OTM Warrants”). On December 2, 2021, Aldel completed its business combination with Hagerty, an auto and marine insurance carrier, and began operating as Hagerty, Inc., trading on the NYSE under the ticker “HGTY.” As of December 31, 2021, FGSP had beneficial ownership of 500,000 HGTY common shares and warrants to purchase 650,000 HGTY common shares, at an exercise price of $15.00 per share. Through our 46% limited partner interest in FGSP, the Company has beneficial ownership of approximately 230,000 HGTY common shares and approximately 300,000 warrants. We have recorded equity method earnings from our investment in FGSP of approximately $3.78 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The carrying value of our investment in FGSP as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $3.85 million, representing $3.78 million in undistributed earnings.
Certain investments held by our equity method investees are valued using Monte-Carlo simulation and option pricing models. Inherent in Monte-Carlo simulation and option pricing models are assumptions related to expected volatility and discount for lack of marketability of the underlying investment. Our investees estimate the volatility of these investments based on the historical performance of various broad market indices blended with various peer companies which they consider as having similar characteristics to the underlying investment.
As previously discussed under the heading “Deconsolidation of Subsidiary,” equity method investments also include our investment in the Fund, as of December 31, 2021. We had consolidated the Fund as a variable interest entity; however, effective December 1, 2021, we began accounting for this investment under the equity method of accounting. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized approximately $3.0 in pretax income through our investment in the Fund, which consists of consolidated pretax income in the amount of approximately $3.7 million, for the period of January 1, 2021, through November 30, 2021, and equity method losses of approximately $0.7 million for the month of December 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our Fund investment was approximately $9.7 million, including $3.0 million in undistributed earnings.
Through the Fund, the Company has invested $1.0 million in the risk capital of Aldel Investors, LLC, the sponsor of Hagerty, Inc. This investment represents the beneficial ownership of approximately 286,000 HGTY common shares. Altogether, the Company’s investment in Hagerty, Inc., through both FGSP and the Fund, represents beneficial interests of approximately 516,000 HGTY common shares and approximately 300,000 warrants to purchase HGTY common shares at an exercise price of $15.00 per share.
Investments without Readily Determinable Fair Value
In addition to our equity method investments, other investments, as listed on our balance sheet, consist of equity we have purchased in a limited partnership and a limited liability company for which there do not exist readily determinable fair values. The Company accounts for these investments at their cost, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer. Any profit distributions the Company receives on these investments are included in net investment income. The Company’s total investment in these two entities was approximately $483,000 as of December 31, 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company has received profit distributions of $101,000 and $80,000 on these investments, respectively, which has been included in income. Furthermore, both investments began returning capital to investors beginning in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has received approximately 38% of its initial $776,000 investment in these entities.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Funds Deposited with Reinsured Companies
On November 12, 2020, FGRe, our Cayman Islands-based reinsurance subsidiary, initially funded a trust account at Lloyd’s with approximately $2.4 million in cash, to collateralize its obligations under a quota-share agreement with a Funds at Lloyds syndicate. The initial contract covered our quota-share percentage of all risks written by the syndicate for the 2021 calendar year. On November 30, 2021, we entered into an agreement with the same syndicate, slightly increasing our quota-share percentage of the risks the syndicate writes for the 2022 calendar year. This resulted in FGRe’s posting an additional $1.3 million in cash collateral to the account. We have also posted cash collateral in the approximate amount of $0.7 million, to support our automotive insurance quota-share agreement entered into on April 1, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the total cash collateral posted to support all of our reinsurance treaties was approximately $4.4 million.
Current Income Taxes Recoverable
Current income taxes recoverable were $0 as of December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $1.7 million as of December 31, 2020, representing the estimate of both the Company’s state and federal income taxes receivable as of each date. In the third quarter of 2021, we received a refund on our federal taxes in the amount of approximately $1.5 million associated with a carryback refund request filed for our 2018, 2017 and 2014 tax years.
Reinsurance Balances Receivable
Reinsurance balances receivable were $3.9 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $0 as of December 31, 2020, representing net amounts due to the Company under our quota-share agreements. As the Company estimates the ultimate premiums, loss expenses and other costs associated with some of these contracts, based on information received by us from the ceding companies, a significant portion of this balance is based on estimates and, ultimately, may not be collected by the Company.
Net Deferred Taxes
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes, as compared to the amounts used for income tax purposes. The Company’s gross deferred tax assets and liabilities are $6.2 million and $0.5 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company has recorded a valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets of $5.7 million, as of December 31, 2021, due to the uncertain nature surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits in the future. Significant components of the Company’s net deferred taxes are as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) for federal income tax purposes of approximately $14.3 million, which will be available to offset future taxable income. Approximately $0.5 million will expire on December 31, 2039, $0.1 million will expire on December 31, 2040, and $1.6 million of the Company’s NOLs will expire on December 31, 2041. The remaining $12.1 million of the Company’s NOLs do not expire under current tax law. Additionally, the Company has approximately $5.3 million of capital loss carryforward that can only be used to offset capital gains and which will expire in December 2026 if not used prior.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves
A significant degree of judgment is required to determine amounts recorded in the consolidated financial statements for the provision for loss and loss adjustment expense (“LAE”) reserves. The process for establishing this provision reflects the uncertainties and significant judgmental factors inherent in predicting future results of both known and unknown loss events. The process of establishing the provision for loss and LAE reserves relies on the judgment and opinions of many individuals, including the opinions of the Company’s management, as well as the management of ceding companies and their actuaries.
The COVID-19 pandemic is unprecedented, and the Company does not have previous loss experience on which to base the associated estimate for loss and loss adjustment expenses. In estimating losses, the Company may assess any of the following:
● a review of in-force treaties that may provide coverage and incur losses;
● general forecasts, catastrophe and scenario modelling analyses and results shared by cedents;
● reviews of industry insured loss estimates and market share analyses; and
● management’s judgment.
Assumptions which served as the basis for the Company’s estimates of reserves for the COVID-19 pandemic losses and loss adjustment expenses include:
● the scope of coverage provided by the underlying policies, particularly those that provide for business interruption coverage;
● the regulatory, legislative, and judicial actions that could influence contract interpretations across the insurance industry;
● the extent of economic contraction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated actions; and
● the ability of the cedents and insured to mitigate some or all of their losses.
Under the terms of certain of our quota-share agreements, and due to the nature of claims and premium reporting, a lag exists between (i) claims being reported by the underlying insured to the Company’s cedent and (ii) claims being reported by the Company’s cedent to the Company. This lag may impact the Company’s loss reserve estimates. The reports we receive from our cedents have pre-determined due dates. In the case of the Company’s FAL contract, fourth quarter 2021 premium and loss information will not be made available to the Company until subsequent to the filing of this annual report. Thus, our fourth quarter results, including the loss and loss adjustment expense reserves presented herein, have been based upon a combination of first, second, and third quarter actual results as well as full-year forecasts reported to us by the ceding companies, which we used to approximate fourth quarter results. The Company obtains regular updates of premium and loss related information for the current and historical periods, which we use to update the initial expected loss ratios on our reinsurance contracts.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
While the Company believes its estimate of loss and loss adjustment expense reserves are adequate as of December 31, 2021, based on available information, actual losses may ultimately differ materially from the Company’s current estimates. The Company will continue to monitor the appropriateness of its assumptions as new information is provided.
A summary of changes in outstanding loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for the year ended December 31, 2021, is as follows and includes reserves related to both our FAL contract, as well as our automotive insurance quota-share agreement which became effective April 1, 2021. There was no activity with respect to loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for the for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Shareholders’ Equity
Share Repurchase Transaction
On September 15, 2020, the Company repurchased all of the 1,130,152 shares of the Company’s common stock, owned by Hale Partnership Capital Management, LLC and certain of its affiliates (collectively, the “Hale Parties”), for an aggregate of approximately $2.8 million in cash and 330,231 shares of FedNat common stock having an estimated fair value of approximately $2.7 million, which included reimbursement of certain expenses incurred by the Hale Parties. Prior to the transaction, the Hale Parties owned more than 18% of the Company’s outstanding common stock.
As the total consideration paid in the transaction exceeded the fair value of the treasury shares repurchased by the Company, the Company recorded a charge of approximately $0.2 million to general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing the estimated fair value of the rights conveyed to the Company pursuant to the standstill provisions in the repurchase agreement. The fair value of the 1,130,152 shares of Company common stock, or approximately $5.2 million, was recorded to treasury stock.
8.00% Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A
On May 21, 2021, we completed the underwritten public offering of an additional 194,580 shares of our preferred stock designated as 8.00% Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A, par value $25.00 per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), for net proceeds of approximately $4.2 million, bringing the total number of Series A Preferred Stock shares outstanding to 894,580 as of December 31, 2021.
Dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock are cumulative from the date of original issue and are payable quarterly on the 15th day of March, June, September and December of each year, when, as and if declared by our Board of Directors. Dividends are payable out of amounts legally available therefor at a rate equal to 8.00% per annum per $25.00 of stated liquidation preference per share, or $2.00 per share of Series A Preferred Stock per year. Our Board of Directors declared the first quarter 2022 dividend on the shares of Series A Preferred Stock on February 10, 2022. The Series A Preferred Stock shares trade on the Nasdaq Stock Market under the symbol “FGFPP”.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Common Stock
In the 2021 fourth quarter, we sold, a total of 750,000 shares of our common stock, at a price of $4.00 per share, for net proceeds to us of approximately $2.5 million. Also in the fourth quarter, the Company completed a rights offering to holders of its common stock. Pursuant to the rights offering, 691,735 shares were subscribed for, for net proceeds of approximately $2.7 million. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the issuance of its common shares for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
Retirement of Treasury Stock
On August 19, 2021, the Board approved the retirement of all 1,281,511 common stock treasury shares owned by the Company. Accordingly, these shares have been classified as authorized, but unissued shares on the Company’s balance sheet, as of December 31, 2021.
Change in Shareholders’ Equity
The table below presents the primary components of changes to total shareholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned represent actual premiums earned on our quota-share agreements as well as estimated premiums earned on our FAL agreement for the fourth quarter 2021 and is approximately $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our FAL estimates are based on information received from the ceding companies, whereby premiums are recorded, as written, in the same periods in which the underlying insurance contracts are written and are based on cession statements from cedents. These statements are received quarterly, in arrears; so, for any reporting lag, premiums written are estimated based on the portion of the ultimate estimated premiums relating to the risks underwritten during the lag period. As our quota-share agreements became effective in 2021, we had no corresponding net earned premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Other Income
Other income was $186,000, compared to $104,000, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and is comprised of fees earned under the investment advisory and transition services agreements between the Company and FedNat. Also included in other income for current year is approximately $86,000 in service fee revenue we have earned under our new SPAC Platform, whereby we have provided certain accounting, regulatory, strategic advisory, and other administrative services to Aldel, prior to its business combination transaction with Hagerty.
Net Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Net losses and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) for the year ended December 31, 2021, represent charges associated with the establishment of loss and LAE reserves under our quota-share reinsurance agreements. Also included in this figure are loss and LAE payments in the approximate amount of $2.2 million. As discussed under the heading “Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves”, a portion of this charge represents an estimate based upon a full calendar year forecast of results provided to us by the ceding companies under our FAL arrangement.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to underwriting expenses allocated to us pursuant to our two quota-share reinsurance contracts, which accounted for approximately $0.6 million of the increase, as our reinsurance agreements became effective in 2021. Also included in general and administrative expenses are payments to Fundamental Global Management, LLC (“FGM”), pursuant to a shared services agreement entered into on March 31, 2020. Under the agreement, FGM provides the Company with certain services related to the day-to-day management of the Company, including assisting with regulatory compliance, evaluating the Company’s financial and operational performance, providing a management team to supplement the executive officers of the Company, and such other services consistent with those customarily performed by executive officers and employees of a public company. In exchange for these services, the Company pays FGM a fee of approximately $456,000 per quarter, plus reimbursement of expenses incurred by FGM in connection with the performance of the services, subject to certain limitations approved by the Company’s Board of Directors or Compensation Committee, from time to time. The Company paid $1.9 million and $1.4 million to FGM under the agreement, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. FGM is an affiliate of FG, the Company’s largest shareholder.
Personnel costs have also increased as our employee count has increased from three to nine when comparing twelve-month periods. Employee salaries and benefits including associated payroll taxes account for approximately $1.5 million of the increase to general and administrative expenses when comparing twelve-month periods.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our actual effective tax rate varies from the statutory federal income tax rates as shown in the following table.
Due to the sale of our former insurance business, these operations have been classified as discontinued operations in the Company’s financial statements presented herein. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a gain from the sale of these operations of approximately $145,000, related to a final true-up and settlement for income taxes due to the Company under the sale agreement.
As a result of the passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), the Company recorded a credit of $214,000 against its income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a provision in the CARES Act that allows for the five-year carryback of net operating losses. Prior to the passage of the CARES Act, these net operating losses were only available to offset future taxable income generated by the Company.
We have also recorded charges of $1,782 and $3,934 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as a valuation allowance against all of our net deferred tax assets, due to uncertainty regarding our ability to realize these tax benefits in the future, reducing the net deferred income tax asset to $0, as of December 31, 2021.
Net Loss
Information regarding our net loss and loss per share for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as shown in the following table:
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The purpose of liquidity management is to ensure that there is sufficient cash to meet all financial commitments and obligations as they fall due. The liquidity requirements of the Company and its subsidiaries have been met primarily from the cash proceeds of the Asset Sale, by funds generated from operations, and from the proceeds from the sales of our common and preferred stock. Cash provided from these sources has historically been used for loss and loss adjustment expense payments, as well as other operating expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold common and preferred stock to the public, for total net proceeds of $9.4 million. Additional information regarding the public offering of our common stock and Series A Preferred Stock can be found under the heading “Shareholders’ Equity.”
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the Company’s consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s net cash used by operating activities was approximately $14.4 million, the major drivers of which were as follows:
● Our net loss of approximately $7.2 million for the year.
● Approximately $7.8 million for a non-cash charge related to the unrealized holding gains on our various investments, offset by $5.5 million in realized loss on sale associated with our shares of FedNat common stock.
● A cash outflow of approximately $2.0 million representing cash placed in trust as collateral, pursuant to our quota-share agreements.
● A cash outflow of approximately $6.5 million for our investment in our SPAC sponsorships through the Fund. As this investment was made by our former investment company subsidiary, we are required to show these cash outflows as operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s net cash provided by financing activities consist primarily of proceeds of approximately $5.9 million from the sale of a portion of our FedNat shares as well as the complete liquidation of our Metrolina investment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s net cash used by financing activities consist of:
● The payments of dividends in the amount of $1.7 million on our Series A Preferred Shares.
● Net proceeds from the issuance of our Series A Preferred Shares in the amount of approximately $4.2 million.
● Net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in the amount of approximately $5.2 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s net cash used by operating activities was approximately $11.3 million. The major drivers of which were as follows:
● Our net loss of approximately $22.5 million for the year, offset by approximately $16.0 million for a non-cash charge related to the unrealized losses associated with our shares of FedNat common stock.
● A cash outflow of approximately $2.4 million representing cash placed in trust as collateral, pursuant to our Funds at Lloyd’s quota-share agreement, effective January 1, 2021.
● A cash outflow of approximately $4.0 million for our investment in the Class A and Class A-1 interests in the Sponsor of FGNA. As this investment was made by our former investment company subsidiary, we are required to show these cash outflows as operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s net cash used by financing activities consist of:
● Payments of dividends in the amount of $1.4 million on our Series A Preferred Shares.
● The payment of $2.5 million in cash to the Hale Parties in connection with the repurchase transaction.