ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations relates to Ferrellgas Partners and the operating partnership.
Ferrellgas Partners is a holding entity that conducts no operations and has two direct subsidiaries, the operating partnership and Partners Finance Corp. Both Partners Finance Corp. and Finance Corp. have nominal assets, do not conduct any operations and have no employees other than officers. Our activities are primarily conducted through the operating partnership. Partners Finance Corp. has served as co-issuer and co-obligor for debt securities of Ferrellgas Partners, while Finance Corp., a subsidiary of the operating partnership, serves as co-issuer and co-obligor for debt securities of the operating partnership. Accordingly, and due to the reduced disclosure format, a discussion of the results of operations, liquidity and capital resources of Partners Finance Corp. and Finance Corp. is not presented in this section.
The following is a discussion of our historical financial condition and results of operations and should be read in conjunction with our audited historical consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The discussions set forth in the “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections generally refer to Ferrellgas Partners and its consolidated subsidiaries. However, in these discussions there existed two material differences between Ferrellgas Partners and the operating partnership:
● Ferrellgas Partners had outstanding $357.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior unsecured notes due June 2020 (the “Ferrellgas Partners Notes”) and, accordingly, had interest expense that the operating partnership did not have. On March 30, 2021 (the “Effective Date”), by operation of the Second Amended Prepackaged Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of Ferrellgas Partners, L.P. and Ferrellgas Partners Finance Corp. confirmed by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware, the Ferrellgas Partners Notes were discharged and cancelled.
● On January 8, 2021, Ferrellgas Partners entered into a term loan credit agreement with the operating partnership, pursuant to which the operating partnership extended to Ferrellgas Partners an unsecured, non-amortizing term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $19.9 million. The term loan, which had a maturity date of July 1, 2022, bore interest at a rate of 20% per annum, and all interest on the term loan was added to the outstanding principal amount. During July 2021, Ferrellgas Partners made an optional prepayment of $9.0 million principal amount on the term loan. On May 16, 2022, Ferrellgas Partners repaid the operating partnership the full amount of the term loan of $15.3 million, which represented the outstanding principal and accrued interest. Additionally, Ferrellgas Partners paid the operating partnership $3.9 million for separate intercompany receivables related to expense incurred from the 2021 debt transactions.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
COVID-19, and variants thereof, which has been declared by the World Health Organization as a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern,” continues to evolve and impact the economy of the United States and other countries around the world. We are continuing to assess the impact that COVID-19 may have on our results of operations and financial condition and cannot at this time accurately predict what effects these conditions will have on our operations and sales due to uncertainties relating to the ultimate geographic spread of the virus, the severity of the disease, the duration of the outbreak and the length of the travel restrictions and business closures imposed by governments in different jurisdictions. Additionally, initiatives we have implemented or may implement to slow and/or reduce the impact of COVID-19, such as using staggered start times for drivers, may increase our operating expenses and reduce the efficiency of our operations.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our overall business performance based primarily on a metric we refer to as “Adjusted EBITDA,” which is not defined by GAAP and should not be considered an alternative to earnings measures defined by GAAP. We do not utilize depreciation, depletion and amortization expense in our key measures because we focus our performance management on cash flow generation and our revenue generating assets have long useful lives. For the definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net earnings (loss) attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P., the most directly comparable GAAP measure, see the subheading “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Propane operations and related equipment sales
Based on our propane sales volumes in fiscal 2022, we believe that we are the second largest retail marketer of propane in the United States and a leading national provider of propane by portable tank exchange. We serve residential, industrial/commercial, portable tank exchange, agricultural, wholesale and other customers in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. Our operations primarily include the retail distribution and sale of propane and related equipment and supplies with concentrations in the Midwest, Southeast, Southwest and Northwest regions of the United States.
We use information on temperatures to understand how our results of operations are affected by temperatures that are warmer or colder than normal. Normal temperatures computed by us are the average of the last 10 years of information published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Based on this information we calculate a ratio of actual heating degree days to normal heating degree days. Heating degree days are a general indicator of weather impacting propane usage.
Weather conditions have a significant impact on demand for propane for heating purposes primarily during the months of November through March (the “winter heating season”). Accordingly, the volume of propane used by our customers for this purpose is directly affected by the severity of the winter weather in the regions we serve and can vary substantially from year to year. In any given region, sustained warmer-than-normal temperatures will tend to result in reduced propane usage, while sustained colder-than-normal temperatures will tend to result in greater usage. Although there is a strong correlation between weather and customer usage, general economic conditions in the United States and the wholesale price of propane can have a significant impact on this correlation. Additionally, there is a natural time lag between the onset of cold weather and increased sales to customers. If the United States were to experience a cooling trend, we could expect nationwide demand for propane to increase which could lead to greater sales, income and liquidity availability. Conversely, if the United States were to experience a continued warming trend, we could expect nationwide demand for propane for heating purposes to decrease which could lead to a reduction in our sales, income and liquidity availability as well as impact our ability to maintain compliance with our debt covenants.
We employ risk management activities that attempt to mitigate price risks related to the purchase, storage, transport and sale of propane generally in the contract and spot markets from major domestic energy companies. We attempt to mitigate these price risks through the use of financial derivative instruments and forward propane purchase and sales contracts. We enter into propane sales commitments with a portion of our customers that provide for a contracted price agreement for a specified period of time. These commitments can expose us to product price risk if not immediately hedged with an offsetting propane purchase commitment.
Our open financial derivative propane purchase commitments are designated as hedges primarily for fiscal 2022 and 2023 sales commitments and, as of July 31, 2022, we have experienced net mark-to-market gains of approximately $38.3 million. Because these financial derivative purchase commitments qualify for hedge accounting treatment, the resulting asset, liability and related mark-to-market gains or losses are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets as “Prepaid expenses and other current assets,” "Other assets, net," “Other current liabilities,” "Other liabilities" and “Accumulated other comprehensive income,” respectively, until settled. Upon settlement, realized gains or losses on these contracts will be reclassified to “Cost of sales-propane and other gas liquid sales” in the consolidated statements of operations as the underlying inventory is sold. These financial derivative purchase commitment net gains are expected to be offset by increased margins on propane sales commitments that qualify for the normal purchase normal sale exception. At July 31, 2022, we estimate 82% of currently open financial derivative purchase commitments, the related propane sales commitments and the resulting gross margin will be realized into earnings during the next twelve months.
Summary Discussion of Results of Operations:
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021
During fiscal 2022, we recognized net earnings attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P. of $148.0 million, compared to a net loss attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P. of $68.4 million during fiscal 2021. This increase was primarily driven by $104.8 million in “Loss on extinguishment of debt” and $10.4 million of “Reorganization expense - professional fees,” both of which were recorded in the prior year period. The remainder of the increase was attributable to a $68.4 million increase in “Gross margin,” a decrease of $73.5 million in “Interest expense,” an $8.4 million increase in “(Gain) loss on asset sales and disposals” and a $7.3 million decrease in “General and administrative expense.” These increases were partially offset by a $54.8 million increase in “Operating expenses - personnel, vehicle, plant and other.”
The increase in gross margin consists of a $57.0 million increase in “Gross margin - Propane and other gas liquid sales” and an $11.4 million increase in “Gross margin - Other.”
“Interest expense” for Ferrellgas Partners decreased $73.5 million primarily due to (i) a decrease in interest on the Ferrellgas Partners Notes and (ii) lower interest expense in 2022 as a result of the March 30, 2021 refinancing transactions.
Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors increased to $226.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $135.7 million in fiscal 2021. This increase of $91.1 million was primarily due to a $60.8 million decrease in net cash interest expense, a $22.0 million increase in our Adjusted EBITDA and a $9.1 million decrease in maintenance capital expenditures.
Distributable cash flow excess decreased to $57.0 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to $108.9 million in fiscal 2021, primarily due to $100.0 million in distributions paid to Class B unitholders in fiscal 2022 and a $41.3 million increase in distributions accrued or paid to preferred unitholders, partially offset by the $91.1 million increase in distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors noted above.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this Annual Report we present the following non-GAAP financial measures: Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors, Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders, and Distributable cash flow excess.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA for Ferrellgas Partners is calculated as net earnings (loss) attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P., plus the sum of the following: income tax expense, interest expense, depreciation and amortization expense, non-cash employee stock ownership plan compensation charge, loss on extinguishment of debt, (gain) loss on asset sales and disposals, other income, net, reorganization expense - professional fees, severance costs, legal fees and settlements related to non-core businesses, provision for doubtful accounts related to non-core businesses, and net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest. Management believes the presentation of this measure is relevant and useful because it allows investors to view the partnership’s performance in a manner similar to the method management uses, adjusted for items management believes make it easier to compare its results with other companies that have different financing and capital structures. Adjusted EBITDA, as management defines it, may not be comparable to similarly titled measurements used by other companies. Items added into our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA that will not occur on a continuing basis may have associated cash payments. This method of calculating Adjusted EBITDA should be viewed in conjunction with measurements that are computed in accordance with GAAP.
Distributable Cash Flow Attributable to Equity Investors. Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA minus net cash interest expense, maintenance capital expenditures and cash paid for income taxes, plus proceeds from certain asset sales. Management considers distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors a meaningful measure of Ferrellgas’ ability to declare and pay quarterly distributions to equity investors, including holders of the operating partnership’s Preferred Units. Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors, as management defines it, may not be comparable to similarly titled measurements used by other companies. Items added into our calculation of distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors that will not occur on a continuing basis may have associated cash payments. Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors should be viewed in conjunction with measurements that are computed in accordance with GAAP.
Distributable Cash Flow Attributable to Class A and B Unitholders. Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders is calculated as Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors minus distributions accrued or paid to Preferred Unitholders and distributable cash flow attributable to general partner and noncontrolling interest. Management considers Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders a meaningful measure of the partnership’s ability to declare and pay quarterly distributions to Class A and B Unitholders. Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders, as management defines it, may not be comparable to similarly titled measurements used by other companies. Items added into our calculation of distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders that will not occur on a continuing basis may have associated cash payments. Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders should be viewed in conjunction with measurements that are computed in accordance with GAAP.
Distributable Cash Flow Excess. Distributable cash flow excess is calculated as Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B unitholders minus Distributions paid to Class A and B unitholders. Distributable cash flow excess, if any, is retained to establish reserves, to reduce debt, to fund capital expenditures and for other partnership purposes, and any shortage is funded from previously established reserves, cash on hand or borrowings under our Credit Facility or, previously, under our terminated accounts receivable securitization facility. Management considers Distributable cash flow excess a meaningful measure of the partnership’s ability to effectuate those purposes. Distributable cash flow excess, as management defines it, may not be comparable to similarly titled measurements used by other companies. Items added into our calculation of distributable cash flow excess that will not occur on a continuing basis may have associated cash payments. Distributable cash flow excess should be viewed in conjunction with measurements that are computed in accordance with GAAP.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors, Distributable cash flow attributable to Class A and B Unitholders and Distributable cash flow excess to Net earnings (loss) attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P., the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the fiscal years indicated:
(a) Net cash interest expense is the sum of interest expense less non-cash interest expense and other income, net. This amount includes interest expense related to the terminated accounts receivable securitization facility.
(b) Maintenance capital expenditures include capitalized expenditures for betterment and replacement of property, plant and equipment, and may from time to time include the purchase of assets that are typically leased.
(c) The Company did not pay any distributions to Class A unitholders during fiscal 2022 or 2021.
Operating Results for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021
Propane operations and related equipment sales
The following table summarizes propane sales volumes and Adjusted EBITDA results for the fiscal years indicated:
NM - Not meaningful
(a) Gross margin for “Other Gas Sales” is allocated to Gross margin “Retail - Sales to End Users” and “Wholesale - Sales to Resellers” based on the volumes in each respective category.
(b) “Other” primarily includes various customer fee income and to a lesser extent appliance and material sales.
(c) Gross margin from “Propane and other gas liquids sales” represents “Revenues - Propane and other gas liquids sales” less “Cost of sales - Propane and other gas liquids sales” and does not include depreciation and amortization.
(d) “Operating, general and administrative expense” above includes both the “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other” and “General and administrative expense” captions in the consolidated statement of operations.
Propane sales volumes during fiscal 2022 decreased 3%, or 29.3 million gallons, compared to fiscal 2021. This decrease was largely attributable to decreased sales to tank exchange customers and other wholesale customers. Retail volume was relatively flat with 624.3 million gallons sold in fiscal 2022 compared to 632.1 million gallons sold in fiscal 2021.
Weather in the more highly concentrated geographic areas we serve for fiscal 2022 was approximately 5% warmer than normal and 4.9% warmer than fiscal 2021, which we believe was the primary factor for the decreases in retail and other wholesale customer propane sales during the year.
Our wholesale sales price per gallon partially correlates to the change in the wholesale market price of propane. The wholesale market price at major supply points in Mt. Belvieu, Texas during fiscal 2022 averaged 64% more than fiscal 2021, while at the Conway, Kansas major supply point prices averaged 66% more than fiscal 2021. The wholesale market price at Mt. Belvieu, Texas averaged $1.25 and $0.76 per gallon during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively, while the wholesale market price at Conway, Kansas averaged $1.23 and $0.74 per gallon during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. This increase in the wholesale cost of propane contributed to our increase in sales price per gallon and therefore revenues.
Revenues
Retail sales increased $322.9 million or 29% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in sales price per gallon. Revenues from retail customers saw increases in all areas, with significant increases noted in our industrial/commercial, residential and agricultural customer bases.
Wholesale sales increased $32.5 million or 6% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. This increase in sales was primarily due to an increase in sales price per gallon, as discussed above, and was partially offset by a decline in gallons sold to wholesale customers due to warmer weather in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Other gas sales decreased $6.3 million or 22% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the volume decrease noted above.
Other revenues increased $11.2 million or 13% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased miscellaneous fees billed to customers and increased tank rental income.
Gross margin - Propane and other gas liquids sales
Gross margin increased $57.0 million primarily due to increased retail gross margin of $69.2 million, which was driven by an increase in sales price per gallon, partially offset by a decrease of $12.2 million in wholesales gross margin, which was primarily driven by the declines in volume noted above. See above discussion.
Gross margin - other
Gross margin increased $11.4 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to increased miscellaneous fees billed to customers and increased tank rental income.
Operating income
Operating income increased $28.8 million primarily due to a $57.0 million increase in "Gross margin - Propane and other gas liquid sales" and an $11.4 million increase in “Gross margin - other,” both as discussed above. Other positive factors contributing to the increase in operating income were an $8.4 million increase in “(Gain) loss on asset sales and disposals” and a $4.0 million decrease in “Operating expense - equipment lease expense.” These increases were partially offset by a $47.5 million increase in “Operating, general and administrative expense” and a $4.5 million increase in “Depreciation and amortization expense.”
The $8.4 million increase in “(Gain) loss on asset sales and disposals primarily related to the derecognition of a lease liability and the related asset of a non-core business. The $4.0 million decrease in “Operating expense - equipment lease expense” was due to our entering into more finance leases instead of operating leases, resulting in less lease expense and greater interest expense and amortization expense.
“Operating, general and administrative expense” increased due to a $54.8 million increase in “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other,” partially offset by a $7.3 million decrease in “General and administrative expense.” The increase in “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other” was primarily due to increases of $20.5 million in vehicle repairs and maintenance and fuel costs, $19.4 million in selling and other costs and $14.9 million in personnel costs. The decrease in “General and administrative expense” was primarily due to a $3.5 million decrease in personnel expense and a $3.5 million decrease in legal costs associated with non-core business.
The $4.5 million increase in “Depreciation and amortization expense” primarily relates to an increase in depreciation related to “Tanks, cylinders and customer equipment.” See Note E - Supplemental financial statement information in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information. The cost for tanks, cylinders and related components has risen due to increases in the price of steel. In addition, these assets have shorter depreciable lives which increase the amount of depreciation expense recognized during the period.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA increased $22.0 million or 7% due to the $28.8 million increase in operating income and a $4.5 million increase in “Depreciation and amortization expense,” both as discussed above, partially offset by an $8.4 million increase in “(Gain) loss on asset sales and disposals,” a $2.2 million decrease in legal fees and settlements related to non-core businesses and a $1.2 million decrease for nonrecurring severance costs.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $34.7 million primarily due to a $36.4 million increase in "Gross margin - Propane and other gas liquid sales" and a $4.9 million increase in “Gross margin - other”, both as discussed above, partially offset by a $7.1 million increase in “Operating, general and administrative expense”. “Operating, general and administrative expense” increased due to a $9.4 million increase in “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other,” partially offset by a $2.3 million decrease in “General and administrative expense”. “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other” increased primarily due to a $12.7 million increase in field personnel costs, a $1.5 million increase related to acquisitions made in the last twelve months, a $1.5 million increase in plant and office costs, a $1.1 million increase in selling expenses and a $1.1 million increase in personnel incentives, partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in vehicle fuel costs. “General and administrative expense” remained unchanged, primarily due to a $3.2 million decrease in legal costs offset by a $2.3 million increase in personnel incentives and a $0.9 million increase in other corporate costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash flows from operating activities, our Credit Facility and funds received from sales of debt and equity securities. On the Effective Date, the operating partnership, the general partner and certain of the operating partnership’s subsidiaries entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), which provides for a four-year revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of up to $350.0 million, including a sublimit not to exceed $200.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit. For additional discussion, see Note H - Debt in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
As of July 31, 2022, our total liquidity was $401.0 million, which was comprised of $147.5 million in unrestricted cash and $253.5 million of availability under our Credit Facility. These sources of liquidity and short-term capital resources are intended to fund our working capital requirements, acquisitions and capital expenditures. As of July 31, 2022, letters of credit outstanding totaled $87.6 million. Our access to long-term capital resources, to the extent needed to refinance debt or for other purposes, may be affected by our ability to access the capital markets, covenants in our debt agreements and other financial obligations, unforeseen demands on cash, or other events beyond our control.
As of July 31, 2022, we had $11.2 million of restricted cash for a cash deposit made with the administrative agent under our prior senior secured credit facility that was terminated in April 2020.
Our working capital requirements are subject to, among other things, the price of propane, delays in the collection of receivables, volatility in energy commodity prices, liquidity imposed by insurance providers, downgrades in our credit ratings, decreased trade credit, significant acquisitions, the weather, customer retention and purchasing patterns and other changes in the demand for propane. Relatively colder weather or higher propane prices during the winter heating season are factors that could significantly increase our working capital requirements.
Our ability to satisfy our obligations is dependent upon our future performance, which will be subject to prevailing weather, economic, financial and business conditions and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. Due to the seasonality of the retail propane distribution business, a significant portion of our propane operations and related products cash flows from operations is generated during the winter heating season. Our net cash provided by operating activities primarily reflects earnings from our business activities adjusted for depreciation and amortization and changes in our working capital accounts. Historically, we generate significantly lower net cash from operating activities in our first and fourth fiscal quarters as compared to the second and third fiscal quarters due to the seasonality of our propane operations and related equipment sales operations.
During periods of high volatility, our risk management activities may expose us to the risk of counterparty margin calls in amounts greater than we have the capacity to fund. Likewise, our counterparties may not be able to fulfill their margin calls from us or may default on the settlement of positions with us.
We believe that the liquidity available from cash flows from operating activities, unrestricted cash and the Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our capital expenditure, working capital and letter of credit requirements for the foreseeable future.
Distributable Cash Flow
Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors is reconciled to net earnings (loss) attributable to Ferrellgas Partners, L.P., the most directly comparable GAAP measure, in this Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations -Non-GAAP Financial Measures" above. A comparison of distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors to cash distributions accrued or paid to equity investors for the year ended July 31, 2022 to the year ended July 31, 2021 is as follows (in thousands):
(a) DCF ratio is calculated as Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors divided by Cash distributions accrued or paid to equity investors.
For fiscal 2022, Distributable cash flow attributable to equity investors increased $91.1 million compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to a $60.8 million decrease in net cash interest expense, a $22.0 million increase in Adjusted EBITDA and a $9.1 million decrease in maintenance capital expenditures.
Quarterly distributions aggregating to $63.4 million were paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units during the year ended July 31, 2022. This included $0.9 million of Additional Amounts (as defined in Note I - Preferred units) payable to certain holders of Preferred Units related to the side letters outlined in the OpCo LPA Amendment. As of July 31, 2022, the Quarterly Distribution accrued was $17.5 million with $15.4 million paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units on August 15, 2022. The remaining Quarterly Distribution accrual of $2.1 million represents Additional Amounts payable to certain holders of Preferred Units pursuant to the side letters.
As of April 30, 2021, the Quarterly Distribution accrued was $8.0 million, reflecting a prorated distribution amount for the period from the Effective Date to April 30, and the Quarterly Distribution in that amount was paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units on May 17, 2021. As of July 31, 2021, the aggregate Quarterly Distribution and Additional Amounts accrued was $16.0 million, and $15.7 million of that amount was paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units on August 16, 2021.
We did not pay any cash distributions to our Class A Unitholders or the general partner during fiscal 2022 or fiscal 2021. Ferrellgas Partners made aggregate cash distributions of approximately $100.0 million to its Class B Unitholders during the year ended July 31, 2022. See Note R - Net loss per unitholders’ interest for additional information. Thus, cash reserves, which we utilize to meet future anticipated expenditures, were $161.5 million and $111.6 million, respectively, for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021.
Operating Activities
Ferrellgas Partners
Fiscal 2022 v Fiscal 2021
Net cash provided by operating activities was $160.5 million for fiscal 2022, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $206.4 million for fiscal 2021. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to a $123.8 million increase in requirements for other current liabilities, a $31.7 million outflow associated with other assets and liabilities, and a $3.9 million increase in working capital requirements. These changes were partially offset by a $106.8 million increase in cash flow from operations, a decrease of $14.3 million in requirements for prepaid expenses and a $7.7 million decrease in accrued interest expense related to the timing and nature of the March 2021 restructuring transactions.
The $123.8 million increase related to other current liabilities was primarily driven by changes in the broker margin deposit liability. The increase in working capital requirements for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an $11.1 million increase in inventory requirements and a $4.6 million increase in requirements for accounts payable. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $11.8 million in requirements for accounts and notes receivable, net.
The increase in cash flow from operations was primarily due to a decrease in “Interest expense” of $73.5 million, a $68.4 million increase in gross profit, an $8.4 million gain on asset sales and disposals, a $7.3 million decrease in “General and administrative expense” and a $4.0 million decrease in “Operating expense - equipment lease expense.” These changes were partially offset by an increase in “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other” of $54.8 million.
The operating partnership
Fiscal 2022 v Fiscal 2021
Net cash provided by operating activities was $179.7 million for fiscal 2022, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $217.0 million for fiscal 2021. This decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to a $123.6 million increase in requirements for other current liabilities, a $12.5 million outflow associated with other assets and liabilities, a $6.0 million increase in accrued interest expense related to the timing and nature of the March 2021 restructuring transactions, and a $3.9 million increase in working capital requirements. These changes were partially offset by an $82.3 million increase in cash flow from operations and a decrease of $14.3 million in requirements for prepaid expenses.
The $123.6 million increase related to other current liabilities was primarily driven by changes in the broker margin deposit liability. The increase in working capital requirements for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an $11.1 million increase in inventory requirements and a $4.6 million increase in requirements for accounts payable. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $11.8 million in requirements for accounts and notes receivable, net.
The increase in cash flow from operations was primarily due to a $68.4 million increase in gross profit, a net decrease in “Interest expense” of $59.8 million, an $8.4 million gain on asset sales and disposals, a $7.0 million decrease in “General and administrative expense” and a $4.0 million decrease in “Operating expense - equipment lease expense.” These increases were partially offset by an increase in “Operating expense - personnel, vehicle, plant and other” of $54.8 million and a $4.5 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense.
Investing Activities
Ferrellgas Partners
Capital Requirements
Our business requires continual investments to upgrade or enhance existing operations and to ensure compliance with safety and environmental regulations. Capital expenditures for our business consist primarily of:
● Maintenance capital expenditures. These capital expenditures include expenditures for betterment and replacement of property, plant and equipment, and may from time to time include the purchase of assets that are typically leased, rather than to generate incremental distributable cash flow. Examples of maintenance capital expenditures include a routine replacement of a worn-out asset or replacement of major vehicle components; and
● Growth capital expenditures. These expenditures are undertaken primarily to generate incremental distributable cash flow. Examples include expenditures for purchases of both bulk and portable propane tanks and other equipment to facilitate expansion of our customer base and operating capacity.
Fiscal 2022 v Fiscal 2021
Net cash used in investing activities was $111.8 million for fiscal 2022, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $61.0 million for fiscal 2021. This increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a $35.8 million increase in “Capital expenditures” and a $13.1 million increase in "Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired," partially offset by a $2.4 million decrease in “Proceeds from sale of assets.”
The increase in "Capital expenditures" during fiscal 2022 was primarily due to increases related to growth capital expenditures. The Company had three acquisitions in fiscal 2022 compared to one in fiscal 2021.
Due to the mature nature of our operations we do not anticipate significant fluctuations in maintenance capital expenditures, with the exception of future decisions regarding lease versus buy financing options. However, future fluctuations in growth capital expenditures could occur due to the opportunistic nature of these projects.
The operating partnership
The investing activities discussed above also apply to the operating partnership, other than the net activity of the term loan credit agreement with Ferrellgas Partners described below under “-Disclosures about Effects of Transactions with Related Parties.”
Financing Activities
Ferrellgas Partners
Fiscal 2022 v Fiscal 2021
Net cash used in financing activities was $171.9 million for fiscal 2022, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $197.3 million for fiscal 2021. This decrease in cash flow used in financing activities was primarily due to financing costs related to fiscal 2021 debt transactions (as discussed further in Note H - Debt), partially offset by $100.0 million in fiscal 2022 distributions to Class B unitholders and an increase of $55.3 million in preferred unit distributions.
Letters of credit outstanding at July 31, 2022 and July 31, 2021 totaled $87.6 million and $107.7 million, respectively, and were used to secure insurance arrangements, product purchases and commodity hedges. As of July 31, 2022, we had available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility of $253.5 million.
Distributions
Partnership distributions
The Sixth Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Ferrellgas Partners, L.P. (the “Amended Ferrellgas Partners LPA”) requires Ferrellgas Partners to make quarterly cash distributions of all of its “available cash”. Available cash is defined in the Amended Ferrellgas Partners LPA as, generally, the sum of Ferrellgas’ Partners cash receipts less consolidated cash disbursements and net changes in reserves established by our general partner for future requirements. In general, the amount of Ferrellgas Partners’ available cash depends primarily on whether and the extent to which Ferrellgas Partners receives cash distributions from the operating partnership, as such distributions generally would be Ferrellgas Partners’ only significant cash receipts.
The Fifth Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Ferrellgas, L.P. (the “Amended OpCo LPA”), which amended and restated in its entirety the Fourth Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Ferrellgas L.P., and a First Amendment to the Amended OpCo LPA (the “OpCo LPA Amendment”), sets forth the preferences, rights, privileges and other terms of the Preferred Units.
Pursuant to the Amended Ferrellgas Partners LPA, while any Class B Units remain outstanding, any distributions by Ferrellgas Partners to its partners must be made such that the ratio of (i) the amount of distributions made to holders of Class B Units to (ii) the amount of distributions made to holders of Class A Units and the general partner is not less than 6:1. The Amended Ferrellgas Partners LPA permits Ferrellgas Partners, in the general partner’s discretion, to make distributions to the Class B Unitholders in a greater proportion than the minimum 6:1 ratio, including paying 100% of any such distribution Class B Unitholders. The Class B Units will not be convertible into Class A Units until Class B Unitholders receive distributions in the aggregate amount of $357.0 million (which was the outstanding principal amount of the Ferrellgas Partners Notes), and the rate at which Class B Units will convert into Class A Units increases annually. Additionally, the price at which Ferrellgas Partners may redeem the Class B Units during the first five years after the Effective Date is based on the Class B Unitholders’ receipt of a specified internal rate of return in respect of their Class B Units. This specified internal rate of return in respect of the Class B Units is 15.85%, but that amount increases under certain circumstances, including if the operating partnership paid distributions on the Preferred Units in-kind rather than in cash for a certain number of quarters. Accordingly, distributing cash to the Class B Unitholders in a greater proportion than the minimum 6:1 ratio could result in the Class B Units becoming convertible into Class A Units more quickly or at a lower conversion rate or reduce the redemption price for the Class B Units. For additional discussion of the terms of the Class B Units, see Note J - Equity (Deficit) in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
For these reasons, although the general partner has not made any decisions or adopted any policy with respect to the allocation of future distributions by Ferrellgas Partners to its partners, the general partner may determine that it is advisable to pay more than the minimum amount of any distribution, up to 100% of the amount of such distribution, to Class B Unitholders. On October 8, 2021 and July 8, 2022, Ferrellgas Partners made cash distributions aggregating in total to approximately $100.0 million entirely to the Class B Unitholders, without making any distribution to Class A Unitholders and the general partner. See “Risk Factors-Risks Inherent in an Investment in our Class A or Class B Units or our Debt Securities and Other Risks Related to Our Capital Structure and Financing Arrangements-If Ferrellgas Partners is permitted to make and makes distributions to its partners, while any Class B Units remain outstanding, Class B Unitholders collectively will receive at least approximately 85.7% of the aggregate amount of each such distribution and may receive up to 100% of any such distribution. Accordingly, while any Class B Units remain outstanding, Class A Unitholders may not receive any distributions and, in any case, will not receive collectively more than approximately 14.1% of any distribution.”
The ability of Ferrellgas Partners to make cash distributions to its Class A Unitholders and Class B Unitholders is dependent on the receipt by Ferrellgas Partners of cash distributions from the operating partnership. For so long as any Preferred Units remain outstanding, the amount of cash that otherwise would be available for distribution by the operating partnership to Ferrellgas Partners will be reduced by the amount of cash distributions and other payments made by the operating partnership in respect of the Preferred Units, including payments to redeem Preferred Units. Further, the indentures governing the $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) and $825.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.875% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes” and, together with the 2026 Notes, the “OpCo Notes”), the Credit Agreement and the OpCo LPA Amendment governing the Preferred Units contain covenants that limit the ability of the operating partnership to make distributions to Ferrellgas Partners and therefore effectively limit the ability of Ferrellgas Partners to make distributions to its Class A Unitholders and Class B Unitholders. See Note H - Debt and Note I - Preferred units for a discussion of these limitations. See also “Risk Factors- Risks Inherent in an Investment in our Class A or Class B Units or our Debt Securities and Other Risks Related to Our Capital Structure and Financing Arrangements - Our ability to make cash distributions to holders of Class A Units and Class B Units is dependent on the receipt by Ferrellgas Partners of cash distributions from the operating partnership, which are limited by our obligations under the Indentures, the Credit Agreement and the OpCo LPA Amendment and may be limited by a variety of other factors. Accordingly, we may be unable to make cash distributions to holders of Class A Units and Class B Units.”
Preferred unit distributions
Pursuant to the OpCo LPA Amendment, the operating partnership is required to pay to the holders of each Preferred Unit a cumulative, quarterly distribution (the "Quarterly Distribution") at the Distribution Rate (as defined below) on the unit purchase price of such Preferred Unit, which is $1,000 per unit.
"Distribution Rate" means, for the first five years after March 30, 2021, a rate per annum equal to 8.956%, with certain increases in the Distribution Rate on each of the 5th, 6th and 7th anniversaries of March 30, 2021, subject to a maximum rate of 11.125% and certain other adjustments and exceptions.
The Quarterly Distribution may be paid in cash or, at the election of the operating partnership "in kind" through the issuance of additional Preferred Units ("PIK Units") at the quarterly Distribution Rate plus an applicable premium that escalates each year from 75 bps to 300 bps so long as the Preferred Units remain outstanding. In the event the operating partnership fails to make any Quarterly Distribution in cash, such Quarterly Distribution will automatically be paid in PIK Units.
The Distribution Rate on the Preferred Units will increase upon violation of certain protective provisions for the benefit of Preferred Unit holders notwithstanding the cap mentioned above.
Quarterly distributions aggregating to $63.4 million were paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units during fiscal 2022. This included $0.9 million of Additional Amounts payable to certain holders of Preferred Units related to the side letters outlined in the OpCo LPA Amendment. As of July 31, 2022, the Quarterly Distribution accrued was $17.5 million with $15.4 million paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units on August 15, 2022. The remaining Quarterly Distribution accrual of $2.1 million represents Additional Amounts payable to certain holders of Preferred Units pursuant to side letters.
During fiscal 2021, Quarterly Distributions paid to holders of the Preferred Units totaled $8.0 million. As of July 31, 2021, an additional aggregate Quarterly Distribution and Additional Amounts was accrued for $16.0 million, and $15.7 million of that amount was paid in cash to holders of Preferred Units on August 16, 2021.
Preferred unit tax distributions
For any quarter in which the operating partnership makes a Quarterly Distribution in PIK Units in lieu of cash, it shall make a subsequent cash tax distribution for such quarter in an amount equal to the (i) the lesser of (x) 25% and (y) the highest combined federal, state and local tax rate applicable for corporations organized in New York, multiplied by (ii) the excess (if any) of (A) one-fourth (1/4th) of the estimated taxable income to be allocated to the holders of Preferred Units for the year in which the Quarterly Tax Payment Date (which refers to certain specified dates that next follow a Quarterly Distribution date on which PIK Units were issued) occurs, over (B) any cash paid on the Quarterly Distribution date immediately preceding the Quarterly Tax Payment Date on which a quarterly tax amount would otherwise be paid (such amount, the "Tax Distribution"). Tax Distributions are treated as advances against, and reduce, future cash distributions for any reason, including payments in redemption of Preferred Units or PIK Units, or payments to the holders in their capacity as such pursuant to any side letter or other agreement.
Cash distributions paid
On October 8, 2021 and July 8, 2022, Ferrellgas Partners paid cash distributions to holders of the Class B Units in the amount of $38.46 per Class B Unit or approximately $100.0 million in the aggregate for fiscal 2022. As permitted by the Amended Ferrellgas LPA as described above, Ferrellgas Partners made this distribution solely to Class B Unitholders without any contemporaneous distribution to Class A Unitholders and the general partner. Ferrellgas Partners did not pay any cash distributions to its Class A or Class B Unitholders during fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
The operating partnership paid cash distributions during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 in respect to its Preferred Units as discussed above under “-Preferred unit distributions.”
The operating partnership paid cash distributions to Ferrellgas Partners of approximately $100.0 million in the aggregate during fiscal 2022, which Ferrellgas Partners used to make the October 8, 2021 and July 8, 2022 distributions to Class B Unitholders described above.
The operating partnership
The financing activities discussed above also apply to the operating partnership except for distributions by Ferrellgas Partners, fees paid in connection with the Class B Unit exchange and other amounts related to the Ferrellgas Partners Notes, and proceeds received by Ferrellgas Partners pursuant to the term loan credit agreement described below under “-Disclosures about Effects of Transactions with Related Parties.”
Disclosures about Effects of Transactions with Related Parties
We have no employees and are managed and controlled by our general partner. Pursuant to our partnership agreements, our general partner is entitled to reimbursement for all direct and indirect expenses incurred or payments it makes on our behalf, and all other necessary or appropriate expenses allocable to us or otherwise reasonably incurred by our general partner in connection with operating our business. These reimbursable costs, which totaled $304.3 million for fiscal 2022, include operating expenses such as compensation and benefits paid to employees of our general partner who perform services on our behalf as well as related general and administrative expenses.
Term loan credit agreement between Ferrellgas Partners and the operating partnership
As discussed in Note O - Transactions with related parties in the notes to the consolidated financial statements of the operating partnership, on January 8, 2021 Ferrellgas Partners entered into a term loan credit agreement with the operating partnership, pursuant to which the operating partnership extended to Ferrellgas Partners an unsecured, non-amortizing term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $19.9 million. The term loan bore interest at a rate of 20% per annum, and all interest on the term loan was added to the outstanding principal amount of the term loan. The term loan was scheduled to mature on July 1, 2022. During July 2021, Ferrellgas Partners made an optional prepayment of $9.0 million principal amount of the term loan. On May 16, 2022, Ferrellgas Partners repaid the operating partnership the full amount of the term loan of $15.3 million, which represented the outstanding principal and accrued interest. Additionally, Ferrellgas Partners paid the operating partnership $3.9 million for separate intercompany receivables related to expenses incurred during the 2021 debt transactions.
Related party Class A Unitholders
Related party Class A Unitholder information consisted of the following:
(1) Ferrell Companies is the owner of the general partner and is an approximate 23% direct owner of Class A Units and thus a related party. Ferrell Companies also beneficially owns 9,784 and 2,560 Class A Units held by FCI Trading Corp. (“FCI Trading”) and Ferrell Propane, Inc. (“Ferrell Propane”), respectively, bringing Ferrell Companies’ beneficial ownership to 23.4% at July 31, 2022.
(2) FCI Trading is an affiliate of the general partner and thus a related party.
(3) Ferrell Propane is controlled by the general partner and thus a related party.
(4) James E. Ferrell is the Chief Executive Officer and President of our general partner; and is the Chairman of the Board of Directors of our general partner and a related party. JEF Capital Management owns 237,942 of these Class A Units and is owned by the James E. Ferrell Revocable Trust Two and other family trusts, all of which James E. Ferrell and/or his family members are trustees and beneficiaries. James E. Ferrell holds all voting common stock of JEF Capital Management. The remaining 230 Class A Units are held by Ferrell Resources Holdings, Inc., which is wholly-owned by the James E. Ferrell Revocable Trust One, for which James E. Ferrell is the trustee and sole beneficiary.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our future material cash requirements as of July 31, 2022:
(1) We have long and short-term payment obligations under agreements such as the indentures governing our senior notes. Amounts shown in the table represent our scheduled future maturities of long-term debt (including current maturities thereof) for the periods indicated. For additional information regarding our debt obligations, see Note H - Debt to our consolidated financial statements
(2) Fixed rate interest obligations represent the amount of interest due on fixed rate long-term debt.
(3) We lease certain property, plant and equipment under noncancelable and cancelable operating leases. Amounts shown in the table represent minimum lease payment obligations under our third-party operating leases for the periods indicated.
(4) We lease certain property, plant and equipment under noncancelable and cancelable financing leases. Amounts shown in the table represent minimum lease payment obligations under our third-party financing leases for the periods indicated.
(5) These payments relate to a liability incurred in connection with the withdrawal from certain pension plans.
(6) We define a purchase obligation as an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable and legally binding (unconditional) on us that specifies all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transactions. We have long and short-term product purchase obligations for propane and energy commodities with third-party suppliers. These purchase obligations are entered into at either variable or fixed prices. The purchase prices that we are obligated to pay under variable price contracts approximate market prices at the time we take delivery of the volumes. Our estimated future variable price contract payment obligations are based on the July 31, 2022 market price of the applicable commodity applied to future volume commitments. Actual future payment obligations may vary depending on market prices at the time of delivery. The purchase prices that we are obligated to pay under fixed price contracts are established at the inception of the contract. Our estimated future fixed price contract payment obligations are based on the contracted fixed price under each commodity contract. Quantities shown in the table represent our volume commitments and estimated payment obligations under these contracts for the periods indicated.
The components of other noncurrent liabilities included in our consolidated balance sheets principally consist of property and casualty liabilities and the fair value of derivatives in connection with our risk management activity. These liabilities are not included in the table above because they are estimates of future payments and not contractually fixed as to timing or amount.
The operating partnership
The cash requirements discussed above also apply to the operating partnership.
Adoption of New Accounting Standards
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
No new accounting standards were adopted during the year ended July 31, 2022.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
There were no recently issued accounting standards that could have a material impact to our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, or notes to the consolidated financial statements upon their adoption.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to establish accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. These financial statements include some estimates and assumptions that are based on informed judgments and estimates of management. We evaluate our policies and estimates on an on-going basis and discuss the development, selection and disclosure of critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of our general partner. Predicting future events is inherently an imprecise activity and as such requires the use of judgment. Our consolidated financial statements may differ based upon different estimates and assumptions.
We discuss our significant accounting policies in Note B - Summary of significant accounting policies - to our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are subject to judgments and uncertainties that affect the application of such policies. We believe these financial statements include the most likely outcomes with regard to amounts that are based on our judgment and estimates. Our financial position and results of operations may be materially different when reported under different conditions or when using different assumptions in the application of such policies. In the event estimates or assumptions prove to be different from the actual amounts, adjustments are made in subsequent periods to reflect more current information. We believe the following accounting policies are critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements due to the estimation process and business judgment involved in their application:
Depreciation of property, plant and equipment
We calculate depreciation on property, plant and equipment using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the assets ranging from two to 30 years. Changes in the estimated useful lives of our property, plant and equipment could have a material effect on our results of operations. The estimates of the assets’ useful lives require our judgment regarding assumptions about the useful life of the assets being depreciated. When necessary, the depreciable lives are revised and the impact on depreciation is treated on a prospective basis. There were no material revisions to depreciable lives in fiscal 2022.
Residual value of customer and storage tanks
We use an estimated residual value when calculating depreciation for our customer and bulk storage tanks. Customer and bulk storage tanks are classified as property, plant and equipment on our consolidated balance sheets. The depreciable basis of these tanks is calculated using the original cost less the residual value. Depreciation is calculated using straight-line method based on the tanks’ estimated useful life of 30 years. Changes in the estimated residual value could have a material effect on our results. The estimates of the tanks’ residual value require our judgment of the value of the tanks at the end of their useful life or retirement. When necessary, the tanks’ residual values are revised and the impact on depreciation is treated on a prospective basis. There were no such revisions to residual values in fiscal 2022, 2021 or 2020.
Valuation methods, amortization methods and estimated useful lives of intangible assets
The specific, identifiable intangible assets of a business enterprise depend largely upon the nature of its operations. Potential intangible assets include intellectual property such as trademarks and trade names, customer lists and relationships, and non-compete agreements, permits, favorable lease arrangements as well as other intangible assets. The approach to the valuation of each intangible asset will vary depending upon the nature of the asset, the business in which it is utilized, and the economic returns it is generating or is expected to generate. During fiscal 2022 or 2021, we did not find it necessary to adjust the valuation methods used for any acquired intangible assets.
Our recorded intangible assets primarily include the estimated value assigned to certain customer-related and contract-based assets representing the rights we own arising from the acquisition of propane distribution companies and related contractual agreements. A customer-related or contract-based intangible with a finite useful life is amortized over its estimated useful life, which is the period over which the asset is expected to contribute directly or indirectly to the future cash flows of the entity. We believe that trademarks and trade names have an indefinite useful life due to our intention to utilize all acquired trademarks and trade names indefinitely. When necessary, the intangible assets’ useful lives are revised and the impact on amortization will be reflected on a prospective basis. The determination of the fair market value of the intangible asset and the estimated useful life are based on an analysis of all pertinent factors including (1) the use of widely-accepted valuation approaches, the income approach or the cost approach, (2) the expected use of the asset by the entity, (3) the expected useful life of related assets, (4) any legal, regulatory or contractual provisions, including renewal or extension periods that would cause substantial costs or modifications to existing agreements, (5) the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, and other economic factors and (6) the level of maintenance required to obtain the expected future cash flows.
If the underlying assumption(s) governing the amortization of an intangible asset were later determined to have significantly changed (either favorably or unfavorably), then we may be required to adjust the amortization period of such asset to reflect any new estimate of its useful life. Such a change would increase or decrease the annual amortization charge associated with the asset at that time. During fiscal 2022 or 2021, we did not find it necessary to adjust the valuation method, estimated useful life or amortization period of any of our intangible assets.
Should any of the underlying assumptions indicate that the value of the intangible asset might be impaired, we may be required to reduce the carrying value and may also be required to reduce the subsequent useful life of the asset. Any such write-down of the value and any unfavorable change in the useful life (i.e., amortization period) of an intangible asset would increase operating expense at that time.
We did not recognize any impairment losses related to our intangible assets during fiscal 2022. For additional information regarding our intangible assets, see Note B - Summary of significant accounting policies and Note G - Goodwill and intangible assets, net - to our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting for risk management activities and derivative financial instruments
We enter into commodity forward, futures, swaps and options contracts involving propane to hedge exposures to price risk. We may also enter into commodity forward, futures, swaps and options contracts involving diesel, gasoline and related products to hedge exposures to price risk. These derivative contracts are reported in the consolidated balance sheets at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in cost of sales and operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations or in other comprehensive income in the consolidated statement of partners’ capital. We utilize published settlement prices for exchange-traded contracts, quotes provided by brokers and estimates of market prices based on daily contract activity to estimate the fair value of these contracts. Changes in the methods used to determine the fair value of these contracts could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of operations. For further discussion of derivative commodity and interest rate contracts, see