Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. We use words such as “anticipates,” “believes,” “plans,” “expects,” “future,” “intends,” and similar expressions to identify these forward-looking statements. Prospective investors should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this report. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. The management’s discussion, analysis of financial condition, and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. For example, a few of the uncertainties that could affect the accuracy of forward-looking statements include:
(a) an abrupt economic change resulting in an unexpected downturn in demand for our services;
(b) governmental restrictions or excessive taxes on our services;
(c) economic resources to support the development of our projects;
(d) expansion plans, access to potential clients, and advances in technology; and.
(e) lack of working capital that could hinder acquisitions for development of our projects.
Our Business Overview.
FREEDOM HOLDINGS, INC F/K/A Freedom Energy Holdings, Inc. (“we”, “us”, “our”, the “Company” or the “Registrant”) was incorporated in the State of Maryland on June 16, 2005. Since inception, the Company has been engaged in the following sectors. The Company was formed to participate in the mortgage industry however was forced to cease mortgage operations during the 2008 housing crisis at which time the Company acquired small oil and gas leases in SE Kansas. In 2012 the company sold the leases and began unsuccessful effort to develop technology to recycle asphalt shingles. In 2015 (based upon the efforts and experience of our CEO) began consulting other small private and public companies assisting in the process of going public and introduction of legal and auditing firm. Since 2015 our CEO has continued to consult with other businesses both Public and Private but has made no efforts to identify a possible business combination. As a result, the Company has not conducted negotiations or entered into a letter of intent concerning any target business. The Company is continuing its consulting business, however from this point forward is seeking the acquisition of or merger with an existing company. The Company may incur losses in seeking a business combination and our Chief Executive Officer intends to spend a limited amount of time seeking a business combination. The Company selected will continue to have September 30 as its fiscal year end.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an emerging growth company as that term is used in the JOBS Act. An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include:
● A requirement to have only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of related MD&A;
● Exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of the emerging growth company’s internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
● Reduced disclosure about the emerging growth company’s executive compensation arrangements; and
● No non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements.
We have already taken advantage of these reduced reporting burdens in this registration statement, which are also available to us as a smaller reporting company as defined under Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”).
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We are choosing to utilize the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(2) of the JOBS Act. This election is irrevocable and allows our Company to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
We could remain an emerging growth company for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
(b) Business of Issuer
The analysis of new business opportunities will be undertaken by or under the supervision of Brian Kistler, the sole officer and director of the Registrant. As of this date, the Company has not entered into any definitive agreement with any party, nor have there been any specific discussions with any potential business combination candidate regarding business opportunities for the Company. The Registrant has unrestricted flexibility in seeking, analyzing and participating in potential business opportunities. In its efforts to analyze potential acquisition targets, the Registrant will consider the following kinds of factors:
(a) Potential for growth, indicated by new technology, anticipated market expansion or new products.
(b) Competitive position as compared to other firms of similar size and experience within the industry segment as well as with the industry as a whole.
(c) Strength and diversity of management, either in place or scheduled for recruitment.
(d) Capital requirements and anticipated availability of required funds, to be provided by the Registrant or from operations, through the sale of additional securities, through joint ventures or similar arrangements or from other sources.
(e) The cost of participation by the Registrant as compared to the perceived tangible and intangible values and potentials.
(f) The extent to which the business opportunity can be advanced.
(g) The accessibility of required management expertise, personnel, raw materials, services, professional assistance and other required items; and
(h) Other relevant factors.
Brian Kistler has served as our President/Chairman of the Board of Directors since the inception of the Company and is an active Arbitrator with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) for the State of Indiana. Mr. Kistler has extensive work history in the financial services industry. He began working at the securities firm Edward Jones in 1987 and over five (5) years increased his assets under management to $45 million dollars. Mr. Kistler then joined Linsco/Private Ledger in 1992, an independent broker/dealer firm, where he worked as an independent contractor. In 1994 he was recruited by broker/dealer Hilliard Lyons to develop the northeast area of Indiana. During his time at Hilliard/Lyons, Mr. Kistler had assets under management of nearly $100 million dollars. In 1999 Mr. Kistler was hired by Raymond James & Associates to manage their recently acquired Fort Wayne, Indiana office. Subsequently, he became the manager of nine (9) Raymond James offices in Indiana. Mr. Kistler’s responsibilities included managing fifty-three employees with client assets under management in excess of one billion dollars. During his time as manager, the revenues and assets under management grew substantially as a direct result of Mr. Kistler’s ability to recruit, retain and train high quality financial advisors. Mr. Kistler retired from his position with Raymond James in December 2005 to focus on the development of Freedom Holdings, Inc. Freedom Holdings, Inc. is an ongoing operation.
The Company was formed to participate in the mortgage industry however was forced to cease mortgage operations during the 2008 housing crisis at which time the Company acquired small oil and gas leases in SE Kansas. In 2012 the company sold the leases and began unsuccessful effort to develop technology to recycle asphalt shingles. In 2015 (based upon the efforts and experience of our CEO) began consulting other small private and public companies assisting in the process of going public and introduction of legal and auditing firm. Since 2015 our CEO has continued to consult with other businesses both Public and Private but has made no efforts to identify a possible business combination. As a result, the Company has not conducted negotiations or entered into a letter of intent concerning any target business. The Company is continuing its consulting business, however from this point forward is seeking the acquisition of or merger with an existing company. The Company selected will continue to have September 30 as its fiscal year end.
Mr. Kistler is also the President of New Opportunity Business Solutions, Inc. (NOBS), a business consulting company in which Mr. Kistler serves in a consultancy status as an officer and director of public companies. Currently, NOBS only has 5 clients that require approximately 15 hours per month of Mr. Kistler time and attention and will not detract from his ability to oversee our company’s operations. Mr. Kistler was the founder and CEO of Freedom Holding Inc.
We believe that Mr. Kistler’s experience in the securities industry as well as the managerial skills he developed during such tenure provide ample qualification for Mr. Kistler to serve as an officer and director for our Company and opens the opportunity for him to find an appropriate acquisition or merger candidate. As a result of his duties and responsibilities with other than Freedom Holdings, Inc., Mr. Kistler intends to devote approximately 5 hours per week to the development of our business. As we have limited operating history and revenue and only minimal assets, there is a risk that we will be unable to continue as a going concern and consummate a business combination.
In applying for foregoing criteria, no one of which will be controlling, management will attempt to analyze all factors and circumstances and make a determination based upon reasonable investigative measures and available data. Potentially available business opportunities may occur in many different industries, and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex. Due to the Registrant’s limited capital available for investigation, the Registrant may not discover or adequately evaluate adverse facts about the opportunity to be acquired.
FORM OF ACQUISITION
The manner in which the Registrant participates in an opportunity will depend upon the nature of the opportunity, the respective needs and desires of the Registrant and the promoters of the opportunity, and the relative negotiating strength of the Registrant and such promoters.
It is likely that the Registrant will acquire its participation in a business opportunity through the issuance of common stock or other securities of the Registrant. Although the terms of any such transaction cannot be predicted, it should be noted that in certain circumstances the criteria for determining whether or not an acquisition is a so-called “tax free” reorganization under Section 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) depends upon whether the owners of the acquired business own 80% or more of the voting stock of the surviving entity. If a transaction were structured to take advantage of these provisions rather than other “tax free” provisions provided under the Code, all prior stockholders would in such circumstances retain 20% or less of the total issued and outstanding shares of the surviving entity.
In addition, depending upon the transaction, the Registrant’s current stockholders may be substantially diluted to less than 20% of the total issued and outstanding shares of the surviving entity and possibly even eliminated as stockholders by an acquisition. Current shareholders will seek to either maintain an equity interest in the surviving company or a cash payment in exchange for outstanding shares, or a combination thereof.
The present stockholders of the Registrant will likely not have control of a majority of the voting securities of the Registrant following a reorganization transaction. As part of such a transaction, all, or a majority of, the Registrant’s sole director may resign, and one or more new directors may be appointed without any vote by stockholders.
In the case of an acquisition, the transaction may be accomplished upon the sole determination of management without any vote or approval by stockholders. In the case of a statutory merger or consolidation directly involving the Company, it will likely be necessary to call a stockholders’ meeting and obtain the approval of the holders of a majority of the outstanding securities. The necessity to obtain such stockholder approval may result in delay and additional expense in the consummation of any proposed transaction and will also give rise to certain appraisal rights to dissenting stockholders. Most likely, management will seek to structure any such transaction so as not to require stockholder approval.
It is anticipated that the investigation of specific business opportunities and the negotiation, drafting and execution of relevant agreements, disclosure documents and other instruments will require substantial management time and attention and substantial cost for accountants, attorneys and others. If a decision is made not to participate in a specific business opportunity, the costs theretofore incurred in the related investigation might not be recoverable. Furthermore, even if an agreement is reached for the participation in a specific business opportunity, the failure to consummate that transaction may result in the loss to the Registrant of the related costs incurred.
We presently have no employees apart from our management. Our sole officer and director is engaged in outside business activities and anticipates that he will devote to our business very limited time (estimated at five hours per week) until the acquisition of a successful business opportunity has been identified. We expect no significant changes in the number of our employees other than such changes, if any, incident to a business combination.
(c) Reports to security holders.
(1) The Company is not required to deliver an annual report to security holders and at this time does not anticipate the distribution of any such report.
(2) The Company will file reports with the SEC. The Company will be a reporting company and will comply with the requirements of the Exchange Act.
(3) The public may read and copy any materials the Company files with the SEC in the SEC’s Public Reference Section, Room 1580, 100 F Street N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Section by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. Additionally, the SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC, which can be found at http://www.sec.gov.
(i) Filing of Exchange Act reports, and
(ii) Consummating an acquisition
We anticipate that our cost for filing Exchange Act reports for the next 12 months will be approximately $8,400. We anticipate that we also should be able to consummate a business combination for approximately $8,400. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through use of funds in our treasury and additional amounts, as necessary to be loaned by our invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors.
We are in the development stage and have negative working capital, negative stockholders’ equity and have not earned any revenues from operations to date. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We are currently devoting our efforts to locating merger candidates. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to develop additional sources of capital, locate and complete a merger with another company, ultimately, achieve profitable operations.
We may consider a business which has recently commenced operations, in a developing company in need of additional funds for expansion into new products or markets, is seeking to develop a new product or service, or is an established business which may be experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. In the alternative, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, a company which does not need substantial additional capital, but which desires to establish a public trading market for its shares, while avoiding, among other things, the time delays, significant expense, and loss of voting control which may occur in a public offering.
Our sole officer and director has not had any preliminary contact or discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a business combination with us. Any target business that is selected may be a financially unstable company or an entity in its early stages of development or growth, including entities without established records of sales or earnings. In that event, we will be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of financially unstable and early stage or potential emerging growth companies. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
Our management anticipates that it will likely be able to effect only one business combination, due primarily to our limited financing and dilution of interest for present and prospective stockholders, which is like to occur as a result of our management’s plan to offer a controlling interest to a target business in order to achieve a tax-free reorganization. This lack of diversification should be considered to a substantial risk in investing in us, because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture against gains from another.
We anticipate that the selection of a business combination will be complex and extremely risky. Because of general economic conditions, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, our management believes that there are numerous firms seeking even the limited additional capital which we will have and/or perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation. We intend to contact various stock transfer agents, investment relation firms and business development entities to locate potential candidates for a business combination transaction. Such perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation include, among other things, facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be obtained, providing liquidity for the principals of and investors in a business creating a means for providing incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, and offering greater flexibility in structuring acquisitions, joint ventures and the like through the issuance of stock. An additional perceived benefit for a private operating company in becoming public by merging with us as opposed to filing its own form 10 registration statement is the time and money required to get through the process. This private company must take into account the consideration that such private company would have to provide to us in such a transaction as well as our obligation to file a Form 8-K in connection with such a transaction including Form 10 information regarding the private operating company. Potentially available business combinations may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex.
PLAN OF OPERATION.
The Company is in the process of investigating potential business ventures which, in the opinion of management, will provide a source of eventual profit to the Company. Such involvement may take many forms, including the acquisition of an existing business or the acquisition of assets to establish subsidiary businesses. Mr. Kistler expects to remain involved as management of any acquired business.
The Company possesses limited funds and will be extremely limited in its attempts to locate potential business situations for investigation. The Company has commenced the process of investigating possible merger and acquisition candidates and believes that the Company’s status as a publicly held corporation will enhance its ability to locate such potential business ventures. No assurance can be given as to when Mr. Kistler may locate suitable business opportunities and such opportunities may be difficult to locate; however, Mr. Kistler intends to actively search for potential business ventures for the foreseeable future.
Business opportunities, if any arise, are expected to become available to Freedom Holdings principally from the personal contacts of Mr. Kistler. While it is not expected that the Company will engage professional firms specializing in business acquisitions or reorganizations, such firms may be retained if funds become available in the future, and if deemed advisable. Opportunities may thus become available from professional advisors, securities broker-dealers, venture capitalists, members of the financial community, and other sources of unsolicited proposals. Mr. Kistler is unable to predict at this time the cost of locating a suitable business opportunity.
The analysis of business opportunities will be undertaken by or under the supervision of Mr. Kistler. Among the factors which he will consider in analyzing potential business opportunities are the available technical, financial and managerial resources; working capital and financial requirements; the history of operation, if any; future prospects; the nature of present and anticipated competition; potential for further research, developments or exploration; growth and expansion potential; the perceived public recognition or acceptance of products or services; name identification, and other relevant factors.
It is not possible at present to predict the exact manner in which the Company may participate in a business opportunity. Specific business opportunities will be reviewed and based upon such review, the appropriate legal structure or method of participation will be decided upon by management. Such structures and methods may include, without limitation, leases, purchase and sale agreements, licenses, joint ventures; and may involve merger, consolidation or reorganization. The Company may act directly or indirectly through an interest in a partnership, corporation or reorganization. However, it is most likely that any acquisition of a business venture the Company would make would be by conducting a reorganization involving the issuance of FREEDOM HOLDING’s restricted securities. Such a reorganization may involve a merger (or combination pursuant to state corporate statutes, where one of the entities dissolves or is absorbed by the other), or it may occur as a consolidation, where a new entity is formed and FREEDOM HOLDING, and such other entity combine assets in the new entity. Reorganization may also occur, directly or indirectly, through subsidiaries, and there is no assurance that the Company would be the surviving entity. Any such reorganization could result in loss of control of a majority of the shares. Mr. Kistler or other members of management, if any, at the time of reorganization may be required to resign in connection with reorganization. Substantial dilution of percentage equity ownership may result to the stockholders. The Company may choose to enter into a venture involving the acquisition of or merger with a company which does not need substantial additional capital but desires to establish a public trading market of its securities. Such a company may desire to consolidate its operations with the Company through a merger, reorganization, asset acquisition, or other combination, in order to avoid possible adverse consequences of undertaking its own public offering. Such consequences might include expense, time delays or loss of voting control. In the event of such a merger, the Company may be required to issue significant additional shares, and it may be anticipated that control over the Company’s affairs may be transferred to others.
As part of his investigation of acquisition possibilities, Mr. Kistler may meet with executive officers of the business and its personnel; inspect its facilities; obtain independent analysis or verification of the information provided, and conduct other reasonable measures, to the extent permitted by the Company’s limited resources and Mr. Kistler’s limited expertise. Generally, Mr. Kistler intends to analyze and make a determination based upon all available information without reliance upon any single factor as controlling.
It may be anticipated that the investigation of specific business opportunities and the negotiation, drafting and execution of relevant agreements, disclosure documents and other instruments will require substantial management time and attention, and substantial costs for accountants, attorneys and others. Should a decision thereafter be made not to participate in a specific business opportunity, it is likely that costs already expended would not be recoverable. It is likely, in the event a transaction should eventually fail to be consummated, for any reason, that the costs incurred by the Company would not be recoverable. Mr. Kistler is entitled to reimbursement for all expenses incurred in his investigation of possible business ventures on behalf of the Company, and no assurance can be given that if the Company has available funds, they will not be depleted by such expenses.
Mr. Kistler believes the best chance to obtain value for the stockholder is to seek a merger or acquisition with an existing business. At this time, Mr. Kistler has not been able to locate any potential mergers or acquisitions.
The Company is not able to determine the time or resources that will be necessary to locate and acquire or merge with a business prospect. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to acquire an interest in any such prospects, products or opportunities that may exist or that any activity of the Company, regardless of the completion of any transaction, will be profitable.
If and when Mr. Kistler locates a business opportunity, he will consider the dollar amount of that entity’s profitable operations and the adequacy of its working capital in determining the terms and conditions under which the Company would consummate such an acquisition. Potential business opportunities, no matter which form they may take, will most likely result in substantial dilution for the Company’s stockholders due to the issuance of stock to acquire such an opportunity.
We have limited history as a public company. We currently file with the SEC annual and quarterly information and other reports that are specified in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and SEC regulations. Thus, we will need to ensure that we will have the ability to prepare, on a timely basis, financial statements that comply with SEC reporting requirements following the effectiveness of this registration statement. We will also become subject to other reporting and corporate governance requirements, including the listing standards of any securities exchange upon which we may list our Common Stock, and the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”), and the regulations promulgated thereunder, which impose significant compliance obligations upon us. As a public company, we will be required, among other things, to:
● prepare and distribute reports and other stockholder communications in compliance with our obligations under the federal securities laws and the applicable national securities exchange listing rules;
● define and expand the roles and the duties of our Board of Directors and its committees;
● institute more comprehensive compliance, investor relations and internal audit functions;
● evaluate and maintain our system of internal control over financial reporting, and report on management’s assessment thereof, in compliance with the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and related rules and regulations of the SEC; and
● involve and retain outside legal counsel and accountants in connection with the activities listed above.
The adequacy of our internal control over financial reporting must be assessed by management for each year commencing with the year ending September 30, 2021. Our internal control over financial reporting will be required to meet the standards required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will incur additional costs in order to improve our internal control over financial reporting and comply with Section 404, including increased auditing and legal fees and costs associated with hiring additional accounting and administrative staff. Ultimately, our efforts may not be adequate to comply with the requirements of Section 404 of which is currently being paid by our CEO If we are unable to implement and maintain adequate internal control over financial reporting or otherwise to comply with Section 404, we may be unable to report financial information on a timely basis, may suffer adverse regulatory consequences, may have violations of the applicable national securities exchange listing rules and may breach covenants under our credit facilities.
The significant obligations related to being a public company will continue to require a significant commitment of additional resources and management oversight that will increase our costs and might place a strain on our systems and resources. As a result, our management’s attention might be diverted from other business concerns. In addition, we might not be successful in implementing and maintaining controls and procedures that comply with these requirements. If we fail to maintain an effective internal control environment or to comply with the numerous legal and regulatory requirements imposed on public companies, we could make material errors in, and be required to restate, our financial statements. Any such restatement could result in a loss of public confidence in the reliability of our financial statements and sanctions imposed on us by the SEC.
Results of Operations and Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
The results of operations are based on preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of financial statements requires management to select accounting policies for critical accounting areas as well as estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements. The Company’s accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to the Notes of Financial Statements.
Results of Operations for years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenues.
All revenues were derived from New Opportunity Business Solutions, Inc. a related party. Mr. Kistler, our CEO is the President and CEO of both Freedom Holdings, Inc. and New Opportunity Business Solutions, Inc.
Total Revenue. Total revenues for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $31,4000 and $11,419, respectively. Revenues increased by approximately 175%.
Cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $31,400 and $0, respectively. Cost of goods sold increased by 100% due to the Company allocating Mr. Kistler’s time at fair market value.
Gross profit. Gross profit for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $0 and $11,419, respectively. Gross profit decreased by 100% due to the Company allocating Mr. Kistler’s time at fair market value.
Expenses.
Total Operating Expenses. Total operating expenses for the years ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 were $245,177 and $245,843, respectively. Total operating expenses consisted of management fees of $240,000 and $0, respectively; stock based compensation of $0 and $240,000, respectively; professional fees of $2,934 and $0, respectively and selling, general and administrative expenses of $2,243 and $5,843, respectively. Management fees increased by approximately 100% due to Mr. Kistler and Mr. Hunt accepting their annual compensation as accrued compensation instead of being issued Series D Preferred Stock. Stock based compensation decreased by 100% due to Mr. Kistler and Mr. Hunt accepting their annual compensation as accrued compensation instead of being issued Series D Preferred Stock. Professional fees increased by approximately 100% due to the process of becoming up-listing to a full reporting company. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by approximately 62%.
Other Income (Expense): Total other income (expense) for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 was ($14,301) and ($6,117), respectively. Other income (expense) consisted of interest expense of ($14,301) and ($6,117), respectively. Interest expense increased by approximately 134% due to increased borrowings.
Financial Condition.
Total Assets. Total assets at September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 were $2,132 and $19, respectively. Total assets consist of cash of $2,132 and $19, respectively. Total assets increased by approximately 11,121%. The main reason for the increase was due to an increase in revenues from a related party.
Total Liabilities. Total liabilities at September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 were $351,924 and $121,733, respectively. Total liabilities consist of accounts payable of $7,861 and $1,773, respectively; accrued interest of $922 and $0, respectively; accrued expenses of $246,208 and $18,405, respectively and note payable of $96,933 and $101,555, respectively. Total liabilities increased by approximately 189%. Accounts payable increased by approximately 343% due to the Company up-listing and becoming full reporting. Accrued interest increased by approximately 100% due to increase borrowings. Accrued expenses increased by approximately 1,238% due to Mr. Kistler and Mr. Hunt accepting their annual compensation as accrued compensation instead of being issued Series D Preferred Stock.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business.
The Company sustained a loss of $259,478 for the year ended September 30, 2021 and $240,541 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company has accumulated losses totaling $9,716,132 at September 30, 2021. Because of the absence of positive cash flows from operations, the Company will require additional funding for continuing the development and marketing of products. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We are presently able to meet our obligations as they come due through the support of our CEO. At September 30, 2021 we had a working capital deficit of $349,792. Our working capital deficit is due to the results of operations.
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were ($24,666) and $3,149, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities includes our net loss, stock issued for services, accounts payable and accrued expenses and accrued interest.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 were $26,779 and ($3,291), respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities includes paid-in capital from a related party, Mr. Brian Kistler our CEO and payments made on notes payable of $4,621 and $3,291 respectively.
We anticipate that our future liquidity requirements will arise from the need to fund our growth from operations, pay current obligations and future capital expenditures. The primary sources of funding for such requirements are expected to be cash generated from operations and raising additional funds from the private sources and/or debt financing. However, we can provide no assurances that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations and/or obtain additional financing on terms satisfactory to us, if at all, to remain a going concern. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations on a timely basis and ultimately to attain profitability. Our Plan of Operation for the next twelve months is to raise capital to implement our strategy. We do not have the necessary cash and revenue to satisfy our cash requirements for the next twelve months. We cannot guarantee that additional funding will be available on favorable terms, if at all. If adequate funds are not available, then we may not be able to expand our operations. If adequate funds are not available, we believe that our officers and directors will contribute funds to pay for some of our expenses. However, we have not made any arrangements or agreements with our officers and directors regarding such advancement of funds. We do not know whether we will issue stock for the loans or whether we will merely prepare and sign promissory notes. If we are forced to seek funds from our officers or directors, we will negotiate the specific terms and conditions of such loan when made, if ever. Although we are not presently engaged in any capital raising activities, we anticipate that we may engage in one or more private offering of our company’s securities. We would most likely rely upon the transaction exemptions from registration provided by Regulation D, Rule 506 or conduct another private offering under Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933. See “Note 2 - Going Concern” in our financial statements for additional information as to the possibility that we may not be able to continue as a “going concern.”
We are not aware of any trends or known demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in material increases or decreases in liquidity.
Capital Resources.
We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of September 30, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have made no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.