Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Future Health” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Future Health ESG Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors”.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-Q including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance, or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of this report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
Future Health is a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 25, 2021. The Company was formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private warrants, our capital stock, debt, or a combination of cash, stock, and debt. The Company is an “emerging growth company”, and as such, the Company is subject to all the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to the Company’s formation and initial public offering described below and the search for a target business for a Business Combination. The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the IPO. The Company has selected December 31 as its fiscal year end.
On September 9, 2021, (the “Company”) consummated the IPO of 20,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one share of common stock and one-half of one redeemable warrant of the Company. Each whole warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one share of common stock for $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $200,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company completed the private sale of 7,375,000 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant (the “Private Placement”), to Future Health ESG Associates 1, LLC (the “Sponsor”) and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $7,375,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $21,881,745, including $9,000,000 in deferred underwriting and advisory fees payable, $4,019,555 in upfront underwriting fees, $8,163,891 in offering costs allocated to anchor investors, and $698,299 in other offering costs related to the Initial Public Offering.
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $180,911, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of $125,004 and franchise tax expense of $62,299, partially offset by interest income on our cash balance of $2,043 and net gains on marketable securities held in our operating and Trust accounts of $4,349.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 14, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO of 20,000,000 units. Each Unit consists of one share of common stock and one-half of one redeemable warrant of the Company. Each whole warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one share of common stock for $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company completed the Private Placement of 7,375,000 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $7,375,000.
Following the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, $201,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $21,881,745 in transaction costs, including $9,000,000 in deferred underwriting and advisory fees payable, $4,019,555 in upfront underwriting fees, $8,163,891 in offering costs allocated to the fair value of the common shares sold to anchor investors by certain related parties, and $698,299 of other offering costs related to the Initial Public Offering.
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $243,997, comprised of a net loss of $180,911, gain on marketable securities (net) dividends and interest held in Trust Account of $4,349, and of $58,737 in cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $201,004,349. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting and advisory fees payable and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,446,482. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
Future Health ESG Associates 1, LLC loaned us $250,000 to cover expenses related to the IPO pursuant to two promissory notes dated March 4, 2021 and August 24, 2021. These notes were non-interest bearing and repaid in full after the closing of the IPO.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account
released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence, and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
On a routine basis, we assess going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40 “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern". As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,446,482 in our operating bank account, $1,430,848 of working capital, and $201,004,349 of securities held in the Trust Account to be used for a Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem our common stock in connection therewith. We believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing, however, there is a risk that our liquidity may not be sufficient. The Sponsor intends, but is not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans to sustain operations in the event of a liquidity deficiency.
We have until December 14, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. While Management expects to complete a Business Combination prior to December 14, 2022, this date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets, or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than described below.
The underwriter of the IPO was paid $4,019,555 in underwriting discount and expense reimbursement upon the closing of the IPO. An additional $9,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees will be due to the underwriter only upon the closing of an Initial Business Combination. Included in this amount is a financial advisory fee of $300,000 that will be payable to Roth Capital Partners, LLC only upon the closing of an Initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company’s management has reviewed all estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements and has determined that none reflect both a significant level of estimation uncertainty and a reasonable likelihood of material impact on the Company’s financial condition or results of operations.
We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including shares of common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ deficit. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, all common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet. The company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital, to the extent available, and accumulated deficit.
Net loss per Share of Common Stock
Earnings or loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares issued and outstanding during the period. Earnings and losses are allocated to redeemable and non-redeemable common stock based on weighted-average shares outstanding. The Company has not considered the effect of warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share of common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any other dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented. Remeasurement adjustment on redeemable common stock is not considered in the calculation because redemption value closely approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020- 06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 effective upon inception on February 25, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.