Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following section discusses management's view of the financial condition and results of operations of FIS and its consolidated subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, unless otherwise noted.
This section should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Information" and "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of this Annual Report for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements that could cause future results to differ materially from those reflected in this section.
Business Trends and Conditions
Our revenue is primarily derived from a combination of technology and processing services, transaction fees, professional services and software license fees. While we are a global company and do business around the world, the majority of our revenue is generated by clients in the U.S. The majority of our international revenue is generated by clients in the U.K., Germany, Australia, Brazil, Canada, and India. In addition, the majority of our revenue has historically been recurring and has been provided under multi-year Banking and Capital Markets contracts that contribute relative stability to our revenue stream. These services, in general, are considered critical to our clients' operations. Although Merchant has a lesser percentage of multi-year contracts, substantially all of our Merchant revenue is recurring, derived from transaction processing fees that fluctuate with the number or value of transactions processed, among other variable measures associated with consumer activity. Professional services revenue is typically non-recurring, though recognition often occurs over time rather than at a point in time. Sales of software licenses are typically non-recurring with point-in-time recognition and are less predictable.
The distribution of vaccines against COVID-19 curtailed the impact of the pandemic in 2021 in many of the larger countries in which we do business, but the timing of a complete recovery remains uncertain as new variants of COVID-19 continue to impact consumer spending. Economic activity increased in many areas throughout 2021, including, most notably, an increase in consumer and business spending by digital methods compared to 2020 when the impact of COVID-19 first arose. In the fourth quarter of 2021, some governmental restrictions were re-imposed based upon a resurgence of variants of COVID-19 in many areas of the U.S. and Europe, which resulted in an adverse impact on payment volumes and transactions over those anticipated following the easing of restrictions in the prior two quarters. In addition, we have continued to see adverse impacts on spending in discretionary spending verticals, including travel, airlines and restaurants, although the impact has lessened compared to 2020. These changes in spending affected our business, results of operations and financial condition throughout 2021 and will likely continue to have an impact in 2022, although the magnitude and duration of their ultimate effect is not possible to predict.
We extended higher-than-usual levels of credit to our merchant clients during the first part of the pandemic as part of funds settlement in connection with payments to their customers, for, among other things, refunds for cancelled trips as cases of COVID-19 spread across the globe. The level of credit extended to our merchant clients has since normalized. We are potentially exposed to losses if our merchant customers are unable to repay the credit we have extended or to fund their liability for chargebacks due to closure, insolvency, bankruptcy or other reasons. Our potential liability for chargebacks did not have a material impact on our liquidity for the three- and twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021, and we continue to monitor for impact on our liquidity, results of operations and financial condition.
We continue to assist financial institutions in migrating to outsourced integrated technology solutions to improve their profitability and address increasing and ongoing regulatory requirements. As a provider of outsourced solutions, we benefit from multi-year recurring revenue streams, which help moderate the effects of broader year-to-year economic and market
Table of Content
changes that otherwise might have a larger impact on our results of operations. We believe our integrated solutions and outsourced services are well-positioned to address this outsourcing trend across the markets we serve.
Over the last five years, we have moved over 80% of our server compute, primarily in North America, to our FIS cloud located in our strategic data centers. This allows us to further enhance security for our clients' data and increases the flexibility and speed with which we can provide solutions and services to our clients, at lesser cost. We have also completed our data center consolidation program in 2021, generating savings for the Company of over $250 million in run-rate annual expense since the program's inception in mid-2016.
Following the successful modernization of our IT infrastructure and consolidation of our data centers, we are now accelerating the modernization of our strategic applications and sunsetting of our redundant platforms. Our multi-year platform modernization initiative is designed to create a componentized, cloud-native set of capabilities that can be consumed by clients as end-to-end business applications or as individual components. Although our platform modernization will result in additional near-term costs, we expect it will result in improvements in our operational efficiencies over time.
We continue to invest in modernization, innovation and integrated solutions and services to meet the demands of the markets we serve and compete with global banks, financial and other technology providers, and emerging technology innovators. We invest both organically and through investment opportunities in companies building complementary technologies in the financial services space. Our internal efforts in research and development activities have related primarily to the modernization of our proprietary core systems in each of our segments, design and development of next-generation digital and innovative solutions and development of processing systems and related software applications and risk management platforms. We have increased our investments in these areas in each of the last three years. We expect to continue our practice of investing an appropriate level of resources to maintain, enhance and extend the functionality of our proprietary systems and existing software applications, to develop new and innovative software applications and systems to address emerging technology trends in response to the needs of our clients and to enhance the capabilities of our outsourcing infrastructure. We will also be developing software that will accelerate bringing new capabilities and innovation to market.
In addition, we are investing in the development of new solutions and venture opportunities by establishing FIS Impact Ventures. This group prioritizes development of, and investment in, next-generation technology and innovation.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Company has taken several actions to protect its employees while maintaining business continuity, including implementing its comprehensive Pandemic Plan. For example, when the COVID-19 variants impacted India in the second quarter, we rolled out several benefits to help our employees there, including providing vaccines to over 15,000 employees and dependents. The Pandemic Plan includes site-specific plans as well as travel restrictions, medical response protocols, work-from-home strategies and enhanced cleaning within our locations. As a critical infrastructure provider for the global economy, FIS continues to operate around the world to serve our clients.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our business practices, and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees, clients and business partners. While FIS has outfitted employees to provide services from home or transferred work to other locations, we recently began a limited reopening of offices in certain locations where the COVD-19 infection rates have been significantly reduced. In many locations, a hybrid work status will allow employees to work from home and the office.
Consumer preference continues to shift from traditional branch banking services to digital banking solutions, and our clients seek to provide a single integrated banking experience through their branch, mobile, internet and voice banking channels. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in accelerating digitization of banking and payment services by requiring, in many cases, banks and bank customers to transact through digital channels. We have been providing our large regional banking customers in the U.S. with Digital One, an integrated digital banking platform, and are now adding functionality and offering Digital One to our community bank clients to provide a consistent, omnichannel experience for consumers of banking services across self-service channels like mobile banking and online banking, as well as supporting channels for bank staff operating in bank branches and contact centers. The uniform customer experience extends to support a broad range of financial services including opening new accounts, servicing of existing accounts, money movement, and personal financial management, as well as other consumer, small business and commercial banking capabilities. Digital One is integrated into several of the core banking platforms offered by FIS and is also offered to customers of non-FIS core banking systems.
We anticipate consolidation within the banking industry will continue, primarily in the form of merger and acquisition activity among financial institutions, which we believe would broadly be detrimental to the profitability of the financial technology industry. However, consolidation resulting from specific merger and acquisition transactions may be beneficial to
Table of Content
our business. When consolidations of financial institutions occur, merger partners often operate systems obtained from competing service providers. The newly formed entity generally makes a determination to migrate its core and payments systems to a single platform. When a financial institution processing client is involved in a consolidation, we may benefit by their expanding the use of our services if such services are chosen to survive the consolidation and to support the newly combined entity. Conversely, we may lose revenue if we are providing services to both entities, or if a client of ours is involved in a consolidation and our services are not chosen to survive the consolidation and to support the newly combined entity. It is also possible that larger financial institutions resulting from consolidation may have greater leverage in negotiating terms or could decide to perform in-house some or all of the services that we currently provide or could provide. We seek to mitigate the risks of consolidations by offering other competitive services to take advantage of specific opportunities at the surviving company.
As of the end of 2021, our achievement of revenue synergies from the Worldpay acquisition have exceeded our targets, driven by successful cross-sell of our heritage FIS solutions into heritage Worldpay clients and leveraging our heritage Worldpay sales and distribution teams, expanding on our existing relationships with financial institutions to establish merchant referral agreements and optimizing our network routing capabilities. We have also exceeded our original target for expense synergies, as we have successfully integrated organizational structures, reduced corporate overhead and achieved cost savings within our operating environment.
We continue to see demand in the payments market for innovative solutions that will deliver faster, more convenient payment options in mobile channels, internet applications, in-store cards, and the growing area of cryptocurrencies. The payment processing industry is adopting new technologies, developing new solutions and services, evolving new business models, and being affected by new market entrants and by an evolving regulatory environment. As merchants and financial institutions respond to these changes by seeking services to help them enhance their own offerings to consumers, including the ability to accept card-not-present ("CNP") payments in eCommerce and mobile environments as well as contactless cards and mobile wallets at the point-of-sale, FIS believes that payment processors will seek to develop additional capabilities in order to serve clients' evolving needs. To facilitate this expansion, we believe that payment processors will need to enhance their technology platforms so they can deliver these capabilities and differentiate their offerings from other providers. The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated digitization of payment services by requiring, in many cases, businesses and consumers to transact through digital channels.
We believe that these market changes present both an opportunity and a risk for us, and we cannot predict which emerging technologies or solutions will be successful. However, FIS believes that payment processors, like FIS, that have scalable, integrated business models, provide solutions across the payment processing value chain and utilize broad distribution capabilities will be best positioned to enable emerging alternative electronic payment technologies. Further, FIS believes that its depth of capabilities and breadth of distribution will enhance its position as emerging payment technologies are adopted by merchants and other businesses. FIS' ability to partner with non-financial institution enterprises, such as mobile payment providers and internet, retail and social media companies, continues to create attractive growth opportunities as these new entrants seek to become more active participants in the development of alternative electronic payment technologies and to facilitate the convergence of retail, online, mobile and social commerce applications.
Globally, attacks on information technology systems continue to grow in frequency, complexity and sophistication. This is a trend we expect to continue. Such attacks have become a point of focus for individuals, businesses and governmental entities. The objectives of these attacks include, among other things, gaining unauthorized access to systems to facilitate financial fraud, disrupt operations, cause denial of service events, corrupt data, and steal non-public information. These circumstances present both a threat and an opportunity for FIS. As part of our business, we electronically receive, process, store and transmit a wide range of confidential information, including sensitive customer information and personal consumer data. We also operate payment, cash access and prepaid card systems.
FIS remains focused on making strategic investments in information security to protect our clients and our information systems. These investments include both capital expenditures and operating expense related to hardware, software, personnel and consulting services. We also participate in industry and governmental initiatives to improve information security for our clients. Through the expertise we have gained with this ongoing focus and involvement, we have developed fraud, security, risk management and compliance solutions to target this growth opportunity in the financial services industry.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accounting policies and estimates described below are those we consider critical in preparing our consolidated financial statements. These policies require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported
Table of Content
amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures with respect to contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual amounts could differ from those estimates. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a more detailed description of the significant accounting policies that have been followed in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The most critical judgments required in applying ASC 606, Revenue Recognition from Customers, and our revenue recognition policy relate to the determination of whether we are the principal or the agent with respect to transactions involving third parties, the determination of distinct performance obligations and the evaluation of the standalone selling price for each performance obligation.
The Company generates revenue in a number of ways, including from the delivery of account- or transaction-based processing, SaaS, BPaaS, cloud offerings, software licensing, software-related services and professional services. Certain contracts contain non-standard terms that require judgment to determine the appropriate impact on revenue recognition.
Technology or services from third parties are frequently embedded in or combined with our applications or service offerings. Whether we recognize revenue based on the gross amount billed to a customer as a principal or the net amount retained as an agent involves judgment that depends on the relevant facts and circumstances, including whether the Company has control of the technology or service prior to it being transferred to the customer and the level of contractual responsibilities and obligations for delivering the application or service.
Contracts containing multiple promised solutions or services require judgment to determine whether individual promised solutions or services can be considered distinct or should instead be combined with other promised solutions or services in the contract. We assess the solutions and services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a solution or service (or bundle of solutions or services) that is distinct - i.e., if a solution or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer.
The transaction price (including any discounts or rebates) is allocated among distinct goods and services in a contract that includes multiple performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. Judgment may be required to determine standalone selling prices for each performance obligation and whether it depicts the amount we expect to receive in exchange for the related good or service. For performance obligations that are not sold separately, we estimate the standalone selling prices considering all reasonably available information and maximizing observable inputs using various approaches including historical pricing, cost plus margin, adjusted market and residual approaches. The cost-plus-margin approach, in particular, requires judgment, including the estimation of the costs required to complete the performance obligation. These estimates are based primarily on the scope and complexity of the obligation, platform migration timelines, expected account or transaction volumes, and internal and external labor rates. We have not made significant changes in our cost estimates under this approach in the reporting period. For significant contracts for which the cost-plus-margin approach was used to estimate the standalone selling price, a 10% change in our cost assumptions would not have a significant impact on the amount reported during the period.
Due to the large number, broad nature and average size of our individual customer contracts, the impact of judgments and assumptions that we apply in recognizing revenue for any single contract is not likely to have a material effect on our consolidated operations or financial position. However, the accounting policies that we apply across similar contracts, products or classes of clients could significantly influence the timing and amount of revenue recognized in our historical and future results of operations or financial position.
Purchase Accounting
We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction at their estimated fair values. The estimates used to determine the fair value of long-lived assets, such as intangible assets and software, are complex and require a significant amount of management judgment. We typically engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in making fair value determinations. The third-party valuation specialists generally use discounted cash flow models, which require internally-developed assumptions, to determine the acquisition fair value of customer relationship intangible assets and developed technology software assets. Assumptions for customer relationship asset valuations typically include forecasted revenue attributable to existing customer contracts and relationships, estimated annual attrition, forecasted EBITDA margin, and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. Assumptions for software asset valuations
Table of Content
typically include forecasted revenue attributable to the software assets, obsolescence rates, estimated royalty rates and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. The forecasted revenue and EBITDA margins used in the discounted cash flow models are critical estimates in determining the fair value of customer relationships and developed technology software assets as these estimates are influenced by many factors including historical financial information and management’s expectation for future operating results as a combined company.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions to determine the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of earnings.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the Payrix acquisition in 2021, the Virtus acquisition in 2020 and Worldpay acquisition in 2019. The Payrix acquisition in the current year is not considered material to warrant additional disclosure regarding estimation uncertainty.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company assesses goodwill for impairment by reporting unit on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or more frequently if circumstances indicate potential impairment. Our reporting units are the same as our primary operating segments, with additional reporting units for certain non-strategic businesses within the Corporate and Other segment. Goodwill impairment assessments require a significant amount of management judgment, and a meaningful change in one or more of the underlying forecasts, estimates, or assumptions used in testing goodwill for impairment could result in a material impact on the Company's results of operations and financial position. Based on the results of our assessments, $94 million of goodwill related to certain non-strategic businesses within the Corporate and Other segment was impaired in 2020. For all other reporting units for all periods presented, goodwill was not impaired.
Our impairment test may first consider qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's carrying amount exceeds its fair value. Qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and events affecting the reporting unit or Company as a whole, including a sustained decrease in stock price. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount as a result of the qualitative assessment, or we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit, then we must perform the quantitative assessment for that reporting unit.
When a quantitative assessment is triggered, we typically engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in determining the fair value of the reporting unit based on a weighted average of multiple valuation techniques, typically a combination of an income approach and a market approach. The income approach calculates a value based upon the present value of estimated future cash flows, while the market approach uses earnings multiples of similarly situated guideline public companies. The income approach involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions regarding forecasted revenue, growth rates, operating margins, capital expenditures, and other factors used to calculate estimated future cash flows. In addition, risk-adjusted discount rates and future economic and market conditions and other assumptions are applied. The market approach involves the selection of guideline public companies and earnings multiples considering factors such as markets of operation, solutions offered, and risk profiles. The income approach used to assess goodwill for impairment is a critical estimate because the forecasted growth rate assumption (including long-term growth assumption) underlying the estimated future cash flows is subject to management’s judgment based upon the best available market information, internal forecasts and operating plans. A deterioration in this assumption could adversely impact our results.
For each of 2021 and 2019, we began our annual assessment with the qualitative assessment and concluded that it remained more likely than not that the fair value of each of our reporting units continued to exceed their respective carrying amounts. For 2020, we began our annual assessment for the Banking Solutions and Capital Market Solutions reporting units with qualitative assessments and concluded that it remained more likely than not that the fair value of each of the reporting units continued to exceed their respective carrying amounts. Based on the qualitative assessments performed for the Banking Solutions and Capital Market Solutions reporting units and the substantial excess of fair value over carrying amount in our previous third-party valuations performed in 2015 for the related businesses, we believe the likelihood of obtaining materially different results based on a change of assumptions is low.
For Merchant Solutions, we began our 2020 annual assessment with a quantitative assessment due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Merchant Solutions business and its primary operations being recently acquired as part of the Worldpay acquisition. As a result of the assessment, the fair value of the reporting unit was estimated to be in excess of its
Table of Content
carrying amount by approximately 4%. The fair value was determined with the assistance of third-party valuation specialists, using an equal weighting of the income and market approaches based on an evaluation of the availability and relevance of guideline public companies having similar risks, participating in similar markets, and providing similar solutions for their customers. Under the income approach for the Merchant Solutions reporting unit, management estimated the fair value by forecasting future cash flows using internal forecasts, which were developed considering historical operating performance, expected economic conditions and industry and market trends, including the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic and expected impact of planned business initiatives. At the end of the forecast period, we used a long-term growth rate to determine the terminal value based on an evaluation of the minimum expected terminal growth rate of the Merchant Solutions reporting unit, as well as broader economic considerations such as inflation and foreign exchange rates. In computing the present value of estimated future cash flows, we used a risk-adjusted discount rate based on an assessment of the weighted average cost of capital for the Merchant Solutions reporting unit and relevant guideline public companies. We believe the discount rate used was commensurate with the risks and uncertainties inherent in the Merchant Solutions business and in our internally developed forecasts, though the rate is subject to change in future periods based on changes in the U.S. Treasury rate, inflation, and other factors.
For Merchant Solutions in 2021, we performed a qualitative assessment for our annual assessment. In addition to the factors noted above that are considered when performing such an assessment, we considered actual results for 2021 and updated internal forecasts as compared to prior internal forecasts and other assumptions used in the 2020 quantitative annual assessment. As a result of the assessment, we determined that the indicated fair value of the reporting unit was estimated to be in excess of carrying amount by a similar percentage as determined by the prior year’s quantitative assessment. We concluded for 2021 that it remained more likely than not that the fair value of the Merchant Solutions reporting unit continued to exceed its carrying amount; however, given the results of the 2020 quantitative and 2021 qualitative annual assessments, the reporting unit is at risk for future goodwill impairment as it is reasonably possible that future developments related to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Merchant Solutions business, such as an extended duration of the pandemic and/or government-imposed shutdowns, prolonged economic downturn or recession, or lack of governmental support for recovery, could have a material impact on one or more of the estimates and assumptions used to evaluate goodwill impairment and could result in future goodwill impairment.
Related-Party Transactions
We are a party to certain historical related-party agreements as discussed in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Results of Operations
This section generally discusses fiscal year 2021 compared to 2020. Discussions of fiscal year 2020 compared to 2019 not included herein can be found in Part II, "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal year 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 18, 2021.
Revenue
Revenue increased primarily due to the continued global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic leading to increased Merchant volumes, increased demand for our newly developed offerings in Banking, and strong new sales driving Capital Markets managed services and other recurring revenue growth. Revenue also benefited from a favorable foreign
Table of Content
currency impact, which was primarily related to a weaker U.S. Dollar versus the Euro and the British Pound Sterling. See Segment Results of Operations below for more detailed explanation.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin
Cost of revenue increased primarily due to the revenue variances noted above and benefited from a positive shift in revenue mix. Gross profit and gross profit margin increased primarily due to revenue growth, a positive shift in revenue mix and continued expense management. This increase was partially offset by $183 million of incremental amortization expense associated with shortened estimated useful lives and accelerated amortization methods for certain software and deferred contract cost assets driven by the Company's platform modernization.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased primarily due to higher compensation expense, including incentive compensation, and accelerated stock compensation expense recorded during the first quarter of 2021 associated with the establishment of the Qualified Retirement Equity Program that modified our existing stock compensation plans as described in Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements. These increases were partially offset by lower discretionary spending during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Asset Impairments
During 2021, the Company recorded $202 million of asset impairments for certain software and deferred contract cost assets driven by the Company's platform modernization. During 2020, the Company recorded asset impairments totaling $136 million related to goodwill for certain non-strategic businesses and to certain long-lived assets related to reducing office space.
Operating Income and Operating Margin
The annual change in operating income resulted from the revenue and cost variances noted above. The operating margin during 2021 increased primarily due to a positive shift in revenue mix and continued expense management, partially offset by asset impairments of $202 million, accelerated amortization expense, and higher compensation expense discussed above as compared to prior year. The operating margin during 2020 was negatively impacted by higher acquired intangible asset amortization expense, higher acquisition, integration and other costs and asset impairments of $136 million.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
The decrease in interest expense, net is primarily due to lower outstanding debt and lower weighted average interest rate on the outstanding debt throughout the year.
Other income (expense), net for 2021 includes net gains on equity security investments without readily determinable fair values of $218 million (see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements), a gain on the sale of our equity ownership interest in Cardinal Holdings of approximately $225 million (see Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements) and a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $528 million relating to tender premiums, make-whole amounts, and fees; the write-off of unamortized bond discounts and debt issuance costs; and losses on related derivative instruments. The foregoing loss resulted from the debt refinancing activity we undertook in the first quarter of 2021 (see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements), which will substantially reduce our ongoing interest expense. Other income (expense), net also includes fair value adjustments on certain other non-operating assets and liabilities and foreign currency transaction remeasurement gains.
Other income (expense), net for 2020 primarily includes the fair value adjustment on certain non-operating assets and liabilities, foreign currency transaction remeasurement gains and losses and the settlement recorded for the Reliance Trust claims, which is further described in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements.
Table of Content
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for the 2021 period includes the one-time net remeasurement of certain deferred tax liabilities due to the increase in the U.K. corporate statutory tax rate from 19% to 25% effective April 1, 2023, enacted on June 10, 2021. The effective tax rate for the 2020 period includes the one-time net remeasurement of certain deferred tax liabilities due to the increase in the U.K. corporate statutory tax rate from 17% to 19% enacted on July 22, 2020.
Segment Results of Operations
This section generally discusses fiscal year 2021 compared to 2020. Discussions of fiscal year 2020 compared to 2019 not included herein can be found in Part II, "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal year 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 18, 2021.
FIS reports its financial performance based on the following segments: Merchant Solutions, Banking Solutions, Capital
Market Solutions, and Corporate and Other. The Company reclassified certain non-strategic businesses from Merchant Solutions, Banking Solutions, and Capital Market Solutions into Corporate and Other during the year ended December 31, 2020, and recast all prior-period segment information presented.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net earnings (loss) before net interest expense, net other income (expense), income tax provision (benefit), equity method investment earnings (loss), depreciation and amortization, and excludes certain costs and other transactions that management deems non-operational in nature. This measure is reported to the chief operating decision maker for purposes of making decisions about allocating resources to the segments and assessing their performance. For this reason, Adjusted EBITDA, as it relates to our segments, is presented in conformity with FASB ASC Topic 280, Segment Reporting. The non-operational items affecting the segment profit measure generally include purchase price amortization of acquired intangible assets as well as acquisition, integration and certain other costs and asset impairments. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes incremental and direct costs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. These costs and adjustments are recorded in the Corporate and Other segment for the periods discussed below. Adjusted EBITDA for the respective segments excludes the foregoing costs and adjustments. Financial information, including details of Adjusted EBITDA, for each of our segments is set forth in Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements.
Merchant Solutions
Revenue increased primarily due to easing lockdown restrictions and the continued global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. For 2021, revenue increased due to higher card-present volumes contributing 12% to growth and card-not-present volumes contributing 5% to growth. Revenue also benefited from a favorable foreign currency impact contributing 2% to growth and was primarily related to a weaker U.S. Dollar versus the British Pound Sterling.
Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the revenue impacts noted above. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased primarily due to revenue growth, higher-margin revenue mix and continued expense management.
Table of Content
Banking Solutions
Revenue increased primarily due to recurring revenue contributing 6% to growth, driven by strong new sales, including newly developed offerings, and increased volumes due to the continued global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Non-recurring revenue also contributed 2% to growth, primarily due to the timing of termination fees.
Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the revenue impacts noted above. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased primarily due to higher-margin revenue mix and continued expense management.
Capital Market Solutions
Revenue increased primarily due to recurring revenue contributing 4% and non-recurring revenue contributing 3% to growth driven by strong new sales driving outsourced solutions and services, as well as favorable timing of license renewals. The growth of recurring revenue led to an increase in professional services revenue, with much of the services being delivered in a virtual capacity given the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue also benefited from a favorable foreign currency impact contributing 1% to growth and was primarily related to a weaker U.S. Dollar versus the British Pound Sterling.
Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the revenue impacts noted above. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased primarily due to higher-margin revenue mix and continued expense management.
Corporate and Other
The Corporate and Other segment results consist of selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and intangible asset amortization not otherwise allocated to the reportable segments. Corporate and Other also includes operations from certain non-strategic businesses.
Revenue decreased primarily due to client attrition in our non-strategic businesses.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased primarily due to the revenue impact noted above as well as higher compensation expense compared to prior year.
Table of Content
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Requirements
Our ongoing cash requirements include operating expenses, income taxes, tax receivable obligations, mandatory debt service payments, capital expenditures, stockholder dividends, regulatory requirements, working capital and timing differences in settlement-related assets and liabilities and may include discretionary debt repayments, share repurchases and business acquisitions. Our principal sources of funds are cash generated by operations and borrowings, including the capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility, the U.S. commercial paper program and the Euro-commercial paper program discussed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $3,375 million of available liquidity, including $2,010 million of cash and cash equivalents and $1,365 million of capacity available under its Revolving Credit Facility. Approximately $900 million of cash and cash equivalents is held by our foreign entities, including amounts related to regulatory requirements. The majority of our domestic cash and cash equivalents relates to settlement payables and net deposits-in-transit, which are typically settled within a few business days. Debt outstanding totaled $20.4 billion, with an effective weighted average interest rate of 0.9%.
The Company's liquidity has improved during 2021 as compared to at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, our liquidity could be impacted if economic conditions deteriorate or as a result of governmental measures that might be imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic or any recurrence or related variants thereof.
The Company remains committed to reducing its leverage incurred in the Worldpay acquisition while ensuring ample liquidity and expects to reach its target leverage by the end of the second quarter of 2022.
We believe that our current level of cash and cash equivalents plus cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our operating cash requirements, capital expenditures and mandatory debt service payments for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
We currently expect to continue to pay quarterly dividends. In January 2022, the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend increase of 21% to $0.47 per share beginning with the first quarter of 2022. A regular quarterly dividend of $0.47 per common share is payable on March 25, 2022, to shareholders of record as of the close of business on March 11, 2022. Consistent with our capital allocation strategy, we plan to increase our annual dividend approximately 20% per year over the next several years, as compared to approximately 10% per year increases in recent years, to gradually increase our dividend payout ratio, beginning with the quarterly dividend payable in March 2022. However, the amount, declaration and payment of future dividends is at the discretion of the Board of Directors and depends on, among other things, our investment opportunities (including potential mergers and acquisitions), results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, future prospects, the duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other factors that may be considered relevant by our Board of Directors, including legal and contractual restrictions. Additionally, the payment of cash dividends may be limited by covenants in certain debt agreements.
The share repurchase plan approved by the Board of Directors in 2017 expired as of December 31, 2020. Management temporarily suspended share repurchases during 2020 as a result of the Worldpay transaction to accelerate debt repayment. In January 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program under which it authorized the Company to repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock at management's discretion from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions and through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The new share repurchase program has no expiration date and may be suspended for periods, amended or discontinued at any time. Under the new share repurchase program, the Company repurchased approximately 15 million shares for $2.0 billion during 2021. Approximately 85 million shares remain available for repurchase as of December 31, 2021. In 2020, there were no share repurchases, and in 2019, we repurchased approximately 4 million shares for $400 million.
Cash Flows from Operations
Cash flows from operations were $4,810 million, $4,442 million and $2,410 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of net earnings, adjusted to add back depreciation and amortization and other non-cash items. Cash flows from operations increased $368 million in 2021 and $2,032 million in 2020. The 2021 increase in cash flows from operations is primarily due to an increase in operating income, partially offset by working capital and settlement timing. The 2020 increase in cash flows from operations is primarily due to increased cash flow from the Worldpay operations, including the timing of settlement activity, partially offset by Worldpay integration-related expenses and lower net earnings from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Table of Content
Capital Expenditures and Other Investing Activities
Our principal capital expenditures are for software (purchased and internally developed) and additions to property and equipment. We invested approximately $1,251 million, $1,129 million and $828 million in capital expenditures (excluding other financing obligations for certain hardware and software) during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue investing in property and equipment, purchased software and internally developed software to support our business.
In 2021, we received approximately $367 million of cash for the net proceeds from the sale of our equity ownership interest in Cardinal Holdings. We used approximately $767 million, $469 million and $6,629 million of cash (net of cash acquired, including restricted cash) during 2021, 2020, and 2019 for the Payrix, Virtus, and Worldpay acquisitions, respectively. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Financing
For more information regarding the Company's debt and financing activity, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
FIS' long-term contractual obligations generally include its long-term debt, interest on long-term debt, lease payments on certain of its property and equipment and payments for certain purchase commitments and other obligations. See Notes 12, 14 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements for information on our long-term debt, operating leases and Tax Receivable Agreement obligations, respectively. The following table summarizes FIS' other significant contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
(1)The calculations above assume that (a) applicable margins and commitment fees remain constant; (b) all floating-rate debt is priced at the rates in effect as of December 31, 2021; (c) no refinancing occurs at debt maturity; (d) only mandatory debt repayments are made; (e) no new hedging transactions are effected; and (f) there are no currency effects.
(2)Includes obligations principally related to software, maintenance support, and telecommunication and network services as well as to third-party processors to provide gateway authorization and other processing services. Also includes the capital obligation related to the construction of our new headquarters.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
No new accounting pronouncement adopted, issued or effective during the fiscal year had or is expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or disclosures.