Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements, related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many important factors, including those set forth in the section captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage genetic medicines company dedicated to transforming the lives of patients suffering from rare genetic diseases with significant unmet medical needs by addressing the underlying cause of the disease. Our proprietary platform is designed to utilize our human hematopoietic stem cell derived adeno-associated virus vectors, or AAVHSCs, to precisely and efficiently deliver single administration genetic medicines in vivo through our gene therapy, our nuclease-free gene editing modality, or our gene therapy to express antibodies platform, or GTx-mAb. Our clinical programs include: HMI-102, an investigational gene therapy candidate in clinical development for the treatment of adult patients with phenylketonuria, or PKU; HMI-103, an investigational gene editing candidate in clinical development for the treatment of patients with PKU; and HMI-203, an investigational gene therapy candidate in clinical development for the treatment of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II), or Hunter syndrome. Additionally, we are developing a gene therapy candidate, HMI-104, from our GTx-mAb platform for the treatment of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, or PNH, and we are conducting research in other diseases including metachromatic leukodystrophy, or MLD. Our diverse set of AAVHSCs allows us to precisely target, via a single injection, a wide range of disease-relevant tissues, including the liver, central nervous system, or CNS, peripheral nervous system, or PNS, bone marrow, cardiac and skeletal muscle and the eye. Our genetic medicines platform is designed to provide us the flexibility to choose the method we believe is best suited for each disease we pursue, based on factors such as the targeted disease biology, the biodistribution of our AAVHSCs to key tissues and the rate of cell division the disease-relevant tissues exhibit. Our product-development strategy is to continue to develop in parallel gene therapy and gene editing, while initially leveraging the experience from our gene therapy product candidates to further advance our gene editing. We believe our technology platform will allow us to provide transformative cures using either modality.
The unique properties of our proprietary family of 15 AAVHSCs enable us to focus on a method of gene editing called gene integration, through the replacement of an entire diseased gene in the genome with a whole functional copy by harnessing the naturally occurring deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, repair process of homologous recombination, or HR. We believe our HR-driven gene editing approach will allow us to efficiently perform gene editing at therapeutic levels without unwanted on- and off-target modifications to the genome, and to directly measure and confirm those modifications in an unbiased manner to ensure only the intended changes are made. By utilizing the body’s natural mechanism of correcting gene defects, we also avoid the need for exogenous nucleases, or bacteria-derived enzymes used in other gene editing approaches to cut DNA, which are known to significantly increase the risk of unwanted modifications.
Clinical-Stage Product Candidates
HMI-102: Investigational Gene Therapy for the Treatment of Adult Patients with PKU
We are currently in Phase 2 of the pheNIX clinical trial with our first and lead product candidate, HMI-102, a gene therapy in development for the treatment of adults with PKU. We have received Fast Track Designation for HMI-102 from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for the prevention or treatment of neurocognitive defects due to phenylalanine hydroxylase, or PAH, deficiency through normalization of circulating Phe levels.
In November 2020, we reported positive safety and efficacy clinical data from the dose-escalation phase of the trial. As of the data cutoff date of October 19, 2020, six patients in the dose-escalation phase of the trial had received HMI-102 across three dose cohorts (low-dose Cohort 1, n=2; mid-dose Cohort 2, n=2; high-dose Cohort 3, n=2). The results showed that HMI-102 was generally well-tolerated, and resulted in marked reductions in phenylalanine, or Phe, increases in tyrosine, or Tyr, and reductions in the Phe-to-Tyr ratio, at two doses. Phe is a registrable endpoint in PKU, and the Phe-to-Tyr ratio is a clinically relevant diagnostic measurement for PKU. Based on the safety and efficacy results observed in the dose-escalation phase, we selected and advanced two doses to the randomized, concurrently controlled, dose expansion Phase 2 portion of the pheNIX trial, which was designed to have the potential to be converted to a registrational trial.
In October 2021, we announced that, as of September 30, 2021, both doses in the Phase 2 portion of the trial have been generally well-tolerated and have shown evidence of biological activity, including clinically meaningful reductions in Phe levels, increases in Tyr and reductions in the Phe-to-Tyr ratio. In addition, several new clinical trials sites have been recently added to the trial for a total of 15 active sites currently, with more sites expected. Despite increased interest in pheNIX, enrollment is slower than anticipated, due in part to a COVID-19 resurgence.
On February 18, 2022, we announced our pheNIX gene therapy trial had been placed on clinical hold due to the need to modify risk-mitigation measures in the study in response to observations of elevated liver function tests, or LFTs. On March 17, 2022, we received the official clinical hold letter from the FDA requesting information on elevated LFTs observed in some patients in the trial and modified clinical risk-mitigation measures. In patients who experienced elevated LFTs, all have resolved and no hospitalizations were required. Among the risk-mitigation methods that we intend to propose is a new, more targeted immunosuppressive regimen that is shorter in duration and includes a T-cell inhibitor used in combination with a steroid-sparing regimen that may improve patient compliance. The use of T-cell inhibitors has been shown to be effective in dampening the anticipated immune response to AAV capsids. With the additional information requested by the FDA and the planned conversion to a more targeted immunosuppressive regimen, we estimate that we will require more time to submit and receive feedback on our proposed clinical risk-mitigation strategy. As a result, we now expect to provide a program update when the path forward is established with the FDA.
HMI-103: Gene Editing Candidate for the Treatment of Patients with PKU
In October 2021, we announced the initiation of a Phase 1 trial with HMI-103, our lead gene editing candidate in development for the treatment of classical PKU and received Fast Track Designation for the treatment of neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric manifestations of PKU secondary to phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. The pheEDIT clinical trial is an open-label, dose escalation study evaluating the safety and efficacy of a single I.V. administration of HMI-103, and is expected to enroll up to nine patients ages 18-55 years old who have been diagnosed with classical PKU due to PAH deficiency. In addition to safety endpoints, the trial will measure serum Phe changes. The trial incorporates an immunosuppressive regimen that includes a T-cell inhibitor used in combination with a steroid-sparing regimen. We expect that the first patient in the pheEDIT clinical trial will be dosed following requisite Institutional Biosafety Committee and Institutional Review Board approvals at the clinical sites, and completion of an 82-day screening/run-in period to account for and more closely understand day-to-day Phe fluctuations of participants. If positive safety and efficacy results are established in adults, we plan to then enroll younger patients in subsequent HMI-103 clinical trials. We expect to provide an update on the pheEDIT clinical trial at the end of 2022.
In in vivo preclinical studies, we observed Phe reduction following a single I.V. administration of the murine surrogate of HMI-103 in the PKU disease model out to 43 weeks (end of study). In addition, using quantitative molecular methods, we have demonstrated achievement of gene integration efficiencies in a humanized murine liver model that corresponded with Phe correction in the PKU murine model.
HMI-203: Investigational Gene Therapy for the Treatment of Adult Patients with MPS II (Hunter Syndrome)
In October 2021, we announced the initiation of a Phase 1 trial with HMI-203, an investigational gene therapy in development for the treatment of adults with Hunter syndrome. Hunter syndrome is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the iduronate 2-sulfatase, or IDS, gene leading to absent or deficient I2S enzymatic activity, which causes toxic lysosomal accumulation of glycosaminoglycans, or GAGs. The juMPStart clinical trial is an open-label, dose-escalation study evaluating the safety and efficacy of a single I.V. administration of HMI-203, and is expected to enroll up to nine male patients ages 18-30 years old who have been diagnosed with Hunter syndrome and are currently receiving enzyme replacement therapy, or ERT. Qualitative data on unmet medical needs obtained from ERT-treated adult MPS II patients and/or their caregivers helped inform our trial design. Patients and caregivers reported that weekly ERT infusions, surgeries and supportive therapies inadequately address range of motion and mobility, pain, and hearing loss, that there are burdens associated with ERT and other therapies, including frequency and duration of treatment, and painful and extended recoveries, that there is a high degree of anxiety regarding prognosis, longevity, need for more invasive surgeries, and financial challenges and that the expectations for a potential one-time gene therapy include the ability to maintain their current quality of life with ERT independence. Also, key opinion leaders surveyed supported our planned design for the juMPStart clinical trial, including our plan to discontinue ERT.
In addition to safety endpoints, the trial will measure plasma I2S activity, urinary GAG levels and other peripheral disease endpoints. We expect to provide an update on the juMPStart clinical trial at the end of 2022.
In preclinical studies, a single I.V. administration of HMI-203 resulted in robust biodistribution and human I2S enzyme expression, leading to significant reductions in heparan sulfate GAG levels in the cerebrospinal fluid, brain, liver, heart, spleen, lung and kidney, compared with the vehicle-treated disease model. HMI-203 also led to significant reductions in skeletal deformities compared with vehicle.
Earlier-Stage Product Candidates
In August 2021, we named a clinical development candidate for PNH, HMI-104, from our GTx-mAb platform. This platform represents an additional way that we are leveraging our AAVHSCs in an effort to deliver one-time in vivo gene therapy to express and secrete antibodies from the liver, which we believe may allow us to target diseases with larger patient
populations. In support of this program, we generated and presented preclinical data targeting complement protein 5, demonstrating proof-of-concept in PNH. Our data showed that our AAVHSCs delivered vectors at a high efficiency to the liver and secreted antibodies throughout the body, resulting in sustained expression levels consistent with C5 antibody therapeutics in a humanized murine model.
We completed Investigational New Drug Application, or IND, -enabling studies with HMI-202, an investigational gene therapy in development for the treatment of patients with MLD. We have generated preclinical data that demonstrate that a single I.V. administration of HMI-202 crossed the blood-brain and blood-nerve-barriers and led to sustained reduction of sulfatides in all brain regions of the disease model. We are applying the learnings from the IND-enabling studies to further optimize an HMI-202 vector that we believe may lead to a better therapeutic profile.
Oxford Biomedica Solutions Transaction
On March 10, 2022, we closed our previously announced transaction with Oxford Biomedica Solutions LLC (f/k/a Roadrunner Solutions LLC), or OXB Solutions, Oxford Biomedica (US), Inc., or OXB, and Oxford Biomedica plc, or OXB Parent, and collectively with OXB, Oxford, pursuant to the Equity Securities Purchase Agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, dated as of January 28, 2022, by and among Homology, OXB Solutions and Oxford, whereby, among other things, we and Oxford have agreed to collaborate to operate OXB Solutions, which will provide AAV vector process development and manufacturing to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, which we refer to as the Oxford Biomedica Solutions Transaction, or the OXB Solutions Transaction. OXB Solutions incorporates our proven 'plug and play' process development and manufacturing platform, as well as our experienced team and high-quality GMP vector production capabilities that we built and have been operating since 2019. We will continue to leverage these process development and manufacturing capabilities while reducing our costs and maintaining dedicated manufacturing capacity to support our product candidates. We believe the quality, reliability and scalability of our gene therapy and gene editing manufacturing approach is a core competitive advantage crucial to our long-term success.
Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement and a contribution agreement, or the Contribution Agreement, entered into between us and OXB Solutions prior to the closing of the OXB Solutions Transaction, or the Closing, we agreed to assign and transfer to OXB Solutions all of our assets that are primarily used in the manufacturing of AAV vectors for use in gene therapy or gene editing products, but excluding certain assets related to manufacturing or testing of our proprietary AAV vectors, or collectively, the Transferred Assets, in exchange for 175,000 common equity units in OXB Solutions, or Units, and OXB Solutions assumed from us, and agreed to pay, perform and discharge when due, all of our duties, obligations, liabilities, interests and commitments of any kind under, arising out of or relating to the Transferred Assets.
Effective as of the Closing, we sold to OXB, and OXB purchased from us, 130,000 Units, or the Transferred Units, in exchange for $130.0 million. In connection with the Closing, OXB contributed $50.0 million in cash to OXB Solutions in exchange for an additional 50,000 Units. Immediately following the Closing, (i) OXB owned 180,000 Units, representing 80 percent (80%) of the fully diluted equity interests in OXB Solutions, and (ii) we owned 45,000 Units, representing 20 percent (20%) of the fully diluted equity interests in OXB Solutions.
Pursuant to the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of OXB Solutions, or the OXB Solutions Operating Agreement, which was executed in connection with the Closing, at any time following the three-year anniversary of the Closing, (i) OXB will have an option to cause us to sell and transfer to OXB, and (ii) we will have an option to cause OXB to purchase from us, in each case all of our equity ownership interest in OXB Solutions at a price equal to 5.5 times the revenue for the immediately preceding 12-month period, subject to a specified maximum amount. Pursuant to the terms of the OXB Solutions Operating Agreement, we will be entitled to designate one director on the Board of Directors of OXB Solutions, which shall initially be Arthur Tzianabos, our President and Chief Executive Officer. Further, Tim Kelly, our former Chief Operating Officer, now serves as the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of OXB Solutions.
Concurrently with the Closing, we entered into certain ancillary agreements with OXB Solutions including a license and patent management agreement whereby OXB Solutions granted certain licenses to us, a supply agreement for a term of three years which includes certain annual minimum purchase commitments, a lease assignment pursuant to which we assigned all of our right, title and interest in, to and under our facility lease to OXB Solutions, a sublease agreement whereby OXB Solutions subleased certain premises in its facility to us, as well as several additional ancillary agreements.
Corporate Headquarters Lease
In November 2021, we entered into an amendment of our December 2017 lease agreement, or the Lease Amendment, for our corporate headquarters in Bedford, Massachusetts. The Lease Amendment increases the space under lease by
approximately 23,011 square feet, or the Expansion Premises, and extends the expiration date of the existing premises under the lease from February 2027 to June 2030. The term with respect to the Expansion Premises commences on the earlier of (i) the date of the Substantial Completion of the Tenant’s Work (as both terms are defined in the Lease Amendment), (ii) the Company’s occupancy of any portion of the Expansion Premises, and (iii) May 1, 2022, and continues for a period of ten years and five months. The term of the Expansion Premises and the existing premises are not coterminous. Annual base rent for the existing premise under the Lease Amendment is approximately $4.7 million beginning on March 1, 2027, and increases by three percent annually; annual base rent for the Expansion Premises is approximately $1.4 million per year and increases by three percent annually. The Lease Amendment allows for a tenant improvement allowance not to exceed $5.3 million. Under the terms of the agreement with Oxford, our lease for our corporate headquarters, including the Expansion Premises, has been assigned to OXB Solutions with Homology subleasing a portion of lab and office space back from the newly created company. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our lease agreement.
License Agreements
On February 26, 2021, we received notice from Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research, Inc., or Novartis, that they had elected to terminate the collaboration and license agreement with respect to the ophthalmic target, which was the only remaining target under the agreement. Accordingly, the notice served as notice of Novartis’ termination of the agreement in its entirety, with an effective date of August 26, 2021, which was six months from the date of the notice. Novartis acknowledged that the data we generated support gene editing in retinal cells in a rare ophthalmic disease, providing early proof-of-principle for further research using this approach. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Novartis collaboration and license agreement.
In April 2016, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with City of Hope, or COH, pursuant to which COH granted us an exclusive, sublicensable, worldwide license, or the COH License, to certain AAV vector-related patents and know-how owned by COH to develop, manufacture, use and commercialize products and services covered by such patents and know-how in any and all fields. On August 6, 2021, we received notice from COH that we did not accomplish at least one of the partnering milestones by the applicable deadline, as set forth in the COH License. This notice does not affect our exclusive license in the field of mammalian therapeutics, including all human therapeutics, associated diagnostics, and target validation, or the Mammalian Therapeutic Field, where we retain exclusive rights. Instead, the notice served as written notice that the exclusive license granted pursuant to the COH License in all fields except the Mammalian Therapeutic Field converted from exclusive to non-exclusive effective as of September 20, 2021, which was forty-five days from the receipt of notice. In connection with the conversion, any royalty obligations and sublicensee fees relating to fields outside of the Mammalian Therapeutic Field shall be reduced by a certain percentage. This change to our exclusive worldwide license with COH does not impact any of our current therapeutic product development candidates in development, including HMI-102, HMI-103, HMI-203, HMI-202 and HMI-104, nor will it impact any potential future therapeutic product development candidates.
Management Team and Financial Overview
Our management team has a successful track record of discovering, developing and commercializing therapeutics with a particular focus on rare diseases. We have a robust intellectual property portfolio that includes a combination of issued patents and pending patent applications that are owned by us or licensed from third parties. The portfolio includes issued patents in the United States directed to our family of 15 AAVHSCs, and issued patents in the United States, Europe, Japan, and China specifically directed to gene editing using these AAVHSCs. As of December 31, 2021, we have an exclusive license or co-exclusive license under 18 United States issued patents, nine foreign granted patents and 52 patent applications pending in the United States and internationally. These licensed patent applications include two United States applications and 13 foreign applications that are co-owned with COH. In addition, we own a granted United States patent relating to our HMI-102 composition that is expected to expire in 2039 and may be eligible for patent term extension depending on the regulatory pathway of the product covered by the patent. We also own ten United States and 86 foreign patent applications that are pending. We believe the breadth and depth of our intellectual property is a strategic asset that has the potential to provide us with a significant competitive advantage.
Since our inception in 2015, we have raised approximately $721 million in aggregate net proceeds through our initial public offering, or IPO, in April 2018, follow-on public offerings of common stock in April 2019 and April 2021, proceeds from the sale of common stock under an “at-the-market” sales agreement, equity investments, preferred stock financings and our newly announced agreement with Oxford. Included in our net proceeds is a $130.0 million up-front cash payment from our agreement with Oxford, $50.0 million from a former collaboration partner, comprised of an up-front payment of $35.0 million and a $15.0 million equity investment, and a $60.0 million equity investment from Pfizer Inc., or Pfizer, through a private placement transaction. We will require additional capital in order to advance our product candidates through clinical development and commercialization. We believe that our compelling preclinical data, positive clinical data with HMI-102,
scientific expertise, product-development strategy, manufacturing platform and process and robust intellectual property position us as a leader in the development of genetic medicines.
On April 6, 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock. We sold 6,596,306 shares of our common stock at a price of $7.58 per share and received net proceeds of $49.7 million, after deducting offering expenses. Under the terms of the underwriters’ agreement, we also granted an option exercisable for 30 days to purchase up to an additional 989,445 shares of our common stock at a price of $7.58 per share. The underwriters did not exercise this option. The offering closed on April 9, 2021. The shares were sold pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, as amended, and a related prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on April 8, 2021.
We were incorporated and commenced operations in 2015. Since our incorporation, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our Company, business planning, raising capital, developing our technology platform, advancing HMI-102, HMI-103 and HMI-203 through IND-enabling studies and into clinical trials, advancing HMI-202 through IND-enabling studies and HMI-104 into IND-enabling studies, researching and identifying additional product candidates, developing and implementing manufacturing processes and internal manufacturing capabilities, building out our manufacturing and research and development space, enhancing our intellectual property portfolio and providing general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of common stock, through the sale of preferred stock and through funding from our collaboration partner.
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future, if at all. We recognized $34.0 million and $2.7 million in collaboration revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes the recognition of approximately $30.8 million of deferred revenue and reimbursements incurred under the collaboration and license agreement with Novartis, for which Novartis gave written notice of termination on February 26, 2021, and is therefore not expected to continue in future years. Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $95.8 million and $128.7 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $424.1 million and $328.4 million, respectively.
Our total operating expenses were $129.9 million and $133.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities related to our product candidates. Specifically, we anticipate that our expenses will increase due to costs associated with our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial with HMI-102, our Phase 1 pheEDIT clinical trial with HMI-103, our Phase 1 juMPStart clinical trial with HMI-203, and development activities and clinical trials associated with our other product candidates, including HMI-202, our gene therapy product candidate for MLD, for which we are focusing on optimization of the vector and HMI-104, our GTx-mAb product candidate for PNH, and research activities in additional therapeutic areas to expand our pipeline, including the addition of our GTx-mAb platform, hiring additional personnel in research, clinical and regulatory, quality and other functional areas, increased expenses incurred with contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, to supply us with product for our clinical studies, costs to manufacture product for preclinical and clinical studies and other costs including the maintenance and expansion of our intellectual property portfolio. In addition, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We have incurred significant capital expenditures for the buildout of a facility we have leased, including research and development labs, office space and manufacturing suites and the procurement of equipment and furniture for this facility and in support of our product development candidates and research initiatives. As a result of our agreement with Oxford, we will be purchasing process development services and manufacturing product runs from the newly created OXB Solutions and therefore would expect an increase in these costs with an offsetting decrease in the total costs to run our manufacturing facility, including employee-related costs for the 125 manufacturing employees transitioning to the new company. We expect to incur significant additional capital expenditures in support of our research and development activities.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our current and any future product candidates and our platform and technology and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for development of any of our product candidates is unknown, we are unable to predict the timing and amount of increased operating expenses and capital expenditures associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the costs, timing, and results of our ongoing research and development efforts, including clinical trials;
•the costs, timing, and results of our research and development efforts for current and future product candidates in our gene therapy and gene editing pipeline;
•the costs and timing of process development scale-up activities, and the adequacy of supply of our product candidates for preclinical studies and clinical trials through CMOs;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims, including any claims by third parties that we are infringing upon their intellectual property rights;
•the effect of competitors and market developments; and
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other agreements and the financial terms of such agreements for our product candidates.
We believe that cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, together with the $130.0 million in cash received from Oxford in March 2022, will enable us to fund our current projected operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2024 including, subject to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, additional development activities related to our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial with HMI-102, our Phase 1 pheEDIT clinical trial with HMI-103, our Phase 1 juMPStart clinical trial with HMI-203, preclinical activities relating to HMI-202 and HMI-104, the continued optimization of our manufacturing processes and the expansion of our intellectual property portfolio. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. For example, the trading prices for our and other biopharmaceutical companies’ stock have been highly volatile as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we may face difficulties raising capital through sales of our common stock and any such sales may be on unfavorable terms. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has and could continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect rights as a shareholder. Any future debt financing or preferred equity or other financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and may require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute the ownership interests of our shareholders.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, we are unable to predict when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We are closely monitoring how the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our employees, clinical trials, preclinical studies and overall operations. In response to the spread of COVID-19, we have taken steps to minimize the impact on our operations.
Operations - At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, to protect the health of our employees and the third parties with whom we interact, most office-based employees were asked to work from home. We have now implemented a return-to-work policy which provides for a hybrid of remote and in-office work, and we expect to operate on such a semi-virtual basis for at least the first half of 2022, pending the future direction of the COVID-19 pandemic. Essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including key personnel in our laboratories. For those employees on-site, we continue to maintain shift schedules for our laboratories and a modified office layout to increase spacing capabilities, reduce inter-office risks and allow for business continuity. We have increased cleaning protocols throughout our entire facility and have implemented procedures regarding office visitors to better protect our employees.
Clinical trials - We are currently in Phase 2 of our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial and are working with trial sites to mitigate COVID-19-related disruptions in order to help ensure the safety of patients and healthcare professionals. In addition, we have deployed home-health services which include home visits for patient monitoring and reporting, as well as the utilization of a centralized laboratory for testing enrolled patients. Despite our best efforts, disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted, and may continue to result, in delays in enrolling our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial. In addition,
we could experience additional disruptions in conducting or completing this trial or other planned clinical trials and the incurrence of unforeseen costs as a result of these delays. We will continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the pheNIX trial and our other clinical trials and will make adjustments, as needed.
Preclinical studies - All of our ongoing and planned preclinical studies at external CROs are progressing and we have accelerated shipments of reagents and supplies to avoid any disruption of activities. However, it is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic may have an impact in the future on our CROs’ ability to complete critical studies required for the progression of these programs. In addition, any planned or potential meetings with the FDA or other regulatory authorities about any of our development programs could be delayed as these regulatory bodies respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
At this time, there is significant uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic and impact of related responses and as a result, we expect that the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business, revenues, results of operations and financial condition. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on financial markets and the global economy, the spread of variants, the effectiveness of vaccines and vaccine distribution efforts and the effectiveness of other actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors- The COVID-19 pandemic has and could continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. We recorded $34.0 million in collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to the termination of the Novartis collaboration and license agreement (see Notes 15 and 16 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding revenue recognition discussions).
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have consisted solely of research and development costs and general and administrative costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, and include:
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, and other third parties that conduct research, preclinical activities and clinical trials on our behalf as well as CMOs and our internal technical operations team that manufactured our product candidates for use in our preclinical testing, our ongoing clinical trials with HMI-102, HMI-103 and HMI-203 and additional potential future clinical trials;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees and related travel expenses;
•the costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials; and
•facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred.
We typically use our employee and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, license payments made under our licensing arrangements or other internal costs to specific development programs or product candidates. These costs are included in other research and development expenses in the table below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate or development program:
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase for the foreseeable future as we advance our clinical trials for the treatment of PKU, including our Phase 2 pheNIX clinical trial with HMI-102 and our Phase 1 pheEDIT clinical trial with HMI-103, advance Phase 1 juMPStart clinical trial with HMI-203 for the treatment of Hunter syndrome, advance our product candidate HMI-202 for the treatment of MLD into clinical trials, advance our product candidate HMI-104 from our GTx-mAb platform for the treatment of PNH through IND-enabling studies and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates. However, as a result of our agreement with Oxford, we will be purchasing process development services and manufacturing product runs from the newly created OXB Solutions and therefore would expect an increase in these costs with an offsetting decrease in the total costs to run our manufacturing facility, including employee-related costs for the 125 manufacturing employees transitioning to the new company.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials or preclinical studies of our product candidates in development or any other future product candidate we may develop or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates in development and any other future product candidate we may develop will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of current clinical trials, as well as of any future clinical trials, and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
•uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
•any delays in clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including the safety and efficacy results, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals; and
•the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, human resources, legal, business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters;
professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs, rent expense, maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support increased research and development activities relating to our product candidates in development and any other future product candidates we may develop. We also have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Our interest income has decreased due to lower balances in invested funds and lower yields on invested funds during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our interest income.
Income Taxes
Since our inception in 2015, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in any year or for our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $367.2 million and $369.0 million, respectively, that expire at various dates through 2041. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $43.2 million and $10.8 million, respectively, that expire at various dates through 2041. Included in the $43.2 million of federal research and development credit carryforwards is $33.9 million of orphan drug credit carryforwards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition-We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Accordingly, we recognize revenue when we obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. For example, a significant portion of
revenue recognized from our collaboration with Novartis, prior to termination, was related to research and preclinical development work performed whereby revenue was recognized as the underlying services were performed using a cost-to-cost model. Prior to the termination of the collaboration with Novartis, we measured the extent of progress towards completion based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified performance obligation.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses-As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel and vendors to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to contract research organizations and other third parties in connection with performing research activities on our behalf and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf and contract manufacturing organizations in connection with producing product for our clinical studies, vendors in connection with preclinical development activities and vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical supplies.
We base our accrued expenses related to preclinical and clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials and CMOs that manufacture product for our research and development activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are sometimes subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical milestones. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from expenses actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differs from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company,” which we are, to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”) to improve financial reporting by requiring more timely recording of credit losses on loans and other financial instruments held by financial institutions and other organizations. ASU 2016-13 requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. ASU 2016-13 also requires enhanced disclosures to help investors and other financial statement users better understand significant estimates and judgments used in estimating credit losses, as well as the credit quality and underwriting standards of an organization’s portfolio. ASU 2016-13 is effective for us beginning January 1, 2023, with early application permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $34.0 million, compared to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Collaboration revenue in both periods includes the recognition of deferred revenue and reimbursements incurred under the collaboration and license agreement with Novartis, which terminated in August 2021. As a result of the termination, all remaining deferred revenue pursuant to the collaboration and license agreement with Novartis was recognized as we performed the final activities under the collaboration and license agreement through the termination date. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized collaboration revenue of $3.2 million related to the Stock Purchase Agreement with Pfizer.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $93.1 million, compared to $100.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $7.3 million was primarily due to a decrease of $17.9 million in direct research expenses for HMI-102 including costs incurred with our CRO to conduct and manage our Phase 2 pheNIX clinical trial due to a slow-down in trial enrollment, as well as lower manufacturing costs in 2021 as we had accelerated procurement of raw materials and production runs in 2020 to mitigate potential supply chain interruptions and relied entirely on our internal manufacturing capabilities for clinical supply in 2021. Additionally, there was a $6.4 million decrease in direct research expenses related to our other development-stage programs, primarily due to higher spending on HMI-202 in the prior year as we completed IND-enabling studies. Partially offsetting these decreases was a $3.6 million and a $5.3 million increase in direct research expenses for HMI-103 and HMI-203, respectively, as we advanced both programs into the clinic in 2021, as well as an increase of $6.9 million in employee-related costs due to additional employee headcount to support our ongoing development programs, research initiatives, technology platform and manufacturing capabilities resulting in increases in salaries, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation expense and recruiting costs. Other research and development costs related to
laboratory supplies and research materials for our early-stage research programs and platform-development work increased $1.3 million over the prior year.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $36.8 million, compared to $32.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $4.2 million was due to an increase of $1.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, an increase in market research of $0.5 million, an increase in legal costs and other professional fees of $1.4 million, and an increase in recruiting fees of $0.5 million. Additionally, there was an increase in licensed software of $0.5 million and an increase in insurance costs of $0.4 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in facilities costs of $0.8 million.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million, compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was the result of lower invested balances in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as significantly lower yields on invested funds.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $95.8 million, compared to $128.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net loss was primarily due to the increase in collaboration revenue discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs and our capital expenditures will increase in connection with conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates, contracting with CMOs to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our research and development laboratories and manufacturing facility, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations. However, as a result of our agreement with Oxford, we will be purchasing process development services and manufacturing product runs from the newly created OXB Solutions and therefore would expect an increase in these costs with an offsetting decrease in the total costs to run our manufacturing facility, including employee-related costs for the 125 manufacturing employees transitioning to the new company. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain from additional equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements, or other sources.
We do not currently have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of common stock, the sale of preferred stock and through an up-front payment and funding of research candidates from a collaboration partner. Since our inception in 2015, we have raised approximately $721 million in aggregate net proceeds through our IPO in April 2018, follow-on public offerings of common stock in April 2019 and April 2021, proceeds from the sale of common stock under an “at-the-market” sales agreement, equity investments, preferred stock financings and our newly announced agreement with Oxford. Included in our net proceeds is $130.0 million up-front cash payment from our agreement with Oxford, $50.0 million from a former collaboration partner, comprised of an up-front payment of $35.0 million and a $15.0 million equity investment and a $60.0 million equity investment from Pfizer through a private placement transaction.
Equity Offerings and ATM Program
In March 2020, we entered into a sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell common stock with an aggregate value of up to $150 million in "at-the-market" offerings, or the ATM, under our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237131) filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020 (as amended, the Shelf). In connection with the filing of certain post-effective amendments to the Shelf, the sales agreement prospectus supplement now covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate $148.4 million of our common stock. Sales of common stock, if any, pursuant to the Sales Agreement, may be made in sales deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a) of the Securities Act, including sales made directly through The Nasdaq Global Market or on any other existing trading market for our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 114,914 shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement, at an average price of
approximately $14.00 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of approximately $1.5 million after deducting an aggregate commission of 3% and issuance costs. As of December 31, 2021, there was $148.4 million of common stock remaining available for sale under the ATM.
On April 6, 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock. We sold 6,596,306 shares of our common stock at a price of $7.58 per share and received net proceeds of approximately $49.7 million, after deducting estimated offering expenses. Under the terms of the underwriting agreement, we also granted the underwriter an option exercisable for 30 days to purchase up to an additional 989,445 shares of our common stock at a price of $7.58 per share. The underwriters did not exercise this option. The offering closed on April 9, 2021. The shares were sold pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, as amended, and a related prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on April 8, 2021.
Oxford Biomedica Solutions Transaction
On March 10, 2022, we closed our previously announced transaction with Oxford pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, dated as of January 28, 2022, by and among Homology, OXB Solutions and Oxford, whereby, among other things, we and Oxford have agreed to collaborate to operate OXB Solutions, which will provide AAV vector process development and manufacturing to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. Pursuant to the terms of the agreements entered into as part of the OXB Solutions Transaction, we have assigned and transferred to OXB Solutions all of our assets that are primarily used in the manufacturing of AAV vectors for use in gene therapy or gene editing products. Oxford paid us $130.0 million upfront and invested $50.0 million to fund the new company in exchange for an 80-percent ownership stake, while we own 20 percent of the new company. See Part I, Item 1. “Manufacturing-Oxford Biomedica Solutions Transaction” and Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the OXB Solutions Transaction.
Strategic Collaborations and Investments
On November 9, 2020, we entered into the Stock Purchase Agreement with Pfizer, pursuant to which Pfizer purchased 5,000,000 shares of our common stock through a private placement transaction at a purchase price of $12.00 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $60.0 million. Under the Stock Purchase Agreement, Pfizer was granted an exclusive right of first refusal, or ROFR, for a 30-month period beginning on the date of the closing of the private placement to negotiate a potential collaboration on the development and commercialization of HMI-102 and HMI-103. Pfizer may exercise its right of first refusal under the ROFR one time for each of HMI-102 and HMI-103 during the ROFR period. In addition to the ROFR, the Stock Purchase Agreement provided for an information sharing committee comprised of representatives of each company which will serve as a forum for sharing information regarding the development of HMI-102 and HMI-103 during the ROFR period. Additionally, Pfizer has designated a member to join our Scientific Advisory Board to participate in matters related to the development of these programs.
See Part I, Item 1. “Strategic Collaborations-Collaboration and License Agreement with the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc.” for additional information about our collaboration and license agreement with Novartis.
Cash Flows
Our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $155.9 million and $217.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We had no indebtedness as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the period presented:
Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2021
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $109.8 million, driven primarily by our net loss of $95.8 million as we incurred expenses associated with research and development activities on HMI-102, HMI-103 and HMI-203, including the Phase 2 pheNIX trial for our HMI-102 program, and research activities on other applications for our technology, a decrease in deferred revenue of $33.4 million, and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $2.4 million. These items were partially offset by net non-cash expenses of $27.8 million, which includes $17.2 million of stock-based compensation expense and $8.4 million of depreciation expense.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $50.8 million, attributable to maturities of short-term investments of $49.0 million, offset by purchases of short-term investments of $97.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $2.4 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $52.2 million, primarily due to $49.7 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in follow-on public offerings and $1.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock pursuant to ATM financing.
Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $94.3 million, driven primarily by our net loss of $128.7 million as we incurred expenses associated with research and development activities on HMI-102, HMI-103, HMI-203, and HMI-202, including the Phase 1/2 pheNIX trial for our HMI-102 program, and research activities on other applications for our technology, and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $2.3 million. These items were partially offset by net non-cash expenses of $22.8 million, which includes $13.2 million of stock-based compensation expense and $8.0 million of depreciation expense, and a decrease in working capital of $13.8 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $204.9 million, attributable to maturities of short-term investments of $228.6 million, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments of $20.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $3.7 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $53.1 million, primarily due to $52.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in a private placement transaction with Pfizer in November 2020.
Funding Requirements
Though our operating expenses decreased in 2021, research and development expenses are expected to increase in future years in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial with HMI-102, our Phase 1 pheEDIT clinical trial with HMI-103, our Phase 1 juMPStart clinical trial with HMI-203 and our preclinical activities including IND-enabling studies, continue to optimize our manufacturing processes, engage with CMOs and initiate additional human clinical trials. However, as a result of our agreement with Oxford, we will be purchasing process development services and manufacturing product runs from the newly created OXB Solutions and therefore would expect an increase in these costs with an offsetting decrease in the total costs to run our manufacturing facility, including employee-related costs for the 125 manufacturing employees transitioning to the new company. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We also expect our capital expenditures to increase as we expand our operations.
Specifically, our expenses will increase as we:
•pursue the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates;
•pursue the preclinical and clinical development of other product candidates based on our gene therapy and gene editing technology;
•further optimize our manufacturing processes and contract with CMOs to support our preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates;
•operate our business in our facility with expanded research and development labs and manufacturing suites and purchase additional equipment for our operations;
•in-license or acquire the rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional personnel in research, manufacturing and regulatory and clinical development as well as management personnel; and
•expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our operations as a public company.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with the $130.0 million received from Oxford in March 2022, will enable us to fund our current projected operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2024, including, subject to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, additional development activities related to our Phase 1/2 pheNIX clinical trial with HMI-102, the advancement of HMI-103, our lead gene editing product candidate for PKU, through IND-enabling studies and into a Phase 1/2 clinical trial, HMI-203, our lead CNS/PNS gene therapy product candidate for Hunter syndrome, through IND-enabling studies and into a Phase 1/2 clinical trial, and HMI-202, a CNS gene therapy product candidate for MLD, through additional preclinical studies as we focus on optimizing the program’s vector, the continued optimization of our manufacturing processes and the expansion of our intellectual property portfolio. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical drugs, it is difficult to estimate with certainty the amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress, costs and results of our preclinical development and initial clinical trials for HMI-102, including the pheNIX Phase 1/2 clinical trial, HMI-103, HMI-203, and HMI-202;
•the progress, costs and results of our additional research and preclinical development programs in gene therapy and gene editing;
•the costs, scope and timing of process development and manufacturing activities with CMOs associated with our lead product development programs and other programs we advance through preclinical and clinical development;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other agreements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of any product candidates that we may derive from our platform technology or any other product candidates that we may develop;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies; and
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property-related claims.
In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as the pandemic continues to evolve globally. See “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” above and “Risk Factors- The COVID-19 pandemic has and could continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Until such time, if ever, that we can generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration agreements, other third-party funding, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and marketing and distribution arrangements.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our shareholders as common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had non-cancelable operating leases with total future minimum lease payments of $48.2 million, of which $3.3 million will be payable in 2022. These minimum lease payments exclude our share of the facility operating expenses, real-estate taxes and other costs that are reimbursable to the landlord under the leases. These payments are for operating leases for our corporate headquarters in Bedford, Massachusetts, comprised of office, manufacturing and lab space that expire in June 2030 and May 2032. Under the terms of the OXB Solutions Transaction, our leases for this space has been assigned to OXB Solutions effective March 10, 2022, with Homology subleasing a portion of lab and office space back from the newly created company. This assignment significantly decreases our contractual obligations under our operating leases to approximately $3.8M through 2024 when the sublease expires. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our lease agreement.
Our agreements with certain institutions to license intellectual property include potential milestone and success fees, sublicense fees, royalty fees, licensing maintenance fees, and reimbursement of patent maintenance costs that we may be required to pay. Our agreements to license intellectual property include potential milestone payments that are dependent upon the development of products using the intellectual property licensed under the agreements and contingent upon the achievement of development or regulatory approval milestones, as well as commercial milestones. These potential obligations are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the timing and likelihood of such potential obligations are not known with certainty. For further information regarding these agreements, please see Part I, Item 1. “Strategic Collaborations.”
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs and CMOs for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior notice of 30 days and, as a result, are not included in the table of contractual obligations above. Pursuant to the terms of the Supply Agreement with OXB Solutions entered into in March 2022, we have agreed to purchase from OXB Solutions at least 50% of our clinical supply requirements of AAV-based products during the initial term of the Supply Agreement. We are committed to purchase a minimum of nine production runs and $12.5 million of process development services in 2021 under the Supply Agreement. The Supply Agreement will provide for an initial term of three years, which period may be extended for an additional one-year term. After the initial term, we will have the right to terminate the Supply Agreement for convenience or other reasons specified in the Supply Agreement upon prior written notice. Either Party may terminate the Supply Agreement upon an uncured material breach by the other Party or upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of the other Party.