Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 detail and year-over-year comparisons between these years. For a comparison of our results for 2020 to our results of 2019 and other financial information related to 2019, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021 filed with the SEC on March 25, 2021.
Business Overview
Foot Locker, Inc. leads the celebration of sneaker and youth culture around the globe through a portfolio of brands including Foot Locker, Lady Foot Locker, Kids Foot Locker, Champs Sports, Eastbay, atmos, WSS, Footaction, and Sidestep. As of January 29, 2022, we operated 2,858 primarily mall-based stores, as well as stores in high-traffic urban retail areas and high streets, in 28 countries across the United States, Canada, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Asia, as well as websites and mobile apps. Our purpose is to inspire and empower youth culture around the world, by fueling a shared passion for self-expression and creating unrivaled experiences at the heart of the global sneaker community.
Foot Locker, Inc. uses its omni-channel capabilities to bridge the digital world and physical stores, including order-in-store, buy online and pickup-in-store, and buy online and ship-from-store, as well as e-commerce. We operate websites and mobile apps aligned with the brand names of our store banners including footlocker.com, kidsfootlocker.com, champssports.com, atmosusa.com, shopwss.com and related e-commerce sites in the various international countries that we operate. These sites offer some of the largest online product selections and provide a seamless link between e-commerce and physical stores. We also operate the websites for eastbay.com and eastbayteamsales.com.
Segment Reporting
Our operating segments are identified according to how our business activities are managed and evaluated by our chief operating decision maker, our CEO. We have three operating segments, North America, Europe, Middle East, and Africa (“EMEA”), and Asia Pacific. Our North America operating segment includes the results of the following banners operating in the U.S. and Canada: Foot Locker, Kids Foot Locker, Lady Foot Locker, Champs Sports, WSS, and Footaction, including each of their related e-commerce businesses, as well as our Eastbay business that includes internet, catalog, and team sales. Our EMEA operating segment includes the results of the following banners operating in Europe: Foot Locker, Sidestep, and Kids Foot Locker, including each of their related e-commerce businesses. Our Asia Pacific operating segment includes the results of Foot Locker and Kids Foot Locker operating in Australia, New Zealand, and Asia as well as the related e-commerce businesses. The Asia Pacific operating segment also includes the operations of our newly acquired atmos business operating primarily in Japan. We have further aggregated these operating segments into one reportable segment based upon their shared customer base and similar economic characteristics.
COVID-19 Update
COVID-19 had a significant effect on overall economic conditions in the various geographic areas in which we have operations. We have made best efforts to comply with all precautionary measures as directed by health authorities and local, state, and national governments. The following represents a summary of the percentage of time that our stores were open, although there were significant regional variances by quarter and other restrictions that reduced operating hours as well:
We continue to monitor the outbreak of COVID-19 and other closures, or closures for a longer period of time, reduced operating hours, capacity limitations, and social distancing may be required to help ensure the health and safety of our team members and our customers. COVID-19 has and may continue to have an effect on ports and trade, as well as global travel.
2021 Form 10-K Page 20
Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the duration of business disruption, and reduced customer traffic, the related financial affect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but may materially affect our business for the foreseeable future.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to reporting our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we report certain financial results that differ from what is reported under GAAP. In the following tables, we have presented certain financial measures and ratios identified as non-GAAP such as Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (“EBIT”), adjusted EBIT, adjusted EBIT margin, adjusted income before income taxes, adjusted net income, adjusted net income margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share, Return on Invested Capital (“ROIC”), and free cash flow.
We present these non-GAAP measures because we believe they assist investors in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that are not indicative of our core business or which affect comparability. These non-GAAP measures are also useful in assessing our progress in achieving our long-term financial objectives.
Additionally, we present certain amounts as excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations, which are also considered non-GAAP measures. Throughout the following discussions, where amounts are expressed as excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations, such changes are determined by translating all amounts in both years using the prior-year average foreign exchange rates. Presenting amounts on a constant currency basis is useful to investors because it enables them to better understand the changes in our businesses that are not related to currency movements.
We estimate the tax effect of the non-GAAP adjustments by applying a marginal rate to each of the respective items. The income tax items represent the discrete amount that affected the period.
The non-GAAP financial information is provided in addition to, and not as an alternative to, our reported results prepared in accordance with GAAP. Presented below is a reconciliation of GAAP and non-GAAP results discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please see the non-GAAP reconciliations for free cash flow in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section.
Reconciliation
2021 Form 10-K Page 21
Notes on Non-GAAP Adjustments:
(1) For 2021, 2020, and 2019, we recorded impairment and other charges of $172 million ($130 million after tax), $117 million ($93 million after tax), and $65 million ($49 million after tax), respectively. See the Impairment and Other Charges section for further information.
(2) During 2021 and 2020, we recorded non-cash gains of $290 million ($214 million after tax) and $190 million, ($140 million after-tax), respectively, related to our minority investment in GOAT. Our investment in GOAT is measured using the fair value measurement alternative and received additional funding at higher valuations than our initial investment. Also, in 2021, we made a minority investment in a public entity, Retailors Ltd. This investment was at a discount of $9 million ($7 million after tax) to the initial public offering price. Due to the infrequent and nonrecurring nature of the gains related to GOAT and discount on the initial public offering of our Retailors Ltd investment, the income was removed to arrive at non-GAAP earnings. This caption also included $7 million ($5 million after tax) related to the finalization of the insurance claim associated with the prior year social unrest. In 2019, Other income, net represented a gain recorded in connection with acquisition of a Canadian distribution center lease and related assets. The tax expense related to this transaction was largely offset by the release of a valuation allowance. See the Other Income, net section for further information.
(3) We recorded tax charges related to the revaluation of certain intellectual property rights, pursuant to a non-U.S. advance pricing agreement of $11 million and $25 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(4) We recognized tax benefits of $1 million, $5 million, and $2 million during the fourth quarters of 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, in connection with tax law changes in the Netherlands.
(5) On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted tax reform legislation that included a broad range of business tax provisions. In 2017, we recognized a $99 million provisional charge for the mandatory deemed repatriation of foreign sourced net earnings and a corresponding change in our permanent reinvestment assertion under ASC 740-30. During 2018, we reduced the provisional amounts by $28 million. This adjustment represented a $21 million reduction in the deemed repatriation tax and a $7 million benefit related to IRS accounting method changes and timing difference adjustments. In 2019, we recorded a charge for $2 million, which reflected an adjustment to U.S. tax on foreign income. We exclude the discrete U.S. tax reform effect from our Adjusted diluted EPS as it does not reflect our ongoing tax obligations under U.S. tax reform.
(6) Valuation allowances were established against deferred tax assets associated with certain foreign tax losses.
Return on Invested Capital
ROIC is presented below and represents a non-GAAP measure. We believe ROIC is a meaningful measure because it quantifies how efficiently we generated operating income relative to the capital we have invested in the business. ROIC, subject to certain adjustments, is also used as a measure in executive long-term incentive compensation.
The closest U.S. GAAP measure to ROIC is Return on Assets (“ROA”) and is also presented below. ROA is calculated as net income attributable to Foot Locker, Inc. in the fiscal year divided by the two-year average of total assets. ROA increased to 11.8% as compared with 4.7% in the prior year. This increase reflected higher profit in 2021, partially offset by higher average total assets.
2021 Form 10-K Page 22
Our ROIC increased to 17.4% in 2021, as compared with 8.6% in the prior year. The overall increase in ROIC reflected an increase in adjusted return after taxes as the prior year was negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
(1) Represents net income attributable to Foot Locker, Inc. of $893 million, $323 million, and $491 million divided by average total assets of $7,589 million, $6,816 million, and $5,205 million for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Calculation of ROIC:
(1) Represents the add-back to operating income driven by the hypothetical interest expense we would incur if the property under our operating leases were owned or accounted for as finance leases. Calculated using the discount rate for each operating lease recorded as a component of rent expense. Operating lease interest is added back to adjusted net operating profit in the ROIC calculation to account for differences in capital structure between us and our competitors.
(2) The adjusted income tax expense represents the marginal tax rate applied to adjusted net operating profit for each of the periods presented.
(3) For 2019, the amount represents the average total assets for 2019 and 2018, excluding the 2019 right-of-use assets of $2,899 million for comparability to prior periods before the adoption of the new lease accounting standard.
(4) For 2019, the amount represents the average of the right-of-use assets as of February 1, 2020 and February 3, 2019 (the date of the adoption of the new lease standard) of $2,899 million and $3,148 million, respectively.
Overview of Consolidated Results
2021 Form 10-K Page 23
Highlights of our 2021 financial performance include:
● We delivered the highest sales in Foot Locker’s history as an athletic retailer, despite COVID-19’s continued effect on overall economic conditions in the various geographic areas in which we have operations. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, stores across all of our brands in North America, EMEA, and Asia Pacific were temporarily closed for various periods during the year. As a result, our stores were open for approximately 89% of operating days in 2021, as compared with 75% in 2020.
● Apparel and accessory sales penetration increased to 20% as compared with 16% last year, our footwear sales represented 80% of sales, down from last year’s penetration as we had increased success with branded and private-label apparel offerings.
● Our stores channel sales rebounded well from the extensive store closures in 2020 as customer traffic returned to shopping centers and malls.
● Sales per square foot increased to $540, increasing from $510 per square foot in 2019.
● Our direct-to-customers sales channel decreased to 21.5% of total sales in 2021 as shoppers began returning to our stores. Despite the decrease, this penetration exceeded the 16.1% in 2019. Our ongoing investments in our omnichannel ecosystem, including consumer experience and supply chain capabilities, have been instrumental in delivering a seamless customer experience.
● As noted in the table below, sales and comparable sales both increased in 2021. Our stores generated significant increases, which more than offset the reduction in the direct-to-customers channel.
● Gross margin, as a percentage of sales, increased to 34.4% as a result of decreased promotions, in part due to increased demand and relatively short supply of certain merchandise.
● SG&A expenses were 20.7% of sales, a decrease of 30 basis points as compared with the prior year. The decrease reflected higher sales in the current year, partially offset by the effect of prior-year COVID-19 payroll subsidies from local governments and higher incentive compensation.
● Net income attributable to Foot Locker, Inc. was $893 million, or $8.61 diluted earnings per share, both of which were record highs in the Company’s history as an athletic retailer. The $570 million increase from the prior-year period reflected higher sales and gross margin which outpaced increases in expenses, as well as an increase in other income primarily from fair value adjustments to our minority investments. Adjusted net income was $807 million, or $7.77 diluted earnings per share, as compared with adjusted net income of $296 million, or $2.81 diluted earnings per share, in the prior year.
Highlights of our financial position for the year ended January 29, 2022 include:
● Our financial performance allowed us to use capital to strengthen our business through the strategic acquisitions of WSS and atmos.
● We ended the year in a strong financial position. At year end, we had $347 million of cash and cash equivalents, net of debt. Cash and cash equivalents at January 29, 2022 were $804 million. Our ending cash balance declined, in part, due to the $1,056 million paid for the WSS and atmos acquisitions.
● Net cash provided by operating activities was $666 million as compared with $1,062 million last year.
● During the year we amended our $600 million asset-based revolving credit facility to reduce the interest rate and commitment fees. No amounts were outstanding at January 29, 2022.
● In 2021, we completed the sale of $400 million of 4% Senior Notes due 2029 for net proceeds of $395 million and repaid the remaining $98 million of our 8.5% debentures.
● Cash capital expenditures during 2021 totaled $209 million and were primarily directed to the remodeling or relocation of 182 stores, the build-out of 57 new stores, and conversion of 63 Footaction stores to other banners, as well as other technology and infrastructure projects.
● During 2021, we returned $449 million of cash to our shareholders. Dividends totaling $101 million were declared and paid during 2021, and 7,545,544 shares were repurchased under our share repurchase program at a cost of $348 million. In February 2022, our Board of Directors approved a dividend increase to $0.40 per share payable on April 29, 2022, and authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $1.2 billion. These initiatives demonstrate our commitment to delivering meaningful returns to our shareholders.
2021 Form 10-K Page 24
Sales
All references to comparable-store sales for a given period relate to sales of stores that were open at the period-end and had been open for more than one year. The computation of consolidated comparable sales also includes direct-to-customers sales. Stores opened or closed during the period are not included in the comparable-store base; however, stores closed temporarily for relocation or remodeling are included. Stores that were temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic are also included in the computation of comparable-store sales. Computations exclude the effect of foreign currency fluctuations.
Sales from acquired businesses that include inventory are included in the computation of comparable-store sales after 15 months of operations. Accordingly, sales of WSS and atmos have been excluded from the computation of comparable-store sales.
The information shown below represents certain sales metrics by sales channel:
In 2021, sales increased by 18.7% to $8,958 million from sales of $7,548 million in 2020. Excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, sales increased by 17.8% as compared with 2020. Sales from our newly acquired WSS and atmos banners totaled $244 million for 2021 since their respective acquisition dates.
The comparisons to 2020 were significantly affected by the closures necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic, as most of the stores were closed during the first quarter of 2020 when our stores were only open for 48% of the total available operating days. While our operating days improved overall, there remained geographic differences throughout 2021. Our stores in Canada and Europe were heavily affected in the first quarter and into the second quarter, while Asia Pacific experienced significant closures during the third quarter. During 2021, EMEA and Asia Pacific stores operated 76% of the available days, whereas North America operated 95% of the available days.
While sales increased significantly compared with 2020, we also exceeded 2019 sales. Excluding the effect of foreign exchange rate fluctuations, sales increased by 10.3%, as compared with 2019 and excluding the sales from acquired businesses, sales increased 7.3% as compared with 2019.
Comparable sales increased by 15.4% as compared with the prior year, by operating segment the increases were 13.7%, 21.7%, and 21.3% for North America, EMEA, and Asia Pacific, respectively. Our stores channel generated significant increases for both the quarter and year-to-date periods, which was a result of the temporary closure of our stores across all of our banners around the world during the first half of 2020, partially offset by a decline in our direct-to-customer channel as shopping navigated back to physical locations. While our digital penetration declined as compared with 2020, our penetration is higher than our historical levels. We continue to leverage our technology platforms to improve the digital experience for our customers. Our significant improvement also reflected increased consumer demand for exciting and new product offerings and the effect of government stimulus.
For the combined channels, sales excluding foreign currency fluctuations increased in all operating segments. North America increased by 15.8%, EMEA increased by 19.9%, and Asia Pacific increased by 51.9%, as compared with 2020. Our North American operating segment’s sales, while strong, were negatively affected by our decision to wind down our Footaction banner in 2021. Sales growth in North America was led by Foot Locker, Champs Sports, and Kids Foot Locker. WSS contributed sales of $195 million. Within EMEA, sales for the Foot Locker banner increased, partially offset by a decline due to the Runners Point shutdown. Sidestep’s sales increased slightly as pressure from the COVID-19 closures was less significant and aided by growth in e-commerce sales.
2021 Form 10-K Page 25
Asia Pacific generated a significant increase in 2021 from strong performance in both Australia and New Zealand, coupled with growth in Asia, based on expansion in that region including the acquisition of atmos during the fourth quarter. Our e-commerce growth in this region was significant, partially as a result of atmos’ business which has a high digital penetration.
From a product perspective for the combined channels, the sales increase in 2021 was across all families of business - footwear, apparel, and accessories. Footwear sales benefited from increases in sales across all wearer segments, led by kids and women’s shoes. Similarly, apparel sales increased across the board, with men’s and kids’ apparel sales driving the most significant gains. The continued athleisure and fitness trend, coupled with exciting product offerings, drove the significant increase in apparel sales as compared with last year.
Gross Margin
Gross margin is calculated as sales minus cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the cost of merchandise, freight, distribution costs including related depreciation expense, shipping and handling, occupancy and buyers’ compensation. Occupancy costs include rent (including fixed common area maintenance charges and other fixed non-lease components), real estate taxes, general maintenance, and utilities.
The gross margin rate increased in 2021 by 550 basis points as compared to the prior year, reflecting a higher merchandise margin rate since we were significantly less promotional than a year ago, due to increased demand and relatively short supply of certain merchandise.
The occupancy rates in 2021 and 2020 were affected by COVID-19 related rent abatements. Upon agreement with our landlord partners, we secured $16 million of rent savings due to rent abatements in 2021, as compared with $67 million in the prior year. We record rent abatements in occupancy expense when the negotiations are completed and the leases are modified. Excluding the rent savings, occupancy and buyers’ compensation expense rate would have been lower in the current year due to the strong sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (SG&A)
SG&A increased by $264 million, or 16.6%, in 2021, as compared with the prior year. As a percentage of sales, the SG&A rate decreased by 30 basis points as compared with 2020. Excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, SG&A increased by $247 million, or 15.6%, as compared with the prior year. WSS, which was acquired in mid-September 2021, and atmos, acquired at the beginning of the fourth quarter, contributed $54 million to SG&A.
SG&A, as a percentage of sales, was affected by the higher sales in the current year and the effect of prior-year COVID-19 related matters. SG&A in 2021 and 2020 included payroll subsidies from local governments of $16 million and $71 million, respectively. The higher prior year amounts related to the fact that we continued to pay our employees throughout most of the first quarter of 2020 despite the temporary store closures. In 2021, personal protective equipment expense decreased by $8 million, as compared with the prior year.
Incentive compensation expense increased by $14 million in 2021, as compared with the prior year, as we outperformed the targeted results in 2021.
Excluding the above-mentioned items and the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, SG&A increased primarily representing variable expenses associated with higher sales.
2021 Form 10-K Page 26
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $21 million and excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, depreciation and amortization increased by $20 million as compared with the prior year. The increase was related to the additions of WSS and atmos which contributed $11 million, as well as acceleration of depreciation and amortization associated with the Footaction closures.
Operating Results
Division profit was $1,161 million, or 13.0% of sales in 2021. This compares with $491 million, or 6.5% of sales, for the prior year. The significant increase in sales, due primarily to store closures in the prior year, resulted in expense leverage and coupled with gross margin improvement generated a meaningful increase in our results. The division profit results from our recent acquisitions were accretive but not significant to the overall results.
Impairment and Other Charges
During the second quarter of 2021, we conducted an impairment review of Footaction stores as a result of our decision to convert part of the stores to other existing banner concepts and close the remaining stores. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets and recorded non-cash charges to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets for approximately 60 locations, and accelerated tenancy charges for leases we expect to terminate prior to the end of the lease term. In connection with this, we recorded charges totaling $66 million. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we conducted an impairment review for approximately 100 underperforming stores. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets and recorded non-cash charges of $26 million to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets for approximately 55 of these stores.
During 2021, we recorded non-cash charges of $42 million related to the write-down of certain minority investments representing full write downs on three of the Company’s minority investments due to the investee’s continued losses and updated estimate of value.
In connection with the acquisitions, we recorded acquisition and integration costs of $24 million, which primarily represented investment banking and integration consulting fees related to the WSS and atmos acquisitions.
In 2021, we recorded $15 million of lease termination costs related to the closure of certain stores. We also recorded $4 million of reorganization expense related to Footaction and certain support functions, as well as $2 million of intangible asset impairment on the Footaction tradename.
Losses related to social unrest represented inventory losses, damages to store property, repairs, and other costs incurred in connection with the riots that affected certain parts of the United States and Canada during the second quarter of 2020. In addition to the $10 million of insurance settlement income we recorded in 2020, in 2021, we reached a final insurance settlement for an additional $13 million, of which $7 million is classified in impairment and other charges, as it relates to the book value of property losses recorded in 2020.
See Note 4, Impairment and Other Charges for additional information.
Corporate Expense
Corporate expense consists of unallocated general and administrative expenses as well as depreciation and amortization related to our corporate headquarters, centrally managed departments, unallocated insurance and benefit programs, certain foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, and other items. Depreciation and amortization included in corporate expense was $34 million, $24 million, and $19 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
2021 Form 10-K Page 27
The allocation of corporate expense to the operating divisions is adjusted annually based upon an internal study; accordingly, the allocation increased by $19 million in 2021, thus reducing corporate expense. Excluding the corporate allocation change, corporate expense increased by $77 million as compared with 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher information technology and support expenses coupled with higher incentive compensation expense.
Interest (Expense) Income, net
We recorded net interest expense of $14 million in 2021 as compared with $7 million in 2020. Interest income decreased as a result of lower average interest rates and a reduction in our cash and cash equivalents. Additionally, interest expense increased due to the issuance of the 4% Senior Notes due 2029 coupled with the interest associated with the WSS finance lease obligations.
Other Income, net
One of our minority investments, GOAT, which is measured using the fair value alternative, received funding at higher valuations in both 2021 and 2020 resulting in non-cash gains of $290 million and $190 million, respectively. As of January 29, 2022, the fair value of our investment in GOAT totaled $613 million.
During 2021, we invested $68 million to take a common stock minority stake in a public entity, Retailors, Ltd., which is traded on the Tel Aviv stock exchange. This investment was at a discount of $9 million to the initial public offering price, resulting in a non-cash gain of $9 million. Changes in fair value represented on our Retailors, Ltd. investment also generated non-cash gains of $68 million during the year.
Other income, net also included $10 million in royalty income, $7 million of net benefit income related to our pension and postretirement programs, $7 million of insurance recoveries in excess of the losses sustained in the prior year related to the social unrest, and $3 million of income related to our equity method investments.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for 2021 was 28.1%, as compared with 34.5% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to significantly higher pretax income earned in the United States reducing the effect of nondeductible expenses on the effective tax rate. We recorded a $11 million tax charge in 2021 related to the revaluation of certain intellectual property rights pursuant to a non-U.S. advance pricing agreement. During 2020, a $25 million tax charge was recognized in connection with the revaluation. Additionally, during the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2020, we recorded tax benefits of $1 million and $5 million, respectively, in connection with tax law changes in the Netherlands.
We regularly assess the adequacy of provisions for income tax contingencies in accordance with the applicable authoritative guidance on accounting for income taxes. As a result, reserves for unrecognized tax benefits may be adjusted due to new facts and developments, such as changes to interpretations of relevant tax law, assessments from taxing authorities, settlements with taxing authorities, and lapses of statutes of limitations. The changes in the tax reserves were not significant in 2021 and 2020.
2021 Form 10-K Page 28
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our primary source of liquidity has been cash flow from operations, while the principal uses of cash have been to fund inventory and other working capital requirements; finance capital expenditures related to store openings, store remodelings, internet and mobile sites, information systems, and other support facilities; quarterly dividend payments; and interest payments; and fund other cash requirements to support the development of our short-term and long-term operating strategies.
We generally finance real estate with operating leases. We believe our cash, cash equivalents, future cash flow from operations, and amounts available under our credit agreement will be adequate to fund these requirements.
We may also repurchase our common stock through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, or otherwise. Such repurchases if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. On February 24, 2022, the Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $1.2 billion of its common stock replacing the prior authorization. The new share repurchase program does not have an expiration date.
On February 24, 2022, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.40 per share to be paid on April 29, 2022. This dividend represents a 33% increase from the previous quarterly per share amount of $0.30 per share and represents a return to the rate in effect prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On October 5, 2021, Foot Locker, Inc. completed the sale of $400 million 4% Senior Notes due 2029. We received net proceeds from the offering of $395 million, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount. The proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes.
Any material adverse change in customer demand, fashion trends, competitive market forces, or customer acceptance of our merchandise mix and retail locations, uncertainties related to the effect of competitive products and pricing, our reliance on a few key suppliers for a significant portion of our merchandise purchases and risks associated with global product sourcing, economic conditions worldwide, the effects of currency fluctuations, uncertainties caused by COVID-19, as well as other factors listed under the heading “Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” could affect our ability to continue to fund our liquidity needs from business operations.
Maintaining access to merchandise that we consider appropriate for our business may be subject to the policies and practices of our key suppliers. Therefore, we believe that it is critical to continue to maintain satisfactory relationships with these key suppliers. We purchased 87% and 91% of our merchandise from our top five suppliers in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Approximately 68% and 75% was purchased from one supplier, Nike, Inc., in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Beginning with the fourth quarter of 2022, we do not expect any one supplier to represent more than 55% of merchandise purchases.
Planned capital expenditures in 2022 are $275 million. Included in the planned amount is $190 million dedicated to real estate projects designed to elevate our customers’ in-store experience. The real estate total includes the remodeling or expansion of approximately 100 existing stores, as well as the planned opening of approximately 110 new stores, primarily representing the continued expansion of our off-mall community-based and “power” store formats, which provide pinnacle retail experiences that deliver connected customer interactions through service, experience, product, and a sense of community. The real estate total includes continued expansion in Asia and funding for 30 WSS stores. Finally, the capital plan for 2022 also includes $85 million primarily for digital and supply chain initiatives. We have the ability to revise and reschedule some of the anticipated capital expenditure program should our financial position require it.
Operating Activities
The amount provided by operating activities reflects income adjusted for non-cash items and working capital changes. Adjustments to net income for non-cash items include non-cash gains, non-cash impairment and other charges, depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, and share-based compensation expense. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 as compared with the prior year reflected higher outflows associated with working capital changes, partially offset by higher net income and non-cash gains.
2021 Form 10-K Page 29
Our merchandise inventory levels last year were significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and during the current year we experienced some easing of the inventory shortages, however slowdowns in the supply chain environment were challenging and we expect this to continue during 2022.
During 2021 and 2020, we did not make any contributions to our U.S. qualified pension plan, as compared with $55 million made in 2019. No U.S. qualified pension plan contributions were required due to the strong funded position of the plan. The amounts and timing of pension contributions are dependent on several factors, including asset performance.
As of January 29, 2022, we have withheld $12 million of lease and lease-related payments as we continue to negotiate rent deferrals or abatements with our landlords for the period that our stores were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash paid for income taxes was $387 million, $100 million, and $201 million for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased significantly in 2021 primarily due our acquisitions of WSS and atmos. During the third quarter, we completed the acquisition of WSS for $737 million, net of cash acquired and in the fourth quarter, we completed the acquisition of atmos for $319, net of cash acquired.
Capital expenditures in 2021 increased to $209 million from $159 million in the prior year. During 2021, we completed the remodeling or relocation of 182 existing stores, the build-out of 57 new stores, and conversion of 63 Footaction stores to other banners.
Additionally, we invested $118 million in other companies primarily comprised of an additional $33 million investment in GOAT, a $68 million investment in a public entity (Retailors Ltd.), and $9 million invested in various limited partner venture capital funds managed by Black fund managers, who are committed to advancing diverse-led businesses as part of our Leading in Education and Economic Development (LEED) initiative.
In connection with the shutdown of the Runners Point banner completed last year, during the first quarter of 2021, we sold the former headquarters, resulting in proceeds of $3 million. As noted above, related to our insurance claim from the social unrest in 2020, we received proceeds of $4 million related to property and equipment loss.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities consisted primarily of our return to shareholders initiatives, including our share repurchase program and cash dividend payments, as follows:
Cash provided by financing activities included of the sale of $400 million aggregate principal amount of our 4% Senior Notes due 2029, for which we received $395 million in proceeds, net of the initial purchasers’ discount. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we repaid $98 million of principal related to the 8.5% debentures as well as paying $4 million related to our finance lease obligations.
During 2021, we repurchased 7,545,544 shares of common stock for $348 million under our share repurchase program, whereas in the prior year we spent $37 million to repurchase shares. We also declared and paid $101 million in dividends representing quarterly rates of $0.20 per share for the first two quarters of 2021 and an increase to $0.30 per share for the third and fourth quarters.
2021 Form 10-K Page 30
We paid $11 million to satisfy tax withholding obligations relating to the vesting of share-based equity awards during 2021. Offsetting this amount were proceeds received in connection with employee stock programs of $17 million.
Free Cash Flow (non-GAAP measure)
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and as an indication of our financial strength and our ability to generate cash. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). We believe the presentation of free cash flow is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to evaluate the cash generated from underlying operations in a manner similar to the method used by management. Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, it should not be considered a substitute for income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. It should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash flow provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to free cash flow.
Capital Structure
On July 14, 2020, we amended our then-existing revolving credit agreement to provide for a $600 million asset-based revolving credit facility that is scheduled to mature on July 14, 2025 (as amended, “2020 Credit Agreement”). Under the 2020 Credit Agreement interest was determined, at our option, by either (1) the eurodollar rate, which is determined by reference to LIBOR, plus a margin of 1.75% to 2.25% per annum, or (2) the base rate, which is determined by reference to the federal funds rate, plus a margin of 0.75% to 1.25%, in each case. In addition, the commitment fee was 0.50% per annum on the unused portion of the commitments under the 2020 Credit Agreement.
In 2021, we entered into an amendment to the 2020 Credit Agreement (“Amended Credit Agreement”). The amendment provides for, among other things, (i) reducing the interest rates and commitment fees applicable to the loans and commitments, respectively, as described below, and (ii) reducing the “floor” applicable. The amendment provides that the interest rate applicable to loans drawn under the credit facility will be equal to, at our option, either a base rate, determined by reference to the federal funds rate, plus a margin of 0.25% to 0.75% per annum, or a Eurodollar rate, determined by reference to LIBOR, plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.75% per annum, in each case, depending on availability under the Amended Credit Agreement. In addition, we will pay a commitment fee of 0.25% per annum on the unused portion of the commitments under the Amended Credit Agreement. On October 1, 2021, WSS became a party to, and bound by the terms of the Amended Credit Agreement and other applicable Loan Documents (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) as guarantor. No events of default occurred during 2021.
Credit Rating
As of March 24, 2022, our corporate credit ratings from Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service are BB+ and Ba1, respectively. In addition, Moody’s Investors Service has rated our senior unsecured notes Ba2.
Debt Capitalization and Equity
2021 Form 10-K Page 31
Net debt capitalization percent increased to 44.4% as compared with 35.2% in the prior year, primarily reflecting higher debt and lower cash and cash equivalents.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities that expose us to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. Also, our financial policies prohibit the use of derivatives for which there is no underlying exposure.
In connection with the sale of various businesses and assets, we may be obligated for certain lease commitments transferred to third parties and pursuant to certain normal representations, warranties, or indemnifications entered into with the purchasers of such businesses or assets. Although the maximum potential amounts for such obligations cannot be readily determined, we believe that the resolution of such contingencies will not significantly affect our consolidated financial position, liquidity, or results of operations.
We also operate certain stores for which lease agreements are in the process of being negotiated with landlords. Although there is no contractual commitment to make these payments, it is likely that leases will be executed.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our responsibility for integrity and objectivity in the preparation and presentation of the financial statements requires application of appropriate accounting policies. Generally, our accounting policies and methods are those specifically required by U.S. GAAP. Included in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies note in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” is a summary of the most significant accounting policies. In some cases, we are required to calculate amounts based on estimates for matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe the following to be the most critical of those accounting policies that necessitate subjective judgments.
Merchandise Inventories and Cost of Sales
Merchandise inventories for our stores are valued at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method (“RIM”). The RIM is used by retail companies to value inventories at cost and calculate gross margins due to its practicality. Under the RIM, cost is determined by applying a cost-to-retail percentage across groupings of similar items, known as departments. The cost-to-retail percentage is applied to ending inventory at its current owned retail valuation to determine the cost of ending inventory on a department basis.
The RIM is a system of averages that requires estimates and assumptions regarding markups, markdowns and shrink, among others, and as such, could result in distortions of inventory amounts. Judgment is required for these estimates and assumptions, as well as to differentiate between promotional and other markdowns that may be required to correctly reflect merchandise inventories at the lower of cost or market. Reserves are established based on current selling prices when the inventory has not been marked down to market. The failure to take permanent markdowns on a timely basis may result in an overstatement of cost under the retail inventory method. The decision to take permanent markdowns includes many factors, including the current retail environment, inventory levels, and the age of the item. We believe this method and its related assumptions, which have been consistently applied, to be reasonable.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term for those arrangements where there is an identified asset and the contract conveys the right to control its use. Our lease term includes options to extend or terminate a lease only when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option.
As most of our leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, we use our incremental borrowing rates based on the remaining lease term to determine the present value of future lease payments. Our incremental borrowing rate for a lease is the rate of interest we would have to pay on a collateralized basis to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments under similar terms. Our incremental borrowing rate is calculated as the weighted average risk-free (sovereign) rate plus a spread to reflect our current unsecured credit rating plus the fees to borrow under our credit facility. The weighted average risk-free (sovereign) rates were based on the Treasury BVAL rates curve in Bloomberg. In the regions that we have stores, rates were developed for 3, 5, 7, 10, and 15 years. The weighting given to each region was determined by the number of stores in each region.
2021 Form 10-K Page 32
The spread to reflect our current credit rating represented the spread between U.S. Treasury rates and Bloomberg’s USD BVAL curve for non-financial companies with the Company’s credit rating. The fees to borrow represent the facility fees paid on the Company’s revolving credit facility.
Impairment of Long-Lived Tangible Assets and Right-of-Use Assets
We perform an impairment review when circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived tangible assets and right-of-use assets may not be recoverable (“a triggering event”). Our policy for determining whether a triggering event exists comprises the evaluation of measurable operating performance criteria and qualitative measures at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of cash flows of other assets and liabilities, which is generally at the store level. We also evaluate for triggering events at the banner level. If an impairment review is necessitated by the identification of a triggering event, we determine the fair value of the asset using assumptions predominately identified from our historical performance and our long-range strategic plans. To determine if an impairment exists, we compare the carrying amount of the asset with the estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, we measure the amount of the impairment by comparing the carrying amount of the asset group with its estimated fair value.
The estimation of fair value is measured by discounting expected future cash flows using a risk adjusted discount rate and by using a market approach to determine current lease rates. Future expected cash flows are based upon estimates that, if not achieved, may result in significantly different results.
During the second quarter of 2021, we conducted an impairment review of Footaction stores as a result of our decision to convert part of the stores to other existing banner concepts and close the remaining stores. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets and recorded non-cash charges to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets for approximately 60 locations, and accelerated tenancy charges for leases we expect to terminate prior to the end of the lease term. In connection with this, we recorded charges totaling $66 million in 2021. Additionally, we performed an impairment review for certain underperforming stores during the fourth quarter and recorded non-cash impairment charges totaling $26 million for approximately 55 stores.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. Additionally, contingent consideration is recorded at fair value on the acquisition date and classified as a liability. We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible, intangible assets, and contingent consideration based, in part, upon internal estimates of cash flows and considering the report of a third-party valuation expert retained to assist the Company and requires a significant amount of management judgment. The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities as well as contingent consideration requires estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. For intangible assets acquired in a business combination, we typically determine the fair value based on the discounted cash flow model, specifically the relief from royalty method for intangible assets related to a tradename. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets and contingent consideration include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of future cash flows, growth rates, customer attrition rates, discount rates and useful lives. Changes to the assumptions used to estimate the fair value could affect the recorded amounts of the assets acquired and the resultant goodwill, as well as the depreciation and amortization expense recorded in future periods.
Recoverability of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually during the first quarter of each fiscal year or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. The review of impairment consists of either using a qualitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the assets is less than their respective carrying values or a one-step qualitative impairment test.
In performing the qualitative assessment, we consider many factors in evaluating whether the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable, including declines in our stock price and market capitalization in relation to the book value of the Company and macroeconomic conditions affecting retail. If, based on the results of the qualitative assessment, it is concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, additional quantitative impairment testing is performed. The quantitative test requires that the carrying value of each reporting unit be compared with its estimated fair value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is greater than its fair value, a goodwill impairment charge will be recorded for the difference (up to the carrying value of goodwill).
2021 Form 10-K Page 33
We use a discounted cash flow approach to determine the fair value of a reporting unit. The determination of discounted cash flows of the reporting units and assets and liabilities within the reporting units requires significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, earnings before depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures forecasts. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual results could differ from those estimates. We evaluate the merits of each significant assumption, both individually and in the aggregate, used to determine the fair value of the reporting units, as well as the fair values of the corresponding assets and liabilities within the reporting units.
The annual impairment test in 2021 did not result in the recognition of impairment.
Pension and Postretirement Liabilities
We review all assumptions used to determine our obligations for pension and postretirement liabilities annually with our independent actuaries, taking into consideration existing and future economic conditions and our intentions with regard to the plans. The assumptions used are:
Long-Term Rate of Return
The expected rate of return on plan assets is the long-term rate of return expected to be earned on the plans’ assets and is recognized as a component of pension expense. The rate is based on the plans’ weighted-average target asset allocation, as well as historical and future expected performance of those assets. The target asset allocation is selected to obtain an investment return that is sufficient to cover the expected benefit payments and to reduce the variability of future contributions. The expected rate of return on plan assets is reviewed annually and revised, as necessary, to reflect changes in the financial markets and our investment strategy.
The weighted-average long-term rate of return used to determine 2021 pension expense was 5.3%.
A decrease of 50 basis points in the weighted-average expected long-term rate of return would have increased 2021 pension expense by approximately $3 million. The actual return on plan assets in a given year typically differs from the expected long-term rate of return, and the resulting gain or loss is deferred and amortized into expense over the average life expectancy of the inactive participants.
Discount Rate
An assumed discount rate is used to measure the present value of future cash flow obligations of the plans and the interest cost component of pension expense and postretirement income. The cash flows are then discounted to their present value and an overall discount rate is determined. The discount rate for our U.S. plans are determined by reference to the Bond:Link interest rate model based upon a portfolio of highly-rated U.S. corporate bonds with individual bonds that are theoretically purchased to settle the plan’s anticipated cash outflows. The discount rate selected to measure the present value of our Canadian benefit obligations is similar to the approach used for the U.S. plan and was determined by reference to the Canadian Rate:Link interest rate model.
The weighted-average discount rates used to determine the 2021 benefit obligations related to our pension and postretirement plans was 3.2% for both plans.
Changing the weighted-average discount rate by 50 basis points would have changed the accumulated benefit obligation of the pension plans at January 29, 2022 by approximately $30 million and $33 million, depending on if the change was an increase or decrease, respectively. A decrease of 50 basis points in the weighted-average discount rate would have increased or decreased the accumulated benefit obligation on the postretirement plan by approximately $1 million depending on if the change was an increase or decrease, respectively.
Trend Rate
We maintain two postretirement medical plans, one covering certain executive officers and key employees (“SERP Medical Plan”), and the other covering all other team members. With respect to the SERP Medical Plan, a 100-basis point change in the assumed health care cost trend rate would not significantly change this plan’s accumulated benefit obligation. With respect to the postretirement medical plan covering all other team members, there is limited risk to us for increases in health care costs since, beginning in 2001, new retirees have assumed the full expected costs and then-existing retirees have assumed all increases in such costs.
2021 Form 10-K Page 34
Mortality Assumptions
The mortality assumption used to value our 2021 U.S. pension obligations was the Pri-2012 mortality table with generational projection using MP-2021 for both males and females, while in the prior year the obligation was valued using the Pri-2012 mortality table with generational projection using MP-2020. We used the 2014 CPM Private Sector mortality table projected generationally with Scale CPM-B for both males and females to value our Canadian pension obligations for 2021.
For the SERP Medical Plan, the mortality assumption used to value the 2021 obligation was updated to the PriH-2012 table with generational projection using MP-2021. Each year we update this assumption to the most recent study from the Society of Actuaries.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, which is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We are required to estimate taxable income for future years by taxing jurisdiction and to use our judgment to determine whether to record a valuation allowance for part or all of a deferred tax asset. Estimates of taxable income are based upon our long-range strategic plans. A 1% change in the overall statutory tax rate for 2021 would have resulted in a change of $5 million to the carrying value of the net deferred tax liability and a corresponding charge or credit to income tax expense depending on whether the tax rate change was a decrease or an increase.
We have operations in multiple taxing jurisdictions, and we are subject to audit in these jurisdictions. Tax audits by their nature are often complex and can require several years to resolve. Accruals of tax contingencies require us to make estimates and judgments with respect to the ultimate outcome of tax audits. Actual results could vary from these estimates.
Our effective tax rates could be affected by numerous factors, such as level and geographic mix of income and losses, acquisitions, investments, intercompany transactions, foreign currency exchange rates, our stock price, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, changes in the laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations related to tax, including changes to the global tax framework and other laws and accounting rules in various jurisdictions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Descriptions of the recently issued accounting principles are included in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies note in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”