Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors
” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 24, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure stockholders that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the search for a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $3,386,750, which consists of operating costs of $1,781,700, a $490,184 increase in the fair value of the forward purchase units, offset by a decrease in the fair value of the warrant liability of $5,653,850, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $3,115, and interest income of $1,669.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 14, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,000,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 3,397,155 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our sponsor and Metric, generating gross proceeds of $5,095,733.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $2,081,180 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. The Company incurred $22,517,064 of offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering, comprised of $640,129 of deal costs, $2,335,058 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $11,491,877 of excess fair value of the Class B Common Stock issued to our founders.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,082,893 which adjusted net income of $3,386,750 for a $490,184 increase in the fair value of the forward purchase units, a $989,674 allocation of deferred offering costs for warrant liability at the Initial Public Offering, offset by a decrease in the fair value of the warrant liability of $5,653,850, changes in operating assets and liabilities of $290,867 an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $3,115, and interest income of $1,669.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $230,004,784. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,062,653 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor, Metric or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $4,600,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue
additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern one year from the date these financial statements are issued. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement for an optional payment to an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on September 13, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A common stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. The statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per Class A redeemable common stock and loss per non-redeemable
common stock following the two-class
method of income per common stock. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the Class A redeemable common stock and non-redeemable
common stock, the Company first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of stock. This
is calculated using the total net income (loss) less any dividends paid. For purposes of calculating net income (loss) per share, any remeasurement of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption was treated as dividends paid to the public stockholders. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of stock, the Company split the amount to be allocated using a ratio of 61% for the Class A redeemable common stock and 39% for the non-redeemable
common stock for the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, reflective of the respective participation rights.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounted for the 14,897,155 warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the private placement warrants (collectively, the “Warrants”) as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the Warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Such guidance provides that because the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, each warrant must be recorded as a liability. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that the Company record a derivative liability upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. Accordingly, the Company classified each warrant as a liability at its fair value and the warrants were allocated a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Units equal to its fair value. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date. With each such re-measurement,
the warrant liability will be adjusted to fair value, with the change in fair value recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The Company will reassess the classification at each balance sheet date. If the classification changes as a result of events during the period, the warrants will be reclassified as of the date of the event that causes the reclassification.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06,
“Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.