Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Flame Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on October 16, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. Our sponsor is Flame Acquisition Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability and an affiliate of certain of our officers and directors.
Our registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on February 24, 2021. On March 1, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, which included 3,875,000 units issued pursuant to the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $16.7 million, inclusive of $10,062,500 in deferred underwriting commissions pursuant to the Business Combination Marketing Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC and Intrepid Partners, LLC (the “Business Combination Marketing Agreement”).
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,750,000 warrants to our initial stockholders, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.75 million.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering and the private placement, $287.5 million of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in our initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants in the private placement were placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the trust account that may be released to us to pay our taxes, if any, the funds held in the trust account will not be released until the earliest to occur of: (a) the completion of our initial business combination, (b) the redemption of any public shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (A) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to allow redemption in connection with our initial business combination or redeem 100% of our public shares if we do not complete our initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial
business combination activity and (c) the redemption of our public shares if we are unable to complete our initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering, subject to applicable law. Based on current interest rates, we expect that interest income earned on the trust account (if any) will be sufficient to pay our income and franchise taxes.
If we are unable to complete our initial business combination by March 1, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but no more than ten business days thereafter subject to lawfully available funds therefor, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes as well as expenses relating to the administration of the trust account (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 was related to our formation, the preparation for our initial public offering, and since the closing of our initial public offering, the search for a target for its initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from October 16, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,657, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $4.3 million, which consisted of approximately $1.7 million in general and administrative expenses, approximately $0.3 million of financing costs, approximately $18,000 of initial fair value adjustment on promissory note, approximately $84,000 of change in fair value of promissory note, and approximately $6.2 million of change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, partly offset by approximately $16,000 in gain on investments held in Trust Account. The $0.3 million in financing costs represents offering costs allocated to warrant liabilities and expensed at the time of the initial public offering.
We classify the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and Private Placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant instruments to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in fair value of warrants was an increase of approximately $6.2 million.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.3 million in cash and working capital deficit of approximately $0.4 million. We are also subject to a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution requirement if we do not complete our initial business combination by March 1, 2023. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. Management’s plans to address this need for capital are discussed in Note 1 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our plans to raise capital and to consummate our initial business combination by March 1, 2023 may not be successful. In addition, management is currently evaluating the continuing impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and its effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
do not include any adjustments that might result from our inability to continue as a going concern.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In November 2020, our founders acquired 7,187,500 founder shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000. Our sponsor purchased 4,671,875 founder shares, FL Co-Investment
purchased 1,257,813 founder shares and Intrepid Financial Partners purchased 1,257,812 founder shares. Also in November 2020, our sponsor transferred 434,375 founder shares to our independent director nominees and certain individuals, including Gregory D. Patrinely, our Chief Financial Officer and Secretary, at their original purchase price. Simultaneously with such transfer, each of FL Co-Investment
and Intrepid Financial Partners transferred 13,125 founder shares to our sponsor, respectively, at their original purchase price.
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of:
(a) one year after the completion of our initial business combination or (b) subsequent to our initial business combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and other similar transactions) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading
day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property. Any permitted transferees would be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements of our initial stockholders with respect to any founder shares.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,750,000 private placement warrants to our initial stockholders, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.75 million.
Each private placement warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants to the initial stockholders was added to the proceeds from our initial public offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a business combination by March 1, 2023, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. Except as set forth below, the private placement warrants will be non-redeemable
for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the initial stockholders or their permitted transferees.
The purchasers of the private placement warrants agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their private placement warrants (except to permitted transferees) until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination.
Related Party Loans
On November 25, 2020, our founders agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to our initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Initial Promissory Note”). This loan was non-interest
bearing and payable upon the completion of our initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $75,000 under the Initial Promissory Note and repaid the Initial Promissory Note to our founders in full as of March 31, 2021. On March 1, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note as a working capital loan to our sponsor in the principal amount of $365,000 to cover additional expenses related to our initial public offering (the “First Working Capital Loan”). This loan was non-interest
bearing and is payable upon the completion of the initial business combination. Our sponsor assigned approximately $145,000 of the First Working Capital Loan to our Chief Financial Officer and Secretary, Gregory Patrinely, approximately $110,000 of the First Working Capital Loan to our Vice President, Anthony Duenner, and approximately $110,000 of the First Working Capital Loan to our Vice President, Caldwell Flores. As of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed approximately $365,000 under the First Working Capital Loan. On December 27, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note as a working capital loan to our sponsor in the principal amount of $800,000 to cover additional expenses related to our search for the initial business combination (the “Second Working Capital Loan”). This loan was non-interest
bearing and payable upon the completion of the initial business combination. As of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed approximately $800,000 under the Second Working Capital Loan. In March 2022, we issued an unsecured promissory note as a working capital loan to our sponsor in the principal amount of $335,000 to cover additional expenses related to our search for the initial business combination. This loan is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the initial business combination, and has been fully drawn down.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender (the “Working Capital Loans”). Such warrants are identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. Each of the First Working Capital Loan and Second Working Capital Loan are Working Capital Loans and may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of our sponsor. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. As of December 31, 2021, we had drawn down approximately $1,165,000 of such loans.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of our founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the founder shares), are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up
period. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $5.75 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our initial public offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $10.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters pursuant to the Business Combination Marketing Agreement. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 28,750,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet.
Under ASC 480-10-S99,
we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of our initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which, resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares.
Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in our initial public offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 22,125,000 shares of our Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since they are not yet exercisable. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 14,375,000 common stock warrants to investors in our initial public offering and issued 7,750,000 private placement warrants. All of our outstanding warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The difference between the fair market value of the private placement warrants and the initial purchase consideration thereof is recorded as compensation expense. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Warrants were initially and subsequently measured at fair value using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. Beginning as of December 31, 2021, the fair value of Public Warrants have been measured based on the listed market price of such Public Warrants. The private placement warrants are measured by reference to the listed trading price of the Public Warrants at December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06 to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024, and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently reviewing what impact, if any, adoption will have on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.