Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“2021 Form 10-K”). This 2021 Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from any future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this 2021 Form 10-K.
Overview
Fluent, Inc. ("we," "us," "our," "Fluent," or the "Company"), is an industry leader in data-driven digital marketing services. We primarily perform customer acquisition services by operating highly scalable digital marketing campaigns, through which we connect our advertiser clients with consumers they are seeking to reach. We deliver data and performance-based marketing executions to our clients, which in 2021 included over 500 consumer brands, direct marketers and agencies across a wide range of industries, including Media & Entertainment, Financial Products & Services, Health & Wellness, Retail & Consumer, and Staffing & Recruitment.
We attract consumers at scale to our owned digital media properties primarily through promotional offerings and employment opportunities. To register on our sites, consumers provide their names, contact information and opt-in permission to present them with offers on behalf of our clients. Approximately 90% of these users engage with our media on their mobile devices or tablets. Our always-on, real-time capabilities enable users to access our media whenever and wherever they choose.
Once users have registered with our sites, we integrate proprietary direct marketing technologies and analytics to engage them with surveys, polls and other experiences, through which we learn about their lifestyles, preferences and purchasing histories. Based on these insights, we serve targeted, relevant offers to them on behalf of our clients. As new users register and engage with our sites and existing registrants re-engage, we believe the enrichment of our database expands our addressable client base and improves the effectiveness of our performance-based campaigns.
Once users have registered with our sites, we integrate proprietary direct marketing technologies to engage them with surveys, polls and other experiences, through which we learn about their lifestyles, preferences and purchasing histories. Based on these insights, we serve targeted, relevant offers to them on behalf of our clients. As new users register and engage with our sites and existing registrants re-engage, we believe the enrichment of our database expands our addressable client base and improves the effectiveness of our performance-based campaigns.
Since our inception, we have amassed a large, proprietary database of first-party, self-declared user information and preferences. We have permission to contact the majority of users in our database through multiple channels, such as email, home address, telephone, push notifications and SMS text messaging. We leverage this data in our performance offerings primarily to serve advertisements that we believe will be relevant to users based on the information they provide, and in our lead generation offerings to provide our clients with users' contact information so that our clients may communicate with them directly. We continue to leverage our existing database into new revenue streams, including utilization-based models, such as programmatic advertising.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded revenue of $329.3 million and $310.7 million, net (loss) of ($10.1) million and net income of $2.2 million, and adjusted EBITDA of $23.2 million and $41.2 million, respectively. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure equal to net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure based on US GAAP, adding back income taxes, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, and other adjustments. See our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this 2021 Form 10-K, and for further discussion and analysis of our results of operations. For further discussion of adjusted EBITDA, including a reconciliation from net income (loss), see "Definitions, Use and Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Trends Affecting our Business
Traffic Quality Initiative and Increased Monetization
A key challenge for our business is identifying and accessing media sources that are of high quality and able to attract targeted users to our media properties. As our business has grown, we have attracted larger and more sophisticated clients to our platform. To further increase our value proposition to clients and to fortify our leadership position in relation to the evolving regulatory landscape of our industry, we commenced a traffic quality initiative (the "Traffic Quality Initiative") in 2020. Our Traffic Quality Initiative curtailed the volume of lower quality affiliate traffic that we source beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We believe that significant value can be created by improving the quality of traffic we source to our media properties, through higher participation rates on our sites, leading to higher conversion rates, resulting in increased monetization and ultimately increasing revenue and media margin. We are also pursuing various revenue initiatives that enable us to grow revenue with existing user traffic volume. During the second half of 2021, we increased the monetization of consumer traffic through multiple channels, including growth in the Winopoly business (d/b/a Fluent Sales Solutions), strong client demand in the staffing and recruitment vertical, and an internally-developed email capability which enables us to re-engage consumers who have registered on our owned media properties. These new and/or improved revenue streams offset reductions in traffic volume year-over-year from our Traffic Quality Initiative. Through these initiatives, our business has become less dependent on traffic volume to generate revenue growth.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we increased media spend with major digital media platforms and revised bidding strategies for affiliate traffic. These strategies yielded lower margins initially, with the intent to optimize spend for improved profitability in future periods. In the second half of 2021, we both increased our spend and improved profitability with our major digital media platforms compared to the second quarter, though profitability was still below our historical levels achieved through affiliate marketing. The mix and profitability of our media channels, strategies and partners is likely to be dynamic and reflect evolving market dynamics and the impact of our Traffic Quality Initiative. Volatility of affiliate supply sources, consolidation of media sources, changes in search engine, email and text message blocking algorithms and increased competition for available media have made the process of growing our traffic under our evolving quality standards challenging during 2021 and may continue to do so in the future. As we test and scale new media channels, strategies and partners, we may determine that certain sources initially able to provide us profitable quality traffic may not be able to maintain our quality standards over time, and we may need to discontinue, or direct a modification of the practices of, such sources, which could reduce profitability.
Seasonality and Cyclicality
Our results are subject to fluctuation as a result of seasonality and cyclicality in our and our clients’ businesses. For example, our fourth fiscal quarter ending December 31 is typically characterized by higher advertiser budgets, which can be somewhat offset by seasonal challenges of lower availability and/or higher pricing for some forms of media during the holiday period. Further, as reflected in historical data from the Interactive Advertising Bureau ("IAB"), industry spending on internet advertising has generally declined sequentially in the first quarter of the calendar year from the fourth quarter. Similar to the industry overall, some of our clients have lower advertising budgets during our first fiscal quarter ending March 31; however, we believe that the breadth of industries in which our clients operate provides us with some insulation from these fluctuations.
In addition to variations in budgets from quarter to quarter, certain clients have budgets that start stronger at the beginning of quarterly or monthly periods, may reach limits during such periods and then may have needs to satisfy their performance objectives at the end of such periods. Beyond these budgetary constraints and buying patterns of clients, other factors affecting our business may include macroeconomic conditions affecting the digital media industry and the various client verticals we serve.
COVID-19 Update
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. At this time, our operations have not been significantly impacted by the global economic impact of COVID-19, and we have taken appropriate measures to ensure that we are able to conduct our business remotely without significant disruptions. The economic uncertainty caused by COVID-19 has had varying degrees of impact on some of our advertiser clients in certain industry verticals over the course of the pandemic. For example, the staffing and recruitment vertical has generally exhibited reduced pricing and/or demand since the onset of the pandemic and has subsequently recovered to a varying degree. On the other hand, demand from certain advertisers in other verticals, such as streaming services and mobile gaming, increased during the pandemic and has since remained strong. With the proliferation of COVID-19 vaccinations in the U.S. during the second quarter of 2021, we have seen a substantial recovery in the staffing and recruitment vertical. There may continue to be additional shifts in pricing and/or demand among our clients, as the trajectory of the pandemic and future economic outlook remain uncertain.
We implemented company-wide work-from-home beginning on March 13, 2020. During the second quarter of 2021, we opened our headquarters to employees that meet health protocols and voluntarily choose to work in the office. We continue to monitor evolving trends and guidance for COVID-19 safety protocols and, in light of the historically dynamic and competitive market for hiring and retaining employees, flexible workplace choices for employees. Currently, our office remains open for those who voluntarily choose to work there. In light of the forgoing factors, we anticipate maintaining a flexible approach to workplace choices in the near term. While we believe we have adapted well to a work-from-home environment, COVID-19 increases the likelihood of certain risks of disruption to our business, such as the incapacity of certain employees or system interruptions, which could lead to diminishment of our regular business operations, technological capacity and cybersecurity capabilities, as well as operational inefficiencies and reputational harm.
Please see "Results of Operations" below and "Item 1A. Risk Factors - Unfavorable global economic conditions, including as a result of health and safety concerns around the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations," for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Definitions, Use and Reconciliation of Non-US GAAP Financial Measures
We report the following non-US GAAP measures:
Media margin is defined as that portion of gross profit (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) reflecting variable costs paid for media and related expenses and excluding non-media cost of revenue. Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) represents revenue minus cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). Media margin is also presented as percentage of revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss), excluding (1) income taxes, (2) interest expense, net, (3) depreciation and amortization, (4) share-based compensation expense, (5) loss on early extinguishment of debt, (6) accrued compensation expense for Put/Call Consideration, (7) goodwill impairment, (8) write-off of intangible assets, (9) acquisition-related costs, (10) restructuring and other severance costs, and (11) certain litigation and other related costs.
Adjusted net income is defined as net income (loss) excluding (1) Share-based compensation expense, (2) loss on early extinguishment of debt, (3) accrued compensation expense for Put/Call Consideration, (4) goodwill impairment, (5) write-off of intangible assets, (6) acquisition-related costs, (7) restructuring and other severance costs, and (8) certain litigation and other related costs. Adjusted net income is also presented on a per share (basic and diluted) basis.
Below is a reconciliation of media margin from gross profit (exclusive of depreciation and amortization), which we believe is the most directly comparable US GAAP measure:
(1) Represents the portion of cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) not attributable to variable costs paid for media and related expenses.
Below is a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA from net income (loss), which we believe is the most directly comparable US GAAP measure:
(1) Included in year ended December 31, 2021 is a net expense of $3,201 related to the Full Winopoly Acquisition.
(2) Balance includes compensation expense related to non-competition agreements entered into as a result of an acquisition.
Below is a reconciliation of adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share from net income (loss), which we believe is the most directly comparable US GAAP measure:
(1) Included in year ended December 31, 2021 is a net expense of $3,201 related to the Full Winopoly Acquisition.
(2) Balance includes compensation expense related to non-competition agreements entered into as a result of an acquisition.
We present media margin, media margin as a percentage of revenue, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share as supplemental measures of our financial and operating performance because we believe they provide useful information to investors. More specifically:
Media margin, as defined above, is a measure of the efficiency of the Company’s operating model. We use media margin and the related measure of media margin as a percentage of revenue as primary metrics to measure the financial return on our media and related costs, specifically to measure the degree by which the revenue generated from our digital marketing services exceeds the cost to attract the consumers to whom offers are made through our services. Media margin is used extensively by our management to manage our operating performance, including evaluating operational performance against budgeted media margin and understanding the efficiency of our media and related expenditures. We also use media margin for performance evaluations and compensation decisions regarding certain personnel.
Adjusted EBITDA, as defined above, is another primary metric by which we evaluate the operating performance of our business, on which certain operating expenditures and internal budgets are based and by which, in addition to media margin and other factors, our senior management is compensated. The first three adjustments represent the conventional definition of EBITDA, and the remaining adjustments are items recognized and recorded under US GAAP in particular periods but might be viewed as not necessarily coinciding with the underlying business operations for the periods in which they are so recognized and recorded. These adjustments include litigation and other related costs associated with legal matters outside the ordinary course of business, including costs and accruals related to the NY AG and FTC matters described above under Part III - Legal Proceedings. Items are considered one-time in nature if they are non-recurring, infrequent or unusual and have not occurred in the past two years or are not expected to recur in the next two years, in accordance with SEC rules. There were no adjustments for one-time items in the periods presented.
Adjusted net income, as defined above, and the related measure of adjusted net income per share exclude certain items that are recognized and recorded under US GAAP in particular periods but might be viewed as not necessarily coinciding with the underlying business operations for the periods in which they are so recognized and recorded. We believe adjusted net income affords investors a different view of the overall financial performance of the Company than adjusted EBITDA and the US GAAP measure of net income (loss).
Media margin, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share are non-GAAP financial measures with certain limitations regarding their usefulness. They do not reflect our financial results in accordance with GAAP, as they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our condensed consolidated statements of operations. Accordingly, these metrics are not indicative of our overall results or indicators of past or future financial performance. Further, they are not financial measures of profitability and are neither intended to be used as a proxy for the profitability of our business nor to imply profitability. The way we measure media margin, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income may not be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies and may not be identical to corresponding measures used in our various agreements.
Results of Operations
Summary
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020:
•
Revenue increased 6% to $329.3 million, from $310.7 million.
•
Net loss was $10.1 million, or $0.13 per share, compared to net income of $2.2 million, or $0.03 per share.
•
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) of $85.5 million, a decrease of 11% over December 31, 2020, and representing 26% of revenue.
•
Media margin decreased 9% to $100.4 million, representing 30.5% of revenue, from $110.4 million.
•
Adjusted EBITDA decreased 44% to $23.2 million, based on a net loss of $10.1 million, from $41.2 million, based on net income of $2.2 million.
•
Adjusted net income decreased $12.1 million to $7.6 million, or $ 0.09 per share, from $19.7 million, or $ 0.25 per share.
The following tables show our results of operations for the periods presented and express the relationship of certain line items as a percentage of revenue for those respective periods:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue increased $18.5 million, or 6%, to $329.3 million, from $310.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
•
Growth in the Winopoly business (d/b/a Fluent Sales Solutions), which considerably expanded its operating scale year-over-year through increased use of contracted call center personnel. This expanded capacity enabled higher volumes of outbound consumer contacts, including consumers who have registered on Fluent's owned media properties, as well as consumer leads sourced from third parties.
•
Strong client demand in the staffing and recruitment vertical, resulting in improvements in both pricing and volume in 2021 compared to 2020.
•
Expanded CRM capabilities, specifically an internally-developed email capability which enables us to re-engage consumers who have already registered on our owned media properties. This revenue stream, which began in the second half of 2021, comes at high margins.
Each of the foregoing factors has served to increase monetization of consumer traffic, which has offset reductions in traffic volume year-over-year, stemming from our Traffic Quality Initiative. Through these initiatives, our business has become less dependent on traffic volume to generate revenue growth. In tandem with the foregoing, in 2021 we sourced higher volumes of traffic from major digital media platforms, with reduced lower-quality affiliate traffic compared 2020. These trends are anticipated to continue in the near future as we continue to test and scale media channels, strategies and partnerships. See discussion below under "Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization)." We ultimately anticipate higher volumes of traffic in future periods as we seek to replace the loss of lower-quality affiliate traffic, though the timing of such increases remains uncertain.
At the onset of the continuing COVID-19 pandemic, certain advertisers in industry verticals such as staffing and recruitment and financial products and services exhibited reduced pricing and/or demand and subsequently recovered and expanded to varying degrees since that time. Demand from certain advertisers in other verticals, such as streaming services and mobile gaming, increased during the pandemic and has remained strong. While changes in demand and pricing among clients in various industry verticals did not result in a significant disruption to our business, the trajectory of these trends is uncertain.
Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenue increased $28.6 million, or 13%, to $243.7 million, from $215.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our cost of revenue primarily consists of media and related costs associated with acquiring traffic from third-party publishers and digital media platforms for our owned and operated websites and, historically, on behalf of third-party advertisers, as well as the costs of fulfilling rewards earned by consumers who complete the requisite number of advertiser offers.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue increased to 74.0%, compared to 69.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the normal course of executing paid media campaigns to source consumer traffic, we regularly test new channels, strategies and partners, in an effort to identify actionable opportunities which can then be optimized over time. Traffic acquisition costs incurred with the major digital media platforms from which we sourced increased traffic volumes have historically been higher than affiliate traffic sources. Through our Traffic Quality Initiative, we curtailed the volume of lower quality affiliate traffic that we source. To replace this lower quality traffic, we are testing and scaling various media channels, strategies and partners to generate consumer traffic meeting our quality requirements. Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we increased media spend with major digital media platforms and revised bidding strategies for affiliate traffic. These strategies yielded lower margins initially, with the intent to optimize spend for improved profitability in future periods. In the second half of 2021, we both increased our spend and improved profitability with our major digital media platforms compared to the second quarter, though profitability was still below our historical levels achieved through affiliate marketing. The mix and profitability of our media channels, strategies and partners is likely to be dynamic and reflect evolving market dynamics and the impact of our Traffic Quality Initiative. As we test and scale new media channels, strategies and partners, we may determine that certain sources initially able to provide us profitable quality traffic may not be able to maintain our quality standards over time, and we may need to discontinue, or direct a modification of the practices of, such sources, which could reduce profitability. We believe the Traffic Quality Initiative will benefit the Company over time, providing the foundation to support sustainable long-term growth and positioning us as an industry leader. Past levels of cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) may therefore not be indicative of future costs, which may increase or decrease as these uncertainties in our business play out.
Sales and marketing. For the year ended December 31, 2021, sales and marketing expenses increased $1.0 million, or 9%, to $12.7 million, from $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amounts consisted mainly of employee salaries and benefits of $10.9 million and $9.5 million, non-cash share-based compensation expense of $0.8 million and $0.8 million, and advertising costs of $0.7 million and $0.8 million, respectively. We are actively managing our sales and marketing expenditures to reflect the evolving market dynamics associated with the impact of COVID-19 on our industry's practices, including trade events and exhibitions, and our advertiser clients’ businesses. As a result, past levels of sales and marketing expenditures may not be indicative of future expenditures, which may increase or decrease as these uncertainties in our business play out.
Product development. For the year ended December 31, 2021, product development expenses increased $3.2 million, or 25%, to $15.8 million, from $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amounts consisted primarily of employee salaries and benefits of $11.0 million and $9.6 million, professional fees of $1.6 million and $0.5 million, software license and maintenance costs of $1.1 million and $1.0 million, non-cash share-based compensation expense of $0.9 million and $1.1 million, and acquisition-related costs of $0.6 million and $0.0 million, respectively. The increase in product development expenses reflects, in part, the development of new app-based media properties, expanding beyond our traditional focus on web-based media properties along with acquisition-related costs in connection with the Full Winopoly Acquisition described below under the heading "Liquidity and Capital Resources."
General and administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased $1.4 million, or 3%, to $48.2 million, from $46.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amounts consisted mainly of employee salaries and benefits of $19.5 million and $17.3 million, professional fees of $5.5 million and $5.5 million, software license and maintenance costs of $4.6 million and $1.6 million, office overhead of $4.4 million and $4.6 million, acquisition-related costs of $3.7 million and $0.2 million, accrued compensation expense for Put/Call Consideration from the Initial Winopoly Acquisition of $3.2 million and $1.8 million (see Note 13, Business acquisition, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), non-cash share-based compensation expense of $3.1 million and $3.5 million, and certain litigation and related costs of $1.8 million and $8.7 million, respectively. The increase was mainly the result of acquisition-related costs in connection with the Full Winopoly Acquisition, increases in IT and IT website costs, employee salaries and benefits, and and accrued compensation expense for Put/Call Consideration in connection with the Initial Winopoly Acquisition, partially offset by a decline in certain litigation and related costs.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $2.1 million, or 14%, to $13.2 million, from $15.3 million for year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill impairment. During the second quarter of 2020, we recognized $0.8 million of goodwill impairment related to the All Other reporting unit, with no corresponding impairment charge in the current period.
Write-off of long-lived assets. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $0.4 million and $0.0 million, respectively, related to software-developed for internal use.
Interest expense, net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense, net, decreased $3.2 million, or 59%, to $2.2 million, from $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a lower interest rate on the New Credit Facility Term Loan as compared to the Refinanced Term Loan.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $3.0 million of loss due to the early extinguishment of debt, described below under "Liquidity and Capital Resources," with no corresponding charge in the prior period.
Income (loss) before income taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net (loss) before income taxes was ($9.8) million, compared to net income before income taxes of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily due to increased cost of revenue of $28.6 million, increased product development of $3.2 million, the loss on early extinguishment of debt recorded in the first quarter of 2021 of $3.0 million, increase in general and administrative expense of $1.4 million, and increase in sales and marketing of $1.0 million, partially offset by an increase in revenue of $18.5 million, decrease in interest expense of $3.2 million, decreased depreciation and amortization expense of $2.1 million and a decline of $0.5 million related goodwill impairment and write-off of intangibles, discussed above.
Income tax expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the provision for income taxes was $0.2 million and $0.8 million, respectively, with an effective tax rate of -2.5% and 27.1%, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded full valuation allowances against its net deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain full valuation allowances against the net deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the release of all or some portion of such allowances. Based on various factors, including our history of losses, current income, estimated future taxable income, exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences and consideration of available tax planning strategies, we believe there is a reasonable possibility that, within the next twelve months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the valuation allowance may be released. Release of some or all of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain deferred tax assets and an increase in deferred tax benefit for any period in which such a release may be recorded, however, the exact timing and amount of any valuation allowance release are subject to change, depending on the profitability that we are able to achieve and the net deferred tax assets available.
Net income (loss). For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net (loss) was ($10.1) million and net income was $2.2 million, respectively, as a result of the foregoing.
Effect of Inflation
The rates of inflation experienced in recent years have had no material impact on our financial statements. We attempt to recover increased costs by increasing prices for our services, to the extent permitted by contracts and the competitive environment within our industry.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flows provided by operating activities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $12.4 million and $20.3 million, respectively. Net loss in the current period of $10.1 million represents a decrease of $12.3 million, as compared with net income of $2.2 million in the prior period. Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities of $23.8 million in the current period declined by $1.3 million, as compared with $25.1 million in the prior period, primarily due to reductions in share-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization, partly offset by the inclusion of a non-cash loss on early extinguishment of debt and an accrual for Put/Call Consideration in the current period. Changes in assets and liabilities consumed cash of $1.3 million in the current period, as compared with consumed cash of $7.0 million in the prior period, primarily due to ordinary-course changes in working capital, largely involving the timing of receipt of amounts owing from clients and disbursements of amounts payable to vendors.
Cash flows used in investing activities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $3.0 million and $4.3 million, respectively. The decline was mainly due to reduced cash paid for business acquisitions of $1.4 million year over year.
Cash flows used in financing activities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.5 million and net cash used in financing activities was $13.6 million, respectively. The increase was mainly due to the net proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $49.6 million, the repurchase of stock as part of the stock repurchase program in the prior period, and the exercise of stock option by a former key executive of $0.9 million, partially offset by an increase in the repayment of long-term debt of $34.9 million, the prepayment penalty on the early extinguishment of debt of $0.8 million, and an increase in statutory taxes paid related to the net share settlement of vested restricted stock units of $0.2 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had noncancelable operating lease commitments of $8.7 million and long-term debt which had a $46.3 million principal balance. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we funded our operations using available cash.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of approximately $34.5 million, an increase of $11.9 million from $22.6 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that we will have sufficient cash resources to finance our operations and expected capital expenditures for the next twelve months and beyond.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations consist of our term loan and obligations under operating leases for office space. For more information regarding our term loan, refer to Note 8 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For more information regarding our lease obligations, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including employee-related expenditures from expansion of our headcount, costs to support the growth in our client accounts and continued client expansion, the timing and extent of spending to support product development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced solutions, features, and functionality, and costs related to building out our leased office facilities. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, and intellectual property rights. We may be required to draw upon our revolving credit facility in order to meet these future capital requirements. In the event that we do not meet the conditions to draw, or additional financing is not accessible from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
In January 2020, holders of an aggregate of 300,000 shares of common stock, obtained upon exercise of warrants issued in connection with our prior credit agreement with Whitehorse Finance. Inc., as administrative agent, exercised a put right to require us to purchase all such shares for an aggregate of $1.15 million. We funded such purchase with cash on hand.
We may explore the possible acquisition of businesses, products and/or technologies that are complementary to our existing business. We continue to identify and prioritize additional technologies which we may wish to develop internally or through licensing or acquisition from third parties. While we may engage from time to time in discussions with respect to potential acquisitions, there can be no assurances that any such acquisitions will be made or that we will be able to successfully integrate any acquired business. In order to finance such acquisitions and working capital, it may be necessary for us to raise additional funds through public or private financings. Any equity or debt financings, if available at all, may be on terms which are not favorable to us and, in the case of equity financings, may result in dilution to shareholders. On April 1, 2020, we acquired a 50% membership interest in Winopoly, LLC (the "Initial Winopoly Acquisition"), for a deemed purchase price of $2.6 million, comprised of $1.6 million in upfront cash paid to the seller parties and contingent consideration with a fair value of $1.0 million, payable based upon the achievement of specified revenue targets over the eighteen-month period following the completion of the acquisition. See Note 13, Business acquisition, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. On September 1, 2021, we acquired the remaining 50% membership interest in Winopoly, LLC ("the Full Winopoly Acquisition") in a negotiated transaction. The consideration was $7.8 million, which consisted of $3.4 million of cash at closing, $2.0 million of cash due on January 31, 2022, and $0.5 million of deferred payments due at each of the first and second anniversaries of the closing. We also issued 500,000 shares of fully-vested stock under the Fluent, Inc. 2018 Stock Incentive Plan to certain Winopoly personnel valued at $1.4 million. See Note 13, Business acquisitions, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the first quarter of 2021, Fluent, LLC redeemed $38.3 million aggregate principal amount of our Refinanced Term Loan due March 26, 2023, prior to maturity, resulting in a loss of $2,964 as a cost of early extinguishment of debt.
On March 31, 2021, Fluent, LLC entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by and among, Fluent, LLC, certain subsidiaries of Fluent, LLC as guarantors, Citizens Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, lead arranger and bookrunner, and BankUnited, N.A. and Silicon Valley Bank. The Credit Agreement provides for a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $50.0 million funded on the Closing Date (the “Term Loan”), along with an undrawn revolving credit facility of up to $15.0 million (the "Revolving Loans," and together with the Term Loan, the "New Credit Facility"). As of December 31, 2021, the Credit Agreement has an outstanding principal balance of $46.3 million and matures on March 31, 2026. Principal amortization of the Credit Agreement is $1.3 million per quarter, which commenced with the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to an applicable margin, plus, at the Company's option, either a base rate or a London Inter-bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) rate (subject to a floor of 0.25%). The applicable margin is between 0.75% and 1.75% for base rate borrowings and 1.75% and 2.75% for LIBOR rate borrowings, depending upon the Company's consolidated leverage ratio. The opening interest rate of the New Credit Facility is 2.50% (LIBOR + 2.25%).
The Credit Agreement contains restrictive covenants which impose limitations on the way we conduct our business, including limitations on the amount of additional debt we are able to incur and our ability to make certain investments and other restricted payments. The restrictive covenants may limit our strategic and financing options and our ability to return capital to our shareholders through dividends or stock buybacks. Furthermore, we may need to incur additional debt to meet future financing needs. The Credit Agreement is guaranteed by us and our direct and indirect subsidiaries and is secured by substantially all of our assets and those of our direct and indirect subsidiaries, including Fluent, LLC, in each case, on an equal and ratable basis.
The Credit Agreement requires us to maintain and comply with certain financial and other covenants. While we were in compliance with the financial and other covenants as of December 31, 2021, we cannot assure that we will be able to maintain compliance with such financial or other covenants. Our failure to comply with these covenants could result in an event of default which, if not cured or waived, could result in the acceleration of all of our indebtedness, which would materially adversely affect our financial health if we are unable to access sufficient funds to repay all the outstanding amounts. Moreover, if we are unable to meet our debt obligations as they come due, we could be forced to restructure or refinance such obligations, seek additional equity financing or sell assets, which we may not be able to do on satisfactory terms, or at all.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon Fluent's consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires Fluent to make certain estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, Fluent evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, recoverability of the carrying amounts of goodwill and intangible assets, share-based compensation and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies govern our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Further details of the Company's accounting policies are available in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of significant accounting policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of goods or services is transferred to customers, in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The Company's performance obligation is typically to (a) deliver data records, based on predefined qualifying characteristics specified by the customer or (b) generate conversions, based on predefined user actions (for example, a click, a registration or the installation of an app) and subject to certain qualifying characteristics specified by the customer.
The Company applies the practical expedient related to the review of a portfolio of contracts in reviewing the terms of customer contracts as one collective group, rather than by individual contract. Based on historical knowledge of the contracts contained in this portfolio and the similar nature and characteristics of the customers, the Company concluded that the financial statement effects are not materially different than accounting for revenue on a contract-by-contract basis.
Revenue is recognized upon satisfaction of associated performance obligations. The Company's customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided, as the Company satisfies its performance obligations. Furthermore, the Company elected the "right to invoice" practical expedient available within ASC 606-10-55-18 as the measure of progress, since the Company has a right to payment from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of the performance completed to date. The Company's revenue arrangements do not contain significant financing components. The Company has further concluded that revenue does not require disaggregation.
For each identified performance obligation in a contract with a customer, the Company assesses whether it or the third-party supplier is the principal or agent. In arrangements where Fluent has substantive control of the specified goods and services, is primarily responsible for the integration of products and services into the final deliverable to the customer, has inventory risk and discretion in establishing pricing, Fluent is considered to have acted as the principal. For performance obligations in which Fluent so acts as principal, the Company records the gross amount billed to the customer within revenue and the related incremental direct costs incurred as cost of revenue. If the third-party supplier, rather than Fluent, is primarily responsible for the performance and deliverable to the customer, and Fluent solely arranges for the third-party supplier to provide services to the customer, Fluent is considered to have acted as the agent. For performance obligations for which Fluent so acts as the agent, the net fees on such transactions are recorded as revenue, with no associated costs of revenue for the Company.
When there is a delay between the period in which revenue is recognized and when a customer invoice is issued, revenue is recognized and the related amounts are recorded as unbilled revenue within accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheets. In line with industry practice, the unbilled revenue balance is recorded based on the Company's internally tracked conversions, net of estimated variances between this amount and the amount tracked and subsequently confirmed by customers. Substantially all amounts included within the unbilled revenue balance are invoiced to customers within the month directly following the period of service. Historical estimates related to unbilled revenue have not been materially different from actual revenue billed.
Sales commissions are recorded at the time revenue is recognized and recorded in sales and marketing in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company has elected to utilize a practical expedient to expense incremental costs incurred related to obtaining a contract.
In addition, the Company elected the practical expedient to not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which revenue is recognized at the amount to which the Company has the right to invoice for services performed.
Business combinations
The Company records acquisitions pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations, by allocating the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and estimated fair values of intangible assets acquired. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired intangible assets, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. If actual results are materially lower than originally estimated, it could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
Goodwill
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable, by assessing qualitative factors or performing a quantitative analysis in determining whether it is more likely than not that its fair value exceeds the carrying value. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level and is conducted by estimating and co mparing the fair value of each of the Company’s reporting units to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company recognizes an impairment loss equal to the amount of the excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
For the quantitative factors, management utilizes a third-party valuation firm for certain assumptions and analysis including discount rate and market multiples. Management reviews the assumptions and analysis with the valuation firm to ensure reasonableness, although it is inherently uncertain and unpredictable.
﻿As of July 1, 2019, due to the AdParlor Acquisition, the Company determined that it has two reporting units, “Fluent” which represents our core business and “All Other” which represents AdParlor.
During the three months ended June 30, 2020, we determined that the effects of the macroeconomic conditions arising from the global COVID-19 pandemic and the social unrest throughout the United States during June 2020, which changed the media buying patterns of certain customers directly impacting the All Other reporting unit, constituted an impairment triggering event. As such, we conducted an interim test of the fair value of its goodwill for potential impairment as of June 30, 2020. The results of this interim impairment test, which used a combination of income and market approaches to determine the fair value of the All Other reporting unit, indicated that its carrying value exceeded its estimated fair value by 8.9%. We thereby concluded that All Other's goodwill of $5.0 million was impaired by $0.8 million.
During the three months ended March 31, 2021, the Company determined that the reduction in operating results of the Fluent reporting unit, along with a decline in the market value of its publicly-traded stock, collectively constituted a triggering event. As such, we conducted an interim test of the fair value of its goodwill for potential impairment as of March 31, 2021. Based on the results of this interim impairment test, which used a combination of the income and market approaches to determine the fair value of the Fluent reporting unit, the Company concluded its goodwill of $160.9 million was not impaired since the results of the interim test indicated that the estimated fair value exceeded its carrying value by approximately 17%.
The Company believes that the assumptions utilized in its interim impairment testing, including the determination of an appropriate discount rate of 14.5%, long-term profitability growth projections, and estimated future cash flows, are reasonable.
As of October 1, 2021, the Company performed our annual goodwill impairment test. Based on the results of this annual test, which used a combination of income and market approaches to determine the fair value of its two reporting units, the Company concluded that Fluent's goodwill of $160.9 million and All Other's goodwill of $4.2 million, were not impaired since the results of the annual test indicated that the estimated fair values exceeded their carrying value by approximately 34.6% and 138.3%, respectively. The Company believes that the assumptions utilized in its interim impairment testing over its two reporting units, including the determination of an appropriate discount rate of 15.0% for Fluent and 15.5% for All Other, long-term profitability growth projections, and estimated future cash flows, are reasonable. The change in the discount rate was attributable to an increase risk of the business model. The risk of future impairment of goodwill exists if actual results, such as lower than expected revenue, profitability, cash flows, market multiples, discount rates and control premiums, differ from the assumptions used in the Company's annual impairment test.
Intangible assets other than goodwill
Intangible assets are initially capitalized based on actual costs incurred, acquisition cost, or fair value if acquired as part of a business combination. These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their respective estimated useful lives, which are the periods over which these assets are expected to contribute directly or indirectly to future cash flows. Intangible assets represent purchased intellectual property, software developed for internal use, acquired proprietary technology, customer relationships, trade names, domain names, databases and non-competition agreements, including those resulting from acquisitions. Intangible assets have estimated useful lives of 2 to 20 years.
In accordance with ASC 350-40, Software - Internal-Use Software, we capitalize eligible costs, including applicable salaries and benefits, share-based compensation expense, travel expenses and other direct costs of developing internal-use software that are incurred in the application development stage, when developing or obtaining software for internal use. Once the internal use software is ready for its intended use, it is amortized on a straight-line basis over its useful life.
Finite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment periodically, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their related carrying amounts may not be recoverable, in accordance with ASC 360-10-15, Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets. In evaluating intangible assets for recoverability, we use the best estimate of future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and eventual disposition, using assumptions of revenue growth rates, operating expenses and terminal growth rates. These matters are highly uncertain, and different assumptions can result in a materially different estimate of future cash flow. To the extent that estimated future undiscounted cash inflows attributable to the asset, less estimated future undiscounted cash outflows, is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the difference between the carrying value of such asset and its fair value.
Asset recoverability is an area involving management judgment, requiring assessment as to whether the carrying values of assets are supported by their undiscounted future cash flows. We use a third-party valuation firm to assist us in evaluating asset recoverability.
During the three months ended June 30, 2020, the Company determined that the effects of the macroeconomic conditions arising from the global COVID-19 pandemic and the social unrest throughout the United States, which changed the media buying patterns of certain customers directly impacting the All Other reporting unit, constituted an impairment triggering event. As such, the Company conducted an interim test of the recoverability of its long-lived assets as of June 30, 2020. Based on the results of this recoverability test, which measured the Company's projected undiscounted cash flows as compared to the carrying value of the asset group, the Company determined that, as of June 30, 2020, its long-lived assets were not impaired. As of December 31, 2020, the Company assessed whether there were any triggering events that would indicate a potential impairment of its long-lived intangible assets and did not identify any such triggering events or impairment indicators
During the three months ended March 31, 2021, the Company determined that the reduction in operating results of the Fluent reporting unit, along with a decline in the market value of its publicly-traded stock, collectively constituted a triggering event. As such, we conducted an interim test of recoverability of its long-lived assets as of March 31, 2021. Based on the results of this recoverability test, which measured the Company's projected undiscounted cash flows as compared to the carrying value of the asset group, the Company determined that, as of March 31, 2021, its long-lived assets were not impaired. As of December 31, 2021, the Company assessed whether there were any triggering events that would indicate a potential impairment of its long-lived intangible assets and did not identify any such triggering events or impairment indicators.
Share-based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Under ASC 718, for awards with time-based conditions, we measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognize such costs on a straight-line basis over the period the recipient is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which is the vesting period. For awards with market conditions, the Company recognizes costs on a straight-line basis, regardless of whether the market conditions are achieved and the awards ultimately vest. For awards with performance conditions, the Company begins recording share-based compensation when achievement of the performance criteria is deemed probable. The Company recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which requires the use of the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates or laws is recognized in income in the period that the change in tax rates or laws is enacted. Valuation allowances are provided to reduce the amount of deferred tax assets if it is considered more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, based on management's review of historical results and forecasts.
ASC 740 clarifies the accounting for uncertain tax positions. This interpretation requires that an entity recognize in its financial statements the impact of a tax position, if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, based on the technical merits of the position. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs and we consult with external tax counsel as appropriate. Our accounting policy is to accrue interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions, if and when required, as interest expense and a component of other expenses, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2, Summary of significant accounting policies, under the caption "(r) Recently issued and adopted accounting standards" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on certain accounting standards that have been adopted during 2021 or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.