Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1., Business, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. The following information contains forward-looking statements which involve certain risks and uncertainties. See Forward-Looking Statements at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is segregated into four sections, including:
•
Executive overview - provides a summary of our operating performance and cash flows, industry trends, and our strategic initiatives.
•
Critical accounting estimates - describes the accounting areas where management makes critical estimates to report our financial condition and results of operations.
•
Results of operations - an analysis of the company’s consolidated results of operations for Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 as presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 for a discussion of the results of operations for Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019.
•
Liquidity, capital resources and financial position - an analysis of cash flow, contractual obligations, and certain other matters affecting the company’s financial position.
MATTERS AFFECTING COMPARABILITY
Detailed below are expense (recovery) items affecting comparability that will provide additional context while reading this discussion:
Business process improvement consulting costs related to the transformation strategy initiatives. In the second half of Fiscal 2020, we launched initiatives to transform how we operate our business, which includes upgrading our information system to a more robust platform, as well as investments in e-commerce, autonomous planning, and our “bakery of the future” initiative. These transformation strategy initiatives are further discussed in Item 1., Business, of this Form 10-K. In Fiscal 2022, we currently expect costs for the upgrade of our ERP system (a portion of which may be expensed as incurred, capitalized, recognized as a cloud computing arrangement, or recognized as a prepaid service contract) to be approximately $85 million to $95 million. Costs related to our digital strategy initiatives are anticipated in Fiscal 2022, but these amounts cannot currently be estimated. The expensed portion of the consulting costs related to both the ERP upgrade and digital strategy initiatives incurred in Fiscal 2021 was $31.3 million and is reflected in the selling, distribution, and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income. Initial road mapping costs for these initiatives were incurred in Fiscal 2020 and are included in the “ERP Road Mapping consulting costs” in the table above.
Project Centennial consulting costs. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2016, we launched Project Centennial, an enterprise-wide business and operational review. Key initiatives of the project were to enhance revenue growth, improve efficiencies, streamline operations, and make investments to strengthen our competitive position and improve margins over the long-term. The project was completed at the end of Fiscal 2020. Consulting costs associated with the project in Fiscal 2020 were $15.5 million and primarily related to further refining our organizational structure, portfolio and supply chain optimization initiatives, and improving our cake
operations. These consulting costs are reflected in the selling, distribution and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Consulting costs for planning the upgrade of our ERP platform and the broader digital strategy initiative. As discussed above and in Item 1., Business, of this Form 10-K, we began planning for the upgrade of our ERP platform and other system related enhancements (the “ERP road mapping”) during the third quarter of Fiscal 2020. We incurred consulting costs associated with these activities of $4.4 million and these costs are reflected in the selling, distribution and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income. We completed the initial road mapping activities in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and transitioned to the design phase of the project.
Restructuring and related impairment charges associated with Project Centennial. The following table details charges recorded in Fiscal 2020 (amounts in thousands):
In Fiscal 2020, the company reevaluated its organizational structure in an effort to increase its focus on brand growth and product innovation and to improve underperforming bakeries. The organizational structure changes resulted in employee termination benefits charges in Fiscal 2020 related to a voluntary employee separation plan (the “VSIP”) of $2.6 million and an involuntary reduction-in-force plan of $5.3 million. The VSIP and reduction-in-force plans together eliminated approximately 250 positions across different departments and job levels and all remaining payments related to the plans were paid in early Fiscal 2021.
During Fiscal 2020, the company sold three closed bakeries that were included in assets held for sale and certain idle equipment at other bakeries, resulting in the recognition of $5.7 million of impairment charges. Additionally, the company recognized property, plant, and equipment impairment charges of $0.6 million for manufacturing line and distribution depot closures and an office building the company decided to sell, and $0.7 million for spare parts related to equipment the company no longer intended to use.
In order to optimize our distribution network, we vacated certain distribution depots during the third quarter of Fiscal 2020, some of which are owned and others that are leased. These actions resulted in the recognition of lease termination charges and lease impairment charges totaling $13.5 million.
Additionally, in order to optimize sales and production of our organic products, the company decided to cease using the Alpine Valley brand, a finite-lived trademark, resulting in a $4.6 million impairment charge in the second quarter of Fiscal 2020. The company decided to cease using one of its regional brands and recognized a $1.3 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020. Ingredient and packaging impairments of $1.2 million were also recognized as a result of brand rationalization initiatives.
Loss on inferior ingredients. In the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the company issued a voluntary recall on certain Tastykake multi-pack cupcakes sold in eight states and certain Tastykake Krimpets distributed to retail customers throughout the U.S. due to the potential presence of tiny fragments of metal mesh wire. The recall was initiated following notification by a vendor of the possible contamination in a supplied ingredient. The company incurred costs of $1.8 million related to the recall in Fiscal 2021 and these costs are recorded in our Consolidated Statements of Income. The company is seeking recovery of these losses.
In Fiscal 2020, we incurred costs of $1.0 million related to receiving inferior ingredients used in the production of certain of our gluten-free products. In the first quarter of Fiscal 2021, we incurred an additional $0.1 million of costs related to the inferior gluten-free ingredients and in the third quarter of Fiscal 2021, we received reimbursements of approximately $1.0 million for these previously incurred costs. These costs and reimbursements are recorded in the loss on inferior ingredients line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income.
In Fiscal 2020, in addition to the costs related to inferior gluten-free ingredients, we recognized an adjustment of $0.2 million related to previously recorded inferior yeast costs and received a $1.2 million reimbursement for the direct costs associated with receiving inferior yeast in a prior year. These direct costs and reimbursements of direct costs are included in our Consolidated Income Statements. We also received a reimbursement of $3.9 million for indirect losses associated with receiving inferior yeast in a prior
year and this amount is included in the selling, distribution, and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Non-restructuring lease termination gain. In Fiscal 2021, the company purchased twenty-seven warehouses that were included in the company’s operating leased assets. Two of the purchased properties were fully impaired in Fiscal 2020, resulting in the recognition of a $2.6 million gain upon completion of the purchase of these assets and this amount is included in the selling, distribution, and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income.
In Fiscal 2020, due to a change in the contractual terms with a transportation entity that transports a significant portion of our fresh bakery products to allow for substitution of assets, among other changes to the terms, a reassessment of the embedded lease accounting treatment was triggered. Based our analysis, we determined the contracts associated with the transportation entity no longer qualify for embedded lease treatment and, in unwinding these leases, the company recognized a noncash gain of $4.1 million in the selling, distribution and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Pension plan settlement and curtailment loss. In the company-sponsored defined benefit pension plan for union employees (“Plan No. 2”), retired and terminated vested pension plan participants not yet receiving their benefit payments have the option to elect to receive their benefit as a single lump sum payment. In the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, a settlement charge of $0.4 million was triggered as a result of lump sum distributions paid in Fiscal 2021.
On September 28, 2018, the Board approved a resolution to terminate the Flowers Foods, Inc. Retirement Plan No. 1 (“Plan No. 1”), effective December 31, 2018. In the first quarter of Fiscal 2020, the company distributed a portion of the pension plan assets to participants as lump sum payments and transferred the remaining obligations and assets to an insurance company in the form of a nonparticipating group annuity contract. No cash contributions were required in Fiscal 2020 to support this transaction. In Fiscal 2020, the company recognized $108.8 million of non-cash pension termination charges, comprised of a settlement charge of $104.5 million and a curtailment loss of $4.3 million, and an additional $0.1 million of cash charges for other pension termination charges in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Acquisition consideration adjustment. In connection with an acquisition completed in Fiscal 2012, the company agreed to make the selling shareholders whole for certain taxes incurred by the stakeholders on the sale. There was recently a tax determination that the selling shareholders owed additional taxes. Unless there is a successful appeal which overturns the determination, the company estimates that it will owe the shareholders approximately $3.4 million, and the Company has recorded this cost in the selling, distribution, and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income in Fiscal 2021.
Legal settlements and related costs. In Fiscal 2021, we reached an agreement to settle certain distributor-related litigation for a settlement payment, inclusive of plaintiffs’ attorney fees, of $16.5 million. The settlement also requires a phased repurchase of approximately 75 distribution rights and the company estimates this cost to be approximately $6.6 million. The terms of the settlement require court approval. In Fiscal 2020, we reached agreements to settle distributor-related litigation in the aggregate amount of $7.3 million, including plaintiffs’ attorney fees and the company’s FICA obligations. All amounts related to legal settlements and related costs are recorded in the selling, distribution and administrative expenses line item of the Consolidated Statements of Income. At January 1, 2022, $23.1 million of settlements were accrued (inclusive of obligations for repurchase of distribution rights).
Loss on extinguishment of debt. On April 8, 2021, we completed the early redemption of the Company’s $400.0 million of 4.375% senior notes due 2022 (the “2022 notes”) with proceeds received from the issuance of the Company’s $500.0 million of 2.400% senior notes due 2031 (the “2031 notes”) on March 9, 2021. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.1 million comprised of a make-whole cash payment of $15.4 million and the write-off of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs totaling $0.7 million.
Multi-employer pension plan withdrawal costs. On September 22, 2021, the union participants of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union Fund (the “Fund”) at our Birmingham, Alabama plant voted to withdraw from the Fund in the most recent collective bargaining agreement. The withdrawal was effective, and the union participants became eligible to participate in the Flowers Foods, Inc. 401(k) Retirement Savings Plan, on December 1, 2021. This resulted in the recognition of a pension plan withdrawal liability of $3.3 million (including transition payments) in our Consolidated Statements of Income. The transition payments were paid in December 2021 and the withdrawal liability is anticipated to be paid in the first half of Fiscal 2022. While this is our best estimate of the ultimate cost of the withdrawal from this Fund, additional withdrawal liability may be incurred based on the final Fund assessment or in the event of a mass withdrawal as defined by statute, occurring any time within the next three years following our complete withdrawal.
Additional Items Impacting Comparability
Reporting Periods. The company operates on a 52-53 week fiscal year ending the Saturday nearest December 31. Fiscal 2021 consisted of 52 weeks and Fiscal 2020 consisted of 53 weeks. Fiscal 2022 will consist of 52 weeks.
COVID-19. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide, which led to adverse impacts on the U.S. and global economies. Due to the drastic change in consumer buying patterns as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a favorable shift in sales mix to our branded retail products as consumers increased at-home consumption of food products resulting in significant growth in income from operations in Fiscal 2021 and 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019. As shutdowns and capacity restrictions imposed at the onset of the pandemic have eased, our sales volumes have declined in Fiscal 2021 as compared to the prior year, which included the peak period of demand for our branded retail products and an additional week. Improved price/mix in Fiscal 2021 resulting from favorable pricing we have implemented and the continued favorable shift in mix from store branded retail to branded retail sales partially offset the volume declines. For additional details on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business operations and results of operations, see the “Executive Overview - Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business,” “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections below.
Conversion of our Lynchburg, Virginia bakery to organic production. During Fiscal 2020, we converted our Lynchburg, Virginia bakery to an all-organic production facility. The converted facility has increased production capacity for our DKB products, allowing the company to better serve east coast markets with fresher product and reduce distribution costs. We incurred start-up costs related to the conversion of approximately $5.1 million in Fiscal 2020 and these costs are included in materials, supplies, labor and other production costs in our Consolidated Statements of Income. The bakery resumed production at the end of the third quarter of Fiscal 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are the second-largest producer and marketer of packaged bakery foods in the U.S. with Fiscal 2021 sales of $4.3 billion. We operate in the highly competitive fresh bakery market. Our product offerings include a wide range of fresh breads, buns, rolls, snack cakes and tortillas, as well as frozen breads and rolls, which we produce at 46 plants in 18 states. Our products are sold under leading brands such as Nature’s Own, Dave’s Killer Bread, Canyon Bakehouse, Tastykake, Mrs. Freshley’s, and Wonder. See Item 1., Business, of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding our customers and brands, business strategies, strengths and core competencies, and competition and risks.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business:
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our business operations and results of operations during Fiscal 2021 and 2020, as further described under “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below. The resulting dramatic changes in consumer buying patterns has led to a significant rise in demand for our branded retail products due to increases in at-home dining. Sales through our non-retail category, which includes foodservice, restaurant, institutional, vending, thrift stores, and contract manufacturing, declined substantially at the onset of the pandemic in March of Fiscal 2020, but as the pandemic has progressed and mandatory shutdowns and restaurant closures across the U.S. have eased, our non-retail sales have been recovering. Fiscal 2021 sales declined 1.3% mostly due to the additional week in the prior year which negatively impacted Fiscal 2021 sales 1.7%. Although the prior year benefitted from the significant rise in demand for our branded retail products at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as positive shifts in mix throughout the year and the additional week, Fiscal 2021 benefitted from favorable pricing, a continued positive shift in mix from store branded retail to branded retail products, and a partial recovery in non-retail sales. Fiscal 2021 sales remained elevated compared to pre-pandemic levels as we continued to benefit from the positive mix shift to branded retail products during the ongoing pandemic and favorable pricing, partially offset by volume declines.
In recognition and support of our frontline workers, in Fiscal 2021 and 2020, we paid $5.2 million and $12.3 million, respectively, in appreciation bonuses to eligible hourly and non-exempt employees, leased labor, and contract workers. These appreciation bonuses are in addition to the company’s annual performance-based cash incentive plan, in which all Flowers employees participate. Although our branded retail sales volumes have moderated as the pandemic has continued, we cannot currently estimate when or if they will return to pre-pandemic levels.
On April 14, 2020, we temporarily ceased production at our Tucker, Georgia bakery and on July 9, 2020, we temporarily ceased production at our Savannah, Georgia bakery. Both closures were due to an increase in the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases at these bakeries and the related increase in number of workers self-quarantining. Production resumed at the Tucker bakery on April 27, 2020 and at the Savannah Bakery on July 17, 2020. Although our other bakeries were able to assist with meeting production needs in these instances, the potential closure of several of our bakeries across the country at the same time - or in close succession - could negatively affect our ability to meet our production requirements, even if the interruption is temporary. While we have had no
temporary production interruptions in Fiscal 2021 due to COVID-19, such interruptions are possible due to the uncertainty of the pandemic. Additionally, unforeseen disruptions in other areas of our operations, including but not limited to procurement of raw materials, transport of our products, or recovery by our foodservice customers, could negatively impact our operations, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs and we continue to take steps to preserve adequate liquidity during the ongoing pandemic as further discussed in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below. As discussed further in Item 1., Business, of this Form 10-K, we are continuing to move forward with the upgrade of our ERP system and other transformation strategy initiatives and do not anticipate the pandemic to materially alter the timing of these initiatives.
We continue to monitor the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations, results of operations, and liquidity. Our operations may continue to experience disruption due to the continued uncertainty caused by the pandemic, including but not limited to additional variants of the COVID-19 virus, new geographic hotspots, changes in the number of COVID-19 cases, the rate of vaccination within the U.S. population and the efficacy of the vaccines, changes in the global and U.S. economic environment, and changes in pandemic safety policies. Additionally, if there is a significant shift in mix from branded retail to store branded retail products, we expect that our results of operations, including our net sales, earnings, and cash flows, could be negatively impacted.
Our main focus throughout the pandemic has been and continues to be the health and safety of our team members and independent distributor partners. From the start of the pandemic, we have followed the guidance of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), taking a number of recommended steps to safeguard those in our facilities. These steps included, but are not limited to, monitoring the symptoms of everyone entering our facilities, requiring face coverings, maintaining (where possible) social distancing of six feet, conducting enhanced cleaning and sanitizing of common areas and frequently touched surfaces, performing decontamination of work areas and equipment when there is a confirmed or presumptive case of COVID-19 at a facility, and contact tracing. Company-wide bans on non-essential travel and non-essential visitors at all locations were put into place, corporate offices were closed, and office staff were directed to work remotely. In addition, the company issued regular communications about COVID-19 prevention steps. When COVID-19 vaccinations became available, we shared educational information with our team members and encouraged vaccination for those eligible.
We have followed the guidance issued by the CDC and the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and modified our face mask and wellness screening policies to align with local, state, and workplace safety regulations. We remain vigilant in reporting COVID-19 cases in our facilities and continue to evaluate our pandemic safety measures as the pandemic evolves. The majority of employees in non-production roles continue to work remotely. We intend to implement a work policy in 2022 addressing guidelines for three distinct work personas: full-time remote, full-time in office, or flex, a combination of the two. These plans may be impacted by, among other things, consideration of pandemic safety measures, the rate of vaccinations and the efficacy of the vaccines, the threat of additional COVID-19 variants, and the ability of office staff to work effectively from remote locations. Although the impact of these measures, or any other measures adopted by governmental authorities, on our business and workforce is uncertain, these requirements may result in increased costs and could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
During Fiscal 2021, we experienced labor shortages at some of our bakeries. A number of factors may continue to adversely affect the labor force available to us, including high employment and government regulations. In addition, there also are factors that may negatively affect our ability to efficiently operate our production lines or run at full capacity. These might include, but are not limited to, a labor shortage or increased turnover rates within our workforce that could lead to increased labor costs, including additional overtime to meet demand and higher wage rates to attract and retain workers. An overall labor shortage, lack of skilled labor, increased turnover or labor inflation could have a material adverse impact on the company’s operations, results of operations, liquidity, or cash flows.
Summary of Operating Results, Cash Flows and Financial Condition:
Sales decreased 1.3% in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 mostly due to the additional week in the prior year. Although the prior year benefitted from the significant rise in demand for our branded retail products at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic and the additional week, Fiscal 2021 benefitted from positive pricing and a continued positive shift in mix from store branded retail to branded retail products and a partial recovery in non-retail sales.
Income from operations for Fiscal 2021 was $294.9 million compared to $321.5 million in the prior year. The decrease resulted from sales declines, input cost inflation, higher consulting costs and legal settlements, and greater investments in marketing in the current year, partially offset by prior year restructuring and related impairment charges, and higher short-term incentive compensation paid for appreciation bonuses and workforce-related performance-based cash incentive plans in the prior year.
Net income was $206.2 million for Fiscal 2021, an increase of 35.4% as compared to the prior year. The improvement in the current year resulted primarily from the $108.8 million non-cash pension plan settlement and curtailment loss ($81.6 million net of tax) in the prior year in connection with the termination of Plan No. 1, partially offset by the $16.1 million loss on extinguishment of debt ($12.1 million net of tax) recognized in the current year and decreased income from operations year over year.
In Fiscal 2021, we generated net cash flows from operations of $344.6 million, invested $136.0 million in capital expenditures, and purchased a portfolio of leased warehouses for $64.7 million. Additionally, we paid $175.9 million in dividends to our shareholders and decreased our total indebtedness by $81.9 million. On March 9, 2021, we issued the 2031 notes and used the net proceeds from the offering to complete the early redemption of our outstanding 2022 notes and for other debt repayments. Throughout Fiscal 2021, we continued to maintain higher levels of cash on hand compared to pre-pandemic levels in order to ensure future liquidity, although we do not have any presently anticipated need for this additional liquidity. Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of January 1, 2022 was $185.9 million. In Fiscal 2021, we amended senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the “credit facility”) and our accounts receivable securitization facility (the “AR facility”) to, among other things, extend the maturity dates to July 30, 2026 and September 27, 2023, respectively.
In Fiscal 2020, we generated net cash flows from operations of $454.5 million and invested $97.9 million in capital expenditures. We increased our total indebtedness by $92.5 million and paid $167.3 million in dividends to our shareholders in Fiscal 2020. During the first quarter of Fiscal 2020, we borrowed an additional amount under the credit facility in order to ensure future liquidity in response to the uncertainty caused by the pandemic and cash and cash equivalents at January 2, 2021 were $307.5 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The company’s discussion and analysis of its results of operations and financial condition are based upon the Consolidated Financial Statements of the company, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires the company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of the revenues, expenses, and cash flows during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, the company evaluates its estimates, including those related to customer programs and incentives, bad debts, raw materials, inventories, long-lived assets, leased assets, intangible assets, income taxes, restructuring, pensions and other post-retirement benefits, and contingencies and litigation. The company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The selection and disclosure of the company’s critical accounting estimates have been discussed with the company’s audit committee. Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table lists, in no particular order of importance, areas of critical assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Additional detail can be found in the following notes:
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with our customers are satisfied. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. The company records both direct and estimated reductions to gross revenue for customer programs and incentive offerings at the time the incentive is offered or at the time of revenue recognition for the underlying transaction that results in progress by the customer towards earning the incentive. These allowances include price promotion discounts, coupons, customer rebates, cooperative advertising, and product returns. Consideration payable to a customer is recognized at the time control transfers and is a reduction to revenue. The recognition of costs for promotion programs involves the use of judgment related to performance and redemption
estimates. Estimates are made based on historical experience and other factors. Price promotion discount expense is recorded as a reduction to gross sales when the discounted product is sold to the customer.
Derivative Financial Instruments. The company’s cost of primary raw materials is highly correlated to certain commodities markets. Raw materials, such as our baking ingredients, experience price fluctuations. If actual market conditions become significantly different than those anticipated, raw material prices could increase significantly, adversely affecting our results of operations. We enter into forward purchase agreements and other derivative financial instruments qualifying for hedge accounting to manage the impact of volatility in raw material prices. The company measures the fair value of its derivative portfolio using fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal market for that asset or liability. When quoted market prices for identical assets or liabilities are not available, the company bases fair value on internally developed models that use current market observable inputs, such as exchange-quoted futures prices and yield curves. Refer to