Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements.
Results of Operations
During the first quarter of 2021, we changed the composition of our segments to implement our new strategy and to pursue opportunities in our designated markets. We now report our operating results in four segments as follows: Energy Solutions, Urban Solutions, Mission Solutions and Other. Segment operating information and assets for 2020 and 2019 have been recast to conform to these changes.
In the first quarter of 2021, we also committed to a plan to sell our Stork business, which had previously represented the majority of operations from our former diversified services segment. The sale of the North American portion of the AMECO equipment business was completed during May 2021. Therefore, both Stork and AMECO are reported as Disc Ops along with other immaterial operations. We expect to complete the sale of Stork and the remaining AMECO operations early in 2022. The assets and liabilities of the Stork and AMECO businesses are classified as held for sale for all periods presented.
In December 2021, we announced that NuScale, in which we are the majority investor, signed a merger agreement with Spring Valley Acquisition Corp., a special purpose acquisition company ("Spring Valley"). Spring Valley is acquiring an approximately 20% interest in NuScale. The proposed transaction is anticipated to close in the first half of 2022, subject to customary closing conditions. Upon completion of the merger, we estimate that we will own approximately 60-70% of the combined company and expect that we will continue to consolidate it.
(1)Total segment profit (loss) is a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe that total segment profit (loss) provides a meaningful perspective on our results as it is the aggregation of individual segment profit (loss) measures that we use to evaluate and manage our performance.
Our business has been adversely affected by the impacts of COVID and the steep decline in oil prices that occurred in early 2020. These events created significant uncertainty and economic volatility and disruption, which have impacted and may continue to impact our business. We experienced reductions in demand for certain services and the delay or abandonment of ongoing or anticipated projects due to our clients’, suppliers’ and other third parties’ diminished financial condition. Although oil prices have rebounded in 2021 and 2022, we have not yet seen our energy clients respond with elevated capital expenditures for our services. Our estimates reflect our best assessment of project results inclusive of COVID effects, which have been dynamic as our projects have seen changes in prevailing regulations as COVID cases crested and fell.
During 2021, consolidated revenue declined due to volume declines on projects which were completed or nearing completion in the Energy Solutions and Urban Solutions segments as well as the cancellation of three large projects that were in progress in the prior year. Consolidated revenue in 2020 declined due to volume declines on completed projects or projects nearing completion as well as COVID and the decline in oil prices.
During 2021, improvements in segment profit in the Energy Solutions, Mission Solutions and Other segments were partially offset by a significant decline in segment profit for Urban Solutions where we recognized a $138 million charge in the second quarter of 2021 for procurement and subcontractor cost growth on a legacy infrastructure project. Segment profit in 2020 significantly improved primarily due to forecast revisions totaling $839 million recognized in 2019 on several projects in the Energy Solutions, Urban Solutions and Mission Solutions segments but was diminished by the impact of COVID on numerous projects in 2020.
The effective tax rate from Cont Ops was 13%, (454%) and 57% for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The 2021 effective tax rate was favorably impacted by a $52 million benefit due to the Dutch pension plan settlement. This benefit was offset by a $100 million increase in valuation allowances to reduce deferred assets primarily in the U.S., U.K. and the Netherlands. The 2020 effective tax rate was favorably impacted by a $125 million benefit due to the utilization of a 2019 net operating loss carryback as allowed under the CARES ACT. This benefit was offset by a $147 million increase in valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets primarily in the U.S. and the Netherlands. The 2019 effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by $659 million in charges related to establishing valuation allowances to reduce net deferred tax assets in the U.S., the U.K. and Australia.
Our results reported by foreign subsidiaries with non-U.S. dollar functional currencies are affected by foreign currency volatility. When the U.S. dollar appreciates against the non-U.S. dollar functional currencies of these subsidiaries, our reported revenue, cost and earnings, after translation into U.S. dollars, are lower than what they would have been had the U.S. dollar depreciated against the same foreign currencies or if there had been no change in the exchange rates.
Our profit margins, in some cases, may be favorably or unfavorably impacted by a change in the amount of customer-furnished materials, which are accounted for as pass-through costs.
Any lack of broad based new awards could pressure our future earning streams. The decline in backlog during 2021 primarily resulted from the removal of approximately $2 billion from backlog due to the cancellation of a chemicals project and a steel project. Although backlog reflects business that is considered to be firm, cancellations, deferrals or scope adjustments may occur. Backlog is adjusted to reflect any known project cancellations, revisions to project scope and cost, foreign currency exchange fluctuations and project deferrals, as appropriate. Backlog differs from RUPO discussed elsewhere. RUPO includes only the amount of revenue we expect to recognize under contracts with definite terms and substantive termination provisions.
Impairment, Restructuring and Other Exit Costs
Impairment expense, included in Cont Ops, for 2021, 2020 and 2019 is summarized as follows:
During 2019, we initiated a restructuring plan designed to optimize costs and improve operational efficiency. These efforts primarily related to the rationalization of resources, investments, real estate and overhead across various geographies. The recognition of costs for the planned restructuring activities was substantially completed by the end of 2020. We did not recognize any material restructuring costs during 2021.
Information about our completed restructuring follows:
Gain (Loss) on Pension Settlement
In 2021, we settled the majority of the obligations of our largest DB plan, which provided retirement benefits to certain employees in the Netherlands, and recognized a loss on settlement of $198 million. In 2019, we settled the obligations of our DB plan in the United Kingdom and recognized a loss on settlement of $138 million.
Segment Operations
We provide professional services in the fields of EPC, fabrication and modularization, and project management services, on a global basis and serve a diverse set of industries worldwide.
Energy Solutions
Revenue in 2021 decreased due to declines in the volume of execution activities for projects nearing completion and the cancellation of a chemicals project in North America partially offset by the ramp up of execution activities on a refinery project in Mexico and a chemicals project in China. Revenue in 2020 decreased due to significant declines in the volume of execution activities for numerous upstream, downstream and chemicals projects nearing completion partially offset by increased execution activity for an LNG project in Canada.
Segment profit in 2021 increased due to the ramp up of execution activities on the refinery project in Mexico and the LNG project in Canada and the collection of previously reserved accounts receivable but was partially offset by losses on embedded foreign currency derivatives, the decline in execution activity for projects nearing completion and the cancellation of the chemicals project in North America. The increase in segment profit during 2020 was primarily the result of forecast revisions on several projects recognized during 2019. Excluding the impact of the 2019 charges, segment profit declined in 2020 due to COVID related cost growth, the recognition of reserves for expected credit losses on aged receivables, the reduced execution activity of the upstream, downstream and chemicals projects discussed above, partially offset by the increase in activity for the LNG project. The change in segment profit margin in 2021 and 2020 reflects these same factors. Segment profit margin in 2020 was also adversely impacted by a shift from higher margin work in 2019 to lower margin work in 2020 in certain geographies.
New awards in 2021 increased due to awards for a refinery project in Mexico. No significant awards were booked in 2020 due to the impact of COVID and declining oil prices on our customers' capital spend. New awards in 2019 included a chemicals projects in China and a downstream project in the United Kingdom. Backlog decreased during 2021 primarily due to the cancellation of the chemicals project in North America.
Urban Solutions
Revenue in 2021 decreased due to the close out of data center projects in Europe and mining projects in South America and Australia as well as the cancellation of a rail project and a steel project that were in progress in the prior year periods. Revenue in 2020 declined due to a six-month suspension in 2020 of a large mining project in South America due to COVID and a decline in the volume of execution activities for a large life sciences project and two mining projects completed or nearing completion. The revenue decline in 2020 was partially offset by increased execution activities on two advanced technologies projects, a mining project and a metals project.
Segment profit in 2021 declined due to forecast revisions for procurement and subcontractor cost growth, delays and disruptions in schedule of a legacy infrastructure project, resulting in a charge of $138 million recognized in the second quarter of 2021. We believe that these cost growth factors may be at least partially recoverable under the contract. However, we expect that it will require several quarters to analyze recoverability and negotiate with our client before recognizing incremental revenue for these factors. The decline in segment profit in 2021 was further impacted by forecast revisions for schedule delays and productivity on a light rail project but partially offset by the favorable resolution of a long-standing customer dispute on a road project as well as a gain on the sale of our interest in an infrastructure joint venture. The change in 2021 segment profit margin reflects these same factors.
Segment profit in 2020 significantly improved compared to 2019 primarily due to forecast revisions on several power and infrastructure projects recognized in 2019 as well as a favorable settlement on a canceled rail project in 2020. The increase in 2020 segment profit was partially offset by charges for cost growth in the infrastructure legacy portfolio, the decline in activity for the life sciences and mining projects nearing completion and the mining project in South America that was impacted by COVID. The change in 2020 segment profit margin reflects these same factors.
New awards in 2021 and 2020 decreased partly due to delayed procurement efforts by many of our clients. However, we were recently awarded limited notice to proceed on two significant mining projects in South America. New awards in 2021 included a large life sciences project in Europe. New awards in 2020 included a highway project in Texas and new awards in 2019 included the data center projects in Europe and a road project in Texas. Backlog declined during 2021 due to the cancellation of a steel project coupled with lower new awards. Our staffing business does not report new awards or backlog.
Mission Solutions
Revenue in 2021 was flat compared to 2020 and 2019. In 2021, the ramp up of execution activities on a project to provide contingency and humanitarian support for Afghan evacuees in the United States was offset by the decline in revenue related to the closure of the army logistics and life support program in Afghanistan. In 2020, increased project execution activities at the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and our DOE sites were partially offset by the decline in revenue from the completion of a nuclear decommissioning project in 2019.
The increase in segment profit in 2021 was driven by the ramp up of execution activities on the evacuee support project discussed above, increased execution activity on our DOE projects, higher than anticipated performance-based fees, the release of COVID cost reserves and the collection of previously reserved accounts receivable and the reversal of the related provision partially offset by the closure of the army logistics and life support program in Afghanistan. The increase in segment profit in 2020 was primarily driven by significant items recognized in 2019. In 2019, we recognized significant charges for cost growth on two lump-sum projects. The 2019 charges were partially offset by a favorable settlement on two nuclear power plant projects in 2019.The change in segment profit margin in 2021 and 2020 reflects these same factors.
New awards in 2021 increased due to extensions on certain DOE projects as well as the award for contingency and humanitarian support for Afghan evacuees. New awards in 2020 decreased due to a decline in FEMA work in 2020 and an award for a weapons storage and maintenance facility booked in 2019. The decline in backlog during 2021 resulted from new award activity being outpaced by work performed. Backlog included $445 million and $1.0 billion of unfunded government contracts as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Unfunded backlog reflects our estimate of future revenue under awarded government contracts for which funding has not yet been appropriated.
Other
Other includes the operations of NuScale. NuScale expenses included in the determination of segment loss were as follows:
The increase in NuScale expenses during 2021 was due to an increase in compensation and the increase in 2020 was due to an increase in research and development activities as NuScale received final design certification by the NRC in August of 2020. NuScale received capital contributions from outside investors of $193 million, $9 million and $49 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, Fluor had an approximate 80% ownership in NuScale.
G&A
The increase in compensation expense in 2021 was due to higher stock price driven compensation on stock-based awards and higher performance driven compensation including annual bonus projections. The increase in compensation expense in 2020 was primarily due to lower stock price and performance driven compensation in 2019.
We continue to incur professional fees in responding to the SEC investigation, which remains ongoing. The internal review began in the first quarter of 2020 and was substantially completed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The decrease in other expense in 2021 and 2020 was driven by the realization of our 2019 restructuring efforts and lower travel costs due to COVID. We announced in January 2021 that we had begun an undertaking to substantially reduce our overhead costs. Although we have not satisfied the requirements to recognize charges for any restructurings for the 2021 undertaking, we are likely to recognize expense in future quarters for these efforts.
Net Interest Expense
The loss on debt repurchases includes costs to redeem $509 million of 2023 and 2024 Notes through a tender offer completed in September 2021 as well as through open market transactions following the issuance of the CPS in the second quarter of 2021. The decrease in interest income during 2021 and 2020 was primarily driven by lower interest rates compared to 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on information available through the date of the issuance of the financial statements and, accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ from these estimates. Significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements apply to the following critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition for Long-Term Contracts. We recognize our engineering and construction contract revenue over time as we provide services to satisfy our performance obligations. We generally use the cost-to-cost percentage-of-completion measure of progress as it best depicts how control transfers to our clients. The cost-to-cost approach measures progress towards completion based on the ratio of contract cost incurred to date compared to total estimated contract cost. Use of the cost-to-cost measure of progress requires us to prepare estimates of total expected revenue and cost to complete our projects.
Due to the nature of our industry, there is significant complexity in our estimation of total expected revenue and cost, for which we must make significant judgments. Our contracts with our customers may contain award fees, incentive fees, liquidated damages or other provisions that can either increase or decrease the contract price to arrive at estimated revenue. These variable amounts generally are awarded upon achievement of certain performance metrics, program milestones or cost targets and can be based upon customer discretion. We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount to which we expect to be entitled. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable we will realize that amount. Our estimates of variable consideration and our determination of its inclusion in project revenue for accounting purposes are based on an assessment of our anticipated performance and other information that may be available to us.
At a project level, we have specific practices and procedures to review our estimate of total revenue and cost. Each project team reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations, which impact the project’s accounting outcome. As part of this process, the project team reviews information such as any outstanding key contract matters, progress towards completion and the related program schedule and identified risks and opportunities. The accuracy of our revenue and profit recognition in a given period depends on the accuracy of our project estimates, which can change from period to period due to a variety of factors including:
•Complexity in original design;
•Extent of changes from original design;
•Different site conditions than assumed in our bid;
•The productivity, availability and skill level of labor;
•Weather conditions when executing a project;
•The technical maturity of the technologies involved;
•Length of time to complete the project;
•Availability and cost of equipment and materials;
•Subcontractor and joint venture partner performance;
•Expected costs of warranties; and
•Our ability to recover for additional contract costs.
We recognize changes in contract estimates on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the changes are identified. Such changes in contract estimates can result in the recognition of revenue in a current period for performance obligations which were satisfied or partially satisfied in prior periods. Changes in contract estimates may also result in the reversal of previously recognized revenue if the current estimate adversely differs from the previous estimate. If we estimate that a project will have costs in excess of revenue, we recognize the total loss in the period it is identified.
Variable Consideration. The nature of our contracts gives rise to several types of variable consideration, including claims, unpriced change orders, award and incentive fees, liquidated damages and penalties. We consider variable consideration in the development of our project forecasts so that our forecasted revenue reflects the amount of consideration we expect to be probable of recovering without a future significant reversal. We estimate the amount of revenue attributable to variable consideration using the expected value method (i.e., the sum of probability-weighted amounts) or the most likely amount method, whichever offers better prediction. Significant judgments are required in developing estimates for variable consideration.
Fair Value Measurements. We are often required to use fair value measurement techniques with inputs that require the use of estimates and involve significant judgment. These circumstances include:
•Impairment testing of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles when quantitative analysis is deemed necessary
•Impairment testing of long-lived assets when impairment indicators are present
•Impairment testing of investments as part of other than temporary impairment assessments when impairment indicators are present
•Fair value assessments of businesses held for sale that are reported at fair value less cost to sell
•Purchase price allocations for acquired businesses
When performing quantitative fair value or impairment evaluations, we estimate the fair value of our assets by considering the results of either or both income-based and market-based valuation approaches. Under the income approach, we prepare a discounted cash flow valuation model using recent forecasts and compare the estimated fair value of each asset to its carrying value. Cash flow forecasts are discounted using the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital at the date of evaluation. The weighted-average cost of capital is comprised of the cost of equity and the cost of debt with a weighting for each that reflects our current capital structure. Preparation of long-term forecasts involve significant judgments involving consideration of our backlog, expected future awards, customer attrition, working capital assumptions, and general market trends and conditions. Significant changes in these forecasts or any valuation assumptions, such as the discount rate selected, could affect the estimated fair value of our assets and could result in impairment expenses. Under the market approach, we consider market information such as multiples of comparable publicly traded companies and/or completed sales transactions to develop or validate our fair value conclusions, when appropriate and available.
Due to the impact of COVID and the decline in oil prices in 2020, we performed interim impairment testing of our goodwill, intangibles and certain equity method investments and recognized impairment expenses of $169 million, $27 million and $86 million, respectively. The impairment expense on goodwill and intangibles was included in Disc Ops. During 2019, we recognized impairment charges of $257 million related to certain equity method investments and $34 million related to intangible assets now included in Disc Ops.
Restructuring Accruals. We recognize and accrue restructuring related termination benefits when the recognition criteria under GAAP have been met, depending on the nature of the termination benefit. Recognition of termination benefits requires the use of estimates in determining the expected termination benefits payable, when they are probable of being realized and can be reasonably estimated. Our estimates consider the number of employees that we expect will be eligible to receive the benefit and the amount of benefit potentially payable to each employee based on either the terms of the plan or statutory entitlement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Item is described more fully in the Notes to Financial Statements.
Litigation and Matters in Dispute Resolution
Item is described more fully in the Notes to Financial Statements.
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
Our liquidity arises from available cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash generated from operations, capacity under our credit facilities and, when necessary, access to capital markets. We have committed and uncommitted lines of credit available for revolving loans and letters of credit. We believe that for at least the next 12 months, cash generated from operations, along with our unused credit capacity and cash position, is sufficient to support operating requirements. We regularly review our sources and uses of liquidity and may pursue opportunities to address our liquidity needs.
As of December 31, 2021, letters of credit totaling $429 million were outstanding under our $1.65 billion credit facility, which matures in February 2023. This credit facility contains customary financial covenants, including a debt-to-capitalization ratio that cannot exceed 0.65 to 1.00, a limitation on the aggregate amount of debt of the greater of $750 million or €750 million for our subsidiaries, and a minimum liquidity threshold of $1.25 billion, all as defined in the amended credit facility. The credit facility also contains provisions that will require us to provide collateral if we are downgraded to BB by S&P and Ba2 by Moody's, such collateral consisting broadly of liens on our U.S. assets. Borrowings under the facility, which may be denominated in USD, EUR, GBP or CAD, bear interest at a base rate, plus an applicable borrowing margin. As of December 31, 2021, we could have borrowed an additional $779 million under our credit facility.
In February 2022, we amended our credit facility to extend the maturity to February 2025, increase the size of the facility to $1.8 billion and decrease the debt-to-capitalization ratio to 0.60 to 1.00.
In 2022, we expect to pursue issuance of new senior notes to address the maturities currently scheduled for 2023 and 2024. We cannot predict the terms or conditions associated with any such issuance.
Cash and cash equivalents combined with marketable securities were $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2021 and $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents are held in numerous accounts throughout the world to fund our global project execution activities. Non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents amounted to $992 million and $984 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents exclude deposits of U.S. legal entities that are either swept into overnight, offshore accounts or invested in offshore, short-term time deposits, to which there is unrestricted access.
In evaluating our liquidity needs, we consider cash and cash equivalents held by our consolidated variable interest entities (joint ventures and partnerships). These amounts (which totaled $630 million and $655 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively) were not necessarily readily available for general purposes. We also consider the extent to which client advances (which totaled $74 million and $80 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively) are likely to be sustained or consumed over the near term for project execution activities and the cash flow requirements of our various foreign operations. In some cases, it may not be financially efficient to move cash and cash equivalents between countries due to statutory dividend limitations and/or adverse tax consequences. We did not consider any cash to be permanently reinvested outside the U.S. as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, other than unremitted earnings required to meet our working capital and long-term investment needs in non-U.S. foreign jurisdictions where we operate.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities result primarily from our EPC activities and are affected by changes in working capital associated with such activities. Working capital levels vary from period to period and are primarily affected by our volume of work and billing schedules on our projects. These levels are also impacted by the stage of completion and commercial terms of engineering and construction projects, as well as our execution of our projects compared to their budget. Working capital requirements also vary by project and the payments terms agreed to with our clients, vendors and subcontractors. Most contracts require payments as the projects progress. Additionally, certain projects receive advance payments from clients. A typical trend for our projects is to have higher cash balances during the initial phases of execution due to deposits paid to us which then diminish toward the end of the construction phase. As a result, our cash position is reduced as customer advances are utilized, unless they are replaced by advances on other projects. We maintain cash reserves and borrowing facilities to provide additional working capital in the event that a project’s net operating cash outflows exceed its available cash balances. As of December 31, 2021, our backlog included $1.1 billion for loss projects which may have a negative impact on our operating cash flow in future periods.
Our operating cash flow for 2021 was negatively impacted by increases in working capital on several large projects as well as higher cash payments of G&A. Operating cash flow in 2021 and 2020 were positively impacted by significant settlement payments on a cancelled rail project. Operating cash flow in 2020 and 2019 were positively impacted by decreases in project working capital.
We contributed $128 million, $130 million and $115 million into our DC plans during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $13 million, $25 million and $15 million into our DB plans during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to contribute up to $13 million to our DB plans in 2022, which is expected to be in excess of the minimum funding required. The remaining obligations under our Dutch DB plan and UK DB plan were settled in 2021 and 2019, respectively. The loss on settlement in both years consisted primarily of unrecognized actuarial losses included in AOCI and did not materially impact our cash position. For one of our discontinued operations, we participate in one multiemployer plan in which we are aware of
a significant unfunded benefit obligation. However, we believe we qualify for an exemption and do not believe we have a probable payment to the plan. Therefore, we have not recognized a liability related to this unfunded benefit obligation.
NuScale expenses were $69 million, $84 million and $66 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and were reported net of qualified reimbursable expenses of $69 million, $71 million and $57 million, respectively.
Investing Activities
Our investment policy focuses on, in order of priority, the preservation of capital, maintenance of liquidity and maximization of yield. Marketable securities may include money market funds, time deposits placed with highly-rated financial institutions, repurchase agreements that are fully collateralized by U.S. Government-related securities, high-grade commercial paper and high quality short-term and medium-term fixed income securities.
Capital expenditures during 2021 primarily related to construction equipment on certain infrastructure projects as well as expenditures for facilities and investments in information technology. Capital expenditures during 2020 and 2019 primarily related to construction equipment associated with the equipment operations now included in Disc Ops, as well as expenditures for facilities and investments in information technology.
Proceeds from sales of assets during 2021 includes the sale of the North American operations of the AMECO equipment business for $71 million as well as our 10% ownership interest in an infrastructure joint venture and a building in the U.S. During 2020, we sold substantially all of the assets of our AMECO equipment business in Jamaica as well as 100% of our interest in an equipment rental business in Europe. Also in 2020, we sold our interests in two infrastructure joint ventures in the Netherlands and one infrastructure joint venture in the U.S.
Investments in unconsolidated partnerships and joint ventures in 2021 included a $26 million capital contribution to COOEC Fluor, which satisfied our contractual funding requirements, as well as capital contributions to an Energy Solutions joint venture and a recently formed Mission Solutions joint venture. Investments in unconsolidated partnerships and joint ventures in 2020 and 2019 included capital contributions to two infrastructure joint ventures in the United States.
Financing Activities
In May 2021, we issued 600,000 shares of Series A 6.5% cumulative perpetual CPS in a private placement transaction involving a limited number of qualified institutional buyers. Each share of preferred stock has a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, plus accumulated but unpaid dividends, and is convertible, at the holder's option at any time into 44.9585 shares (the conversion rate) of our common stock per share of preferred stock. Cumulative cash dividends on the preferred stock are payable at an annual rate of 6.5% quarterly in arrears on February 15, May 15, August 15, and November 15, beginning on August 15, 2021, upon declaration of the dividend by our Board of Directors. Assuming that our Board of Directors approves dividends, the preferred stock will require approximately $39 million of annual dividend payments. Moreover, the issuance created added complexity to our quarterly EPS calculations. Accordingly, in determining our diluted earnings impact of the preferred stock, we will now assess the correlation between net earnings attributable to Fluor and dividends on the preferred stock as well as the effect of conversions of the preferred stock into our common stock, which could represent up to 27 million potentially dilutive shares.
After May 20, 2022 and before May 2024, we may elect to cause each share of CPS to convert into our common stock at the conversion rate, subject to certain conditions including a make-whole premium before May 2024, if our closing price per common share of our stock exceeds $28.92 for 20 consecutive trading days. After May 2024, we could make a similar election if our closing price per common share of our stock exceeds $22.24 for 20 consecutive trading days.
Dividends on the CPS were declared and paid in August and November 2021. Quarterly cash dividends of $0.10 per common share were paid in the first and second quarters of 2020. Quarterly cash dividends of $0.21 per common share were paid in all quarters of 2019. We suspended our common stock cash dividend during April 2020. The payment and level of future cash dividends is subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors.
In September 2021, we completed a tender offer in which we repurchased $375 million (face value) of 2023 Notes and $108 million (face value) of 2024 Notes, excluding accrued interest. Additionally, we redeemed $26 million of outstanding 2023 and 2024 Notes in open market transactions during 2021. We recognized $20 million in losses related to these redemptions which is included in interest expense.
Other borrowings (debt repayments) represent short-term bank loans and other financing arrangements associated with Stork.
Distributions paid to holders of NCI represent cash outflows to partners of consolidated partnerships or joint ventures created primarily for the execution of single contracts or projects. Distributions in 2021 primarily related to a transportation joint venture project in the United States. Distributions in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to a mining joint venture project in Chile.
Capital contributions by NCI during 2021 primarily related to new investments totaling $193 million by NuScale's NCI holders. We believe these contributions eliminated the need for any near-term contributions to NuScale by us. Capital contributions by NCI in 2020 related to three infrastructure joint ventures in the United States. Capital contributions by NCI in 2019 primarily related to initial investments from new partners in NuScale.
We have a common stock repurchase program, authorized by our Board of Directors, to purchase shares in the open market or privately negotiated transactions at our discretion. As of December 31, 2021, over 10 million shares could still be purchased under the existing stock repurchase program, although we do not have any immediate intent to begin such repurchases.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Letters of Credit
As of December 31, 2021, letters of credit totaling $429 million were outstanding under committed lines of credit and letters of credit totaling $896 million were outstanding under uncommitted lines of credit. Letters of credit are ordinarily provided to indemnify our clients if we fail to perform our obligations under our contracts. Surety bonds may be used as an alternative to letters of credit.
Guarantees
The maximum potential amount of future payments that we could be required to make under outstanding performance guarantees, which represents the remaining cost of work to be performed, was estimated to be $15 billion as of December 31, 2021.
Financial guarantees, made in the ordinary course of business in certain limited circumstances, are entered into with financial institutions and other credit grantors and generally obligate us to make payment in the event of a default by the borrower. These arrangements generally require the borrower to pledge collateral to support the fulfillment of the borrower’s obligation.
Inflation
Although inflation and cost trends affect our results, we mitigate these trends by seeking to fix our cost at or soon after the time of award on lump-sum or fixed-price contracts or to recover cost increases in cost reimbursable contracts.