ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and the section titled “Forward-Looking Information is Subject to Risk and Uncertainty” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 ("Annual Report") for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Company
We are a world-leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment integral to the movement, control and protection of the flow of materials in our customers’ critical processes. Our product portfolio of pumps, valves, seals, automation and aftermarket services supports global infrastructure industries, including oil and gas, chemical, power generation and water management, as well as general industrial markets where our products and services add value. Through our manufacturing platform and global network of QRCs, we offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately 16,000 employees (“associates”) globally and a footprint of manufacturing facilities and QRCs in more than 50 countries.
Our business model is significantly influenced by the capital spending of global infrastructure industries for the placement of new products into service and maintenance spending for aftermarket services for existing operations. The worldwide installed base of our products is an important source of aftermarket revenue, where products are intended to maximize operating time of many key industrial processes. We continue to invest in our aftermarket strategy to provide local support to drive customer investments in our offerings and use of our services to replace or repair installed products. The aftermarket portion of our business also helps provide business stability during various economic periods. The aftermarket business, which is primarily served by our network of 155 QRCs located around the globe, some of which are shared by our two business segments, provides a variety of service offerings for our customers including spare parts, service solutions, product life cycle solutions and other value-added services. It is generally a higher margin business compared to our original equipment business and a key component of our profitable growth strategy.
Our operations are conducted through two business segments that are referenced throughout this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"):
•Flowserve Pump Division ("FPD") for custom, highly-engineered pumps, pre-configured industrial pumps, pump systems, mechanical seals, auxiliary systems and replacement parts and related services; and
•Flow Control Division ("FCD") for engineered and industrial valves, control valves, actuators and controls and related services.
Our business segments share a focus on industrial flow control technology and have a high number of common customers. These segments also have complementary product offerings and technologies that are often combined in applications that provide us a net competitive advantage. Our segments also benefit from our global footprint, our economies of scale in reducing administrative and overhead costs to serve customers more cost effectively and shared leadership for operational support functions, such as research and development, marketing and supply chain.
The reputation of our product portfolio is built on more than 50 well-respected brand names such as Worthington, IDP, Valtek, Limitorque, Durco, Argus, Edward, Valbart and Durametallic, which we believe to be one of the most comprehensive in the industry. Our products and services are sold either directly or through designated channels to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world’s leading engineering, procurement and construction ("EPC") firms, original equipment manufacturers, distributors and end users.
We continue to leverage our QRC network to be positioned as near to customers as possible for service and support in order to capture valuable aftermarket business. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, we continuously improve our global operations. Despite recent headwinds caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic as well as recent supply chain disruption and labor constraints, we continue to enhance our global supply chain capability to increase our ability to meet global customer demands and improve the quality and timely delivery of our products over the long-term. Additionally, we continue to devote resources to improving the supply chain processes across our business segments to find areas of synergy and cost reduction and to improve our supply chain management capability to meet global customer demands. We also remain focused on improving on-time delivery and quality, while managing warranty costs as a percentage of sales across our global operations, through the assistance of a focused Continuous Improvement Process ("CIP") initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative, which includes lean manufacturing, six sigma business management strategy and value engineering, is to maximize service fulfillment to customers through on-time delivery, reduced cycle time and quality at the highest internal productivity.
COVID-19 Update
Our cross-functional crisis management team established during the first quarter of 2020 has continued monitoring and making recommendations to management to help us continue operating as an essential business, while also protecting the health and safety of our associates. We expect that widespread implications of the pandemic worldwide will continue to cause substantial economic uncertainty and challenging operational conditions through 2022. We continue to actively monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and geographies.
While we cannot reasonably estimate with certainty the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or its ultimate impact on the global economy, our business or our financial condition and results, we nonetheless remain committed to providing the critical support, products and services that our customers rely on, and currently believe that we will emerge from these events well positioned for long-term growth.
Health and Safety of Our Associates
The health and safety of our associates, suppliers and customers around the world continues to be a priority as we navigate the COVID-19 pandemic, including recent spikes in cases of the virus and its variants in various geographies in which we operate. These recent spikes caused significant labor availability issues among our associates in the second half of 2021, which contributed to the COVID-19 operational challenges faced during the second half of 2021. We are incredibly proud of the great teamwork exhibited by our global workforce who have demonstrated strong resilience in adapting to continually evolving health and safety guidelines while addressing these challenging times and providing products and services to our customers.
At the beginning of the pandemic we implemented policies and practices to help protect our workforce so they can safely and effectively carry out their vital work, and we have continued to revise those policies and practices in light of guidance received from local and regional health authorities where appropriate. For employees working in our facilities, including our global headquarters in Irving, Texas, which began a phased reopening during the second quarter of 2021, we continue taking steps, consistent with guidelines from local and global health experts to protect our employees so that we can continue operations and manufacture critical technologies and equipment, including providing face coverings and other personal protective equipment, enhanced cleaning of sites and the implementation of social distancing protocols.
Our employees and facilities have a key role in keeping essential infrastructure and industries operating, including oil and gas, water, chemical, power generation and other essential industries, such as food and beverage and healthcare. All of our facilities are open and operational as we continue to make essential products and provide services for our customers. The measures described above, combined with continued employee costs and under-absorption of manufacturing costs as a result of temporary closures and work-from-home policies, have had and are expected to continue having an adverse impact on our financial performance throughout the remainder of the pandemic. Despite the increased challenges of labor availability in the second half of 2021, we continue to expect a decline of these adverse impacts as we navigate further through the pandemic in 2022.
Customer Demand
During the year the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in global markets have continued to adversely impact our customers, particularly in the oil and gas markets. As a result of the pandemic’s effect (among certain other effects) on oil prices during 2020, many of our large customers reduced capital expenditures and budgets last year. To date, while spending for maintenance and repair projects and aftermarket services have returned close to pre-pandemic levels, project-based customer spending has yet to return to pre-pandemic levels despite some modest improvement during the year. In this regard, we saw an overall increase in bookings of 10.6% during 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Despite the modest improvement in customer spending, during the fourth quarter of the year we continued to experience customer-driven delays in the witnessing and inspection necessary to take delivery of equipment, which we
expect will continue as long as we and our customers continue to experience the supply chain and logistics headwinds described below under the heading "Supply Chain Impact."
While many of the repair and maintenance projects that were paused by our customers last year as a result of the pandemic have gone forward in 2021 and others will ultimately need to be completed, the timing will largely depend on the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and how the virus continues to spread in our customers’ various geographies, given the impact of the pandemic on demand, utilization and required maintenance. While we saw some recovery in capital expenditure budgets in 2021 and, therefore, our bookings during the year, capital spending did not approach pre-pandemic levels in 2021. We expect planned capital spending to increase in 2022 but remain below pre-pandemic levels.
Supply Chain Impact
Since the onset of the pandemic, many of our suppliers have also experienced varying lengths of production and shipping delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, some of which continue to exist in highly affected countries. Additionally, the global supply chain and logistics constraints that are currently affecting global markets caused additional headwinds in the second half of the year. These conditions have had an adverse effect on the speed at which we can manufacture and ship our products to customers, and have also led to an increase in logistics, transportation and freight costs, requiring that we diversify our supply chain and, in some instances, source materials from new suppliers. Additionally, these conditions have in some cases impacted our ability to deliver products to customers on time, which has in turn led to an increase in backlog at some of our manufacturing sites. These disruptions in our supply chain and their effects have continued and we expect they will continue as the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing global supply chain and logistics headwinds continue.
Operational Impacts
We have also engaged in a number of cost savings measures in order to help mitigate certain of the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results, including certain realignment activities (further described below under “OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS") for the period ended December 31, 2021, reductions in capital expenditures and continued cuts in other discretionary spending due to our response to the effects of COVID-19, which partially offsets the continued costs and operational impacts of the safety protocols and procedures that we have implemented and sustained as described above under the heading "Health and Safety of Our Associates." We continue to evaluate additional cost savings measures in order to reduce the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results.
We continually monitor and assess the spread of COVID-19 and known variants, including in areas that have seen recent increases in cases, and we will continue to adapt our operations to respond the changing conditions as needed. During the fourth quarter, we experienced increased difficulty in maintaining staffing and productivity levels due to both a higher infection rate among associates requiring quarantine and a tighter labor market for new hiring. As we continue to manage our business through this time of uncertainty and market volatility, we will remain focused on the health and safety of our associates, suppliers, customers, and will continue to provide essential products and services to our customers.
Our Markets
Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas, chemical, power generation, water management, and several other industries, such as mining, steel and paper, that are collectively referred to as "general industries."
Oil and Gas
The oil and gas industry, which represented approximately 35% and 34% of our bookings in 2021 and 2020, respectively, experienced a material decrease in capital spending in 2020 compared to the previous year. The decrease was primarily due to decreased project activity and short cycle investment resulting from the pandemic's negative impact on demand for refined products. Customers' repair and maintenance budgets improved in 2021 where bookings levels returned to roughly pre-pandemic levels, partially offsetting the decreased project activity and short cycle investment.
The outlook for the oil and gas industry is heavily dependent on the duration of the pandemic and its impact on fuel demand, demand growth from both mature markets and developing geographies as well as changes in the regulatory environment. While we believe that the pandemic will continue to negatively impact our customers' capital investment budgets, we expect 2022 capital investment to increase, but not to pre-pandemic levels. We further believe improved and stable oil prices provide support for increased demand for our aftermarket products and services. We believe the medium and long-term fundamentals for this industry remain attractive and see a stabilized environment with expected increased fuel demand on improved pandemic management, and as the industry works through current excess supply. In addition, we
believe projected depletion rates of existing fields and forecasted long-term demand growth will require additional investments. With our long-standing reputation in providing successful solutions for upstream, mid-stream and downstream applications, along with the advancements in our portfolio of offerings, we believe that we continue to be well-positioned to assist our customers in this improving environment.
Chemical
The chemical industry represented approximately 24% and 24% of our bookings in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The chemical industry is comprised of petrochemical, specialty chemical and pharmaceutical products. Capital spending in 2021 decreased primarily due to the pandemic's negative impact on demand for chemical products. Customers' repair and maintenance budgets improved in 2021 where bookings levels returned to roughly pre-pandemic levels.
The outlook for the chemical industry remains heavily dependent on global economic conditions. As global economies and unemployment conditions improve, a rise in consumer spending should follow. An increase in spending would drive greater demand for petrochemical, specialty chemical and pharmaceutical products supporting improved levels of capital investment. We believe the chemical industry will continue to invest in North America and Middle East capacity additions, maintenance and upgrades for optimization of existing assets and that developing regions will selectively invest in capital infrastructure to meet current and future indigenous demand. We believe our global presence and our localized aftermarket capabilities are well-positioned to serve the potential growth opportunities in this industry.
Power Generation
The power generation industry represented approximately 12% and 13% of our bookings in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, the power generation industry continued to experience softness in thermal power generation capital spending in the mature and key developing markets.
Natural gas-fired combined cycle (“NGCC”) plants increased their share of the energy mix, driven by market prices for gas remaining low and stable (partially due to the increasing global availability of liquefied natural gas (“LNG”)), low capital expenditures, and the ability of NGCC to stabilize unpredictable renewable sources. With the potential of unconventional sources of gas, the global power generation industry is forecasting an increased use of this form of fuel for power generation plants.
Despite fewer new nuclear plants being constructed in recent years, nuclear power remains an important contributor to the global energy mix. We continue to support our significant installed base in the global nuclear fleet by providing aftermarket and life extension products and services. Due to our extensive history, we believe we are well positioned to take advantage of this ongoing source of aftermarket and new construction opportunities.
Global efforts to limit the emissions of carbon dioxide may have some adverse effect on thermal power investment plans depending on the potential requirements imposed and the timing of compliance by country. However, many proposed methods of capturing and limiting carbon dioxide emissions offer business opportunities for our products and services. At the same time, we continue to take advantage of new investments in concentrated solar power generating capacity, where our pumps, valves, and seals are uniquely positioned for both molten salt applications as well as the traditional steam cycle.
We believe the long-term fundamentals for the power generation industry remain solid based on projected increases in demand for electricity driven by global population growth, growth of urbanization in developing markets and the increased use of electricity driven transportation. We also believe that our long-standing reputation in the power generation industry, our portfolio of offerings for the various generating methods, our advancements in serving the renewable energy market and carbon capture methodologies, as well as our global service and support structure, position us well for the future opportunities in this important industry.
Water Management
The water management industry represented approximately 3% and 3% of our bookings in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Water management industry activity levels increased in 2021 following the decrease in 2020 primarily due to the pandemic's negative impact on government budgets across the globe. Worldwide demand for fresh water, water treatment and re-use, desalination and flood control are expected to create requirements for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, particularly pumps. With improved management of the pandemic, we expect capital and aftermarket spending to rise in developed and emerging markets with governments and private industry providing funding for critical projects when their priorities shift away from pandemic-management.
The proportion of people living in regions that find it difficult to meet water requirements is expected to double by 2025. We believe that the persistent demand for fresh water during all economic cycles supports continued investments, especially in North America and developing regions.
General Industries
General industries represented, in the aggregate, approximately 26% and 26% of our bookings in 2021 and 2020, respectively. General industries comprise a variety of different businesses, including mining and ore processing, pulp and paper, food and beverage and other smaller applications, none of which individually represented more than 5% of total bookings in 2021 and 2020. General industries also include sales to distributors, whose end customers operate in the industries we primarily serve. General industry activity levels increased in 2021 primarily due to customers' improved repair and maintenance budgets.
The outlook for this group of industries is heavily dependent upon the condition of global economies and consumer confidence levels. The long-term fundamentals of many of these industries remain sound, as many of the products produced by these industries are common staples of industrialized and urbanized economies. We believe that our specialty product offerings designed for these industries and our aftermarket service capabilities will provide continued business opportunities.
Outlook for 2022
As the world continues to make progress against COVID-19 largely through increased vaccinations, we have seen an inflection in our served end-markets as commodity prices and mobility levels increase. With our increased backlog and improved market environment we expect to return to growth in 2022, however the combined effects of the supply chain, logistics and labor availability headwinds are expected to continue into the first half of 2022. Further, we have not seen and do not expect to see an increase in cancellations from our backlog. We therefore expect to continue to deliver on our backlog during 2022, though with a slightly longer cycle time than originally expected.
Our bookings were $3.8 billion during 2021. Because a booking represents a contract that can be, in certain circumstances, modified or canceled, and can include varying lengths between the time of booking and the time of revenue recognition, there is no guarantee that bookings will result in comparable revenues or otherwise be indicative of future results. Assuming continued progress with the pandemic and other supply chain, logistics and labor availability headwinds, we further expect full-year bookings in 2022 to increase versus 2021 levels.
On December 31, 2021, we had $988.1 million of fixed-rate Senior Notes outstanding. We expect our interest expense in 2022 will be lower compared with amounts incurred in 2021. Our results of operations may also be impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. See “