Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
The following analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Update
On April 28, 2020, we announced the exit of our Vehicle Seating, and the remainder of the Hospitality product lines, and subsequently closed our Dubuque, Iowa and Starkville, Mississippi manufacturing facilities. We completed substantially all the restructuring activities related to the exit of our Vehicle Seating and the remainder of the Hospitality product lines during fiscal 2021. Both product lines combined represented less than 1% of the Company’s total net sales for the fiscal year ended 2022.
Results of Operations
The following table has been prepared as an aid in understanding the Company’s results of operations on a comparative basis for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020. Amounts presented are percentages of the Company’s net sales.
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Net sales were $544.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to net sales of $478.9 million in the prior year, an increase of $65.4 million or 13.6%. Sales of products sold through retailers grew by $73.4 million or 17.8% primarily driven by pricing and a strong order backlog at the start of the year. Sales of products sold through e-commerce channels decreased by $8.0 million, or 12% due to a decrease in consumer demand.
Gross margin as a percent of net sales for the year ended June 30, 2022, was 13.4%, compared to 20.2% for the prior year period, a decrease of 680 basis points (“bps”). The 680-bps decrease was primarily driven by a 450-bps decrease related to ancillary charges caused by domestic supply chain disruptions and higher per diem charges, a decrease of 200-bps due to pricing promotions and inventory write-downs, a decrease of 110-bps related to capacity growth investments in a third additional manufacturing plant in Mexico, and a new distribution facility in Greencastle, Pennsylvania, and a decrease of 70-bps primarily related to cost inflation for materials, labor, and transportation, partially offset by an increase of 150-bps related to price realization.
Selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased by $1.2 million in the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A was 12.3% in the fiscal year 2022 compared to 14.2% of net sales in the prior fiscal year. The decrease of 190-bps is primarily due to a decrease of 170-bps due to leverage on year-over-year sales growth and a decrease of 100-bps due to lower incentive compensation and offset by an increase of 80-bps due to growth investments.
Restructuring expenses were $0.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2022, primarily for ongoing costs associated with our facilities listed as held for sale, professional fees, and former employee expenses as part of our previously announced comprehensive restructuring plan. See Note 5, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we completed the sale of our remaining Harrison, Arkansas facility, resulting in total net proceeds of $1.45 million, and a total gain of $1.4 million.
Income tax expense was $4.1 million, or an effective rate of 68.6%, during the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to income tax expense of $8.4 million in the prior year, or an effective tax rate of 26.8%. The effective tax rate is primarily impacted by changes in our deferred tax assets for which we do not receive the income tax benefit due to our full valuation allowance. See Note 10, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Net income was $1.9 million, or $0.28 per diluted share for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to net income of $23.0 million, or $3.09 per diluted share in the prior year.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net sales were $478.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to net sales of $366.9 million in the prior year, an increase of 30.5%. The increase in sales of $112.0 million was primarily driven by $138.8 million, or an increase of 51.1%, related to home furnishing products sold through retailers, and $5.9 million, or an increase of 9.7%, for home furnishing products sold through e-commerce. Net sales growth in our home furnishing products was virtually in all product categories due to increased demand, partially offset by a decline of $32.7 million primarily due to the exit from our Vehicle Seating and Hospitality product lines during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
Gross margin as a percent of net sales for the year ended June 30, 2021, was 20.2%, compared to 14.5% for the prior year, an increase of 570 basis points (“bps”). The 570-bps increase was primarily driven by structural cost reductions, operational efficiencies, and fixed cost leverage due to higher sales volume as compared to the prior year and lower inventory reserve due to demand.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $4.5 million in the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decline in SG&A expenses was primarily due to a $3.5 million reduction in bad debt expenses from the prior year driven by a customer bankruptcy. Higher sales commission expense resulting from increased sales was largely offset by other spending reductions and lower depreciation. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A was 14.2% in the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the prior year of 19.7%. The 550-bps decline compared to the prior year was primarily due to cost leverage gained from higher sales, reductions in non-essential spending due to COVID-19, lower depreciation expense due to assets sold or being held for sale, and lower bad debt expense as discussed above during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Restructuring expenses were $3.5 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, primarily for ongoing utilities and maintenance costs for our facilities listed as held for sale, professional fees, and employee termination costs as part of our previously announced comprehensive restructuring plan. See Note 5, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we completed the sale of our Dubuque, Iowa, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and one of our Harrison, Arkansas facilities, resulting in total net proceeds of $18.6 million, and a total gain of $5.9 million.
Income tax expense was $8.4 million, or an effective rate of 26.8%, during the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to an income tax benefit of $6.9 million in the prior year, or an effective tax rate of 20.5%.
Net income was $23.0 million, or $3.09 per diluted share for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $26.8 million, or $3.37 per diluted share in the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working capital (current assets less current liabilities) on June 30, 2022, was $125.4 million compared to $128.8 million on June 30, 2021. The $3.4 million decrease in working capital was due to an increase in cash of $0.8 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $35.6 million, a decrease of $14.9 million in trade receivables, a decrease in inventory of $19.9 million, a decrease of other current assets of $4.5 million and an increase in other liabilities of $0.5 million. Capital expenditures were $3.9 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
A summary of operating, investing, and financing cash flow is shown in the following table:
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, cash provided by operating activities was $8.0 million, which primarily consisted of net income of $1.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items including depreciation of $5.2 million, gain from the sale of capital assets of $1.8 million, stock-based compensation of $1.0 million and allowance reserve recoveries of $0.3 million. Net cash provided by operating assets and liabilities was $2.0 million and was primarily due to a decrease in accounts payable of $35.8 million due to a decrease in inventory, a decrease in inventory of $19.9 million due to fewer purchases intended to reduce inventory, a decrease in accounts receivable of $15.1 million primarily due to the timing of sales and collections, a decrease in other current assets of $4.0 million and a decrease in other liabilities of $1.2 million.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $32.7 million, which primarily consisted of net income of $23.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items including depreciation of $5.2 million, gain from the sale of capital assets of $5.9 million, change in deferred income taxes of $2.1 million, stock-based compensation of $3.7 million and bad debt expense of $1.6 million. Net cash used in operating assets and liabilities was $62.7 million. The cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $62.7 million, was primarily due to an increase in trade receivables of $25.2 million due to higher sales, an increase in inventory of $90.6 million due to inventory build for the beginning of fiscal 2022, partially offset by $9.4 million decline in other current assets primarily due to receipt of an income tax net refund of $5.6 million and increases in accounts payable of $40.0 million and accrued liabilities of $4.0 million.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash used in investing activities was $1.9 million, primarily due to capital expenditures of $3.8 million partially offset by proceeds of $1.9 million from the sale of our Harrison, Arkansas, facility, and the finalization of the sale of our transportation fleet equipment.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $16.1 million, primarily due to proceeds of $18.6 million for the sale of our Dubuque, IA, and Lancaster, PA, facilities and one of our Harrison, Arkansas facilities, partially offset by capital expenditures of $2.6 million.
Net cash (used in) financing activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash used in financing activities was $5.2 million, primarily due to proceeds from lines of credit of $265.1 million, offset by payments on lines of credit of $230.9 million, $35.0 million for treasury stock purchases, dividends paid of
$3.9 million, and $0.5 million for tax payments on employee vested restricted shares netted with proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $30.2 million, primarily due to $29.8 million for treasury stock purchases, dividends paid of $2.6 million and $1.3 million for tax payments on employee vested restricted shares.
Financing Arrangements
Line of Credit
On August 28, 2020, the Company entered a two-year secured $25.0 million revolving line of credit with Dubuque Bank and Trust Company, with an interest rate of 1.50% plus LIBOR, subject to a floor of 3.00%. The revolving line of credit was secured by essentially all the Company’s assets, excluding real property, and required the Company to maintain compliance with certain financial and non-financial covenants. This line of credit was subsequently canceled in the first quarter of the fiscal year 2022.
On September 8, 2021, the Company, as the borrower, entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the “Lender”), and the other lenders party thereto. The Credit Agreement has a five-year term and provides for up to an $85 million revolving line of credit. Subject to certain conditions, the Credit Agreement also provides for the issuance of letters of credit in an aggregate amount up to $5 million which, upon issuance, would be deemed advances under the revolving line of credit. The Company’s $1.2 million letters of credit previously issued by the Lender are being treated as outstanding under the Credit Agreement and reduce the amount of available borrowings under the revolving line of credit. Proceeds of borrowings were used to refinance all indebtedness owed to Dubuque Bank & Trust and for working capital purposes. The Company’s obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all its assets, excluding real property. Subject to certain conditions, borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.25% or 1.50% per annum, or an effective interest rate of 3.04% on June 30, 2022. When LIBOR becomes unavailable, the replacement rate will be determined pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, and covenants, including a financial covenant to maintain a fixed coverage ratio of not less than 1.00 to 1.00. In addition, the Loan Agreement places restrictions on the Company’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, to create liens or other encumbrances, to sell or otherwise dispose of assets, and to merge or consolidate with other entities.
On April 18, 2022, the Company, as the borrower, entered a first amendment to the September 8, 2021, Credit Agreement (“First Amendment to the Credit Agreement”), with the Lender, and the lenders party thereto. The first amendment to the Credit Agreement changed the definition of the term ‘Payment Conditions’ and further defines default or event of default and the calculation of the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio.
As of June 30, 2022, there was $37.7 million outstanding under the Credit Agreement, exclusive of fees and letters of credit.
Letters of credit outstanding at the Lender as of June 30, 2022, totaled $1.1 million
See Note 9 Credit Arrangements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations on June 30, 2022, and the effect these obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in the future (in thousands):
Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic, cost inflation, and supply-chain disruptions presented unprecedented challenges during fiscal 2022. Our focus for fiscal 2023 will be to remain financially agile with strong liquidity, continue building our foundation for profitable long-term growth in both retail and e-commerce sales channels, build global supply chain resiliency, expand sourcing, manufacturing, and distribution capacity to support future growth, strengthen digital capabilities, reimagine the customer experience, and build strong culture and talent.
During fiscal 2023, the Company anticipates spending $4.0 million to $4.5 million on capital expenditures. The Company plans to spend approximately $3.5 million for manufacturing productivity improvements and approximately $0.5 million for manufacturing software maintenance and general maintenance. The Company believes it has access to adequate working capital to meet these requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial statements and results of operations are based on consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the United States of America. Preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the use of estimates and judgments that affect the reported results. We use estimates based on the best information available in recording transactions and balances resulting from business operations. Estimates are used for such items as the collectability of trade accounts receivable and inventory valuation. Ultimate results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Allowance for Credit Losses - we establish an allowance for credit losses to reduce trade accounts receivable to an amount that reasonably approximates their net realizable value. Our accounts receivable allowances consist of an allowance for doubtful accounts which is established through a review of open accounts, historical collection, and historical write-off amounts. The amount ultimately realized from trade accounts receivable may differ from the amount estimated in the consolidated financial statements.
Inventories - we value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Our inventory valuation reflects markdowns for the excess of the cost over the amount expected to be realized and considers obsolete and excess inventory. Markdowns establish a new cost basis for the Company’s inventory. Subsequent changes in facts or circumstances do not result in the reversal of previously recorded markdowns or an increase in that newly established cost basis.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets - we periodically review the carrying value of long-lived assets and estimated depreciable or amortizable lives for continued appropriateness. This review is based upon projections of anticipated future cash flows and is performed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that asset carrying values may not be recoverable or that the estimated depreciable or amortizable lives may have changed. For assets held for sale, if the net book value of the asset is greater than its estimated fair value less cost to sell, an impairment is recorded for the excess of net book value over the estimated fair value less cost to sell. We recorded no impairments in the fiscal years 2022 and 2021.
Restructuring Costs - The Company groups exit or disposal cost obligations into three categories: Involuntary employee termination benefits, costs to terminate contracts, and other associated costs. Involuntary employee termination benefits must be a one-time benefit, and this element of restructuring cost is recognized as incurred upon communication of the plan to the identified employees. Costs to terminate contracts are recognized upon termination agreement with the provider. Other associated restructuring costs are expensed as incurred. Any inventory impairment costs as a result of restructuring activities are accounted for as costs of goods sold.
Income Taxes - In determining taxable income for financial statement purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments. These estimates and judgments affect the calculation of certain tax liabilities and the determination of the recoverability of certain of the deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets we consider all available positive and negative evidence including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, and our forecast of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we develop assumptions including the amount of future pre-tax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses.
We maintain valuation allowances with respect to our deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that all or a portion of such deferred tax assets will be realized. Our income tax expense recorded in the future may be reduced to the extent of decreases in our valuation allowances. The realization of our remaining deferred tax assets is primarily dependent on future taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction. Any reduction in future taxable income including but not limited to any future restructuring activities may require that we record an additional valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. An increase in the valuation allowance could result in additional income tax expense in such a period and could have a significant impact on our future earnings.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8. Note 1 Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.