ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Flexpoint Sensor Systems, Inc. is a company engaged principally in improving its unique sensor technology, expanding its suite of products, developing new sensor applications, obtaining financing and seeking long-term sustainable manufacturing contracts, licensing agreements and royalty agreements. Our operations have not yet commenced to a commercially sustainable level and include designing, engineering, manufacturing, licensing and selling sensor technology and products featuring our Bend Sensor® technology and equipment.
Finalizing long-term, constant revenue generating production contracts with our existing and other customers remains our greatest challenge because our on-going business is dependent on the types of revenues and cash flows generated by such contracts. Cash flow and cash requirement risks are closely tied to and are dependent upon our ability to attract significant long-term production contracts. We must continue to obtain funding to operate and expand our operations so that we can deliver our unique Bend Sensor® and Bend Sensor® related technologies and products to the market. Management believes that even though we are making positive strides forward with our business plan we will need to raise additional operating capital.
Worldwide automakers are faced with the challenge of providing a safer, more energy efficient, longer lasting product that consumers can afford. This has required automakers to search new and innovative ways to lower the overall weight of the vehicle and to improve its fuel efficiencies, while lowering the cost. We continue to experience an increased interest regarding automotive and other potential applications for our sensor technology because they meet this criterion. With its versatility, light weight, single layer construction and the fact that it is currently being used in various safety devices the Bend Sensor® is positioned well to meet the challenges that the automobile industry is facing.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Currently our revenue is primarily from design contract, testing and production services for prototypes and samples and recurring business, and is not to a level to support our operations. However, we believe, based upon current orders and projected orders over the next twelve months, that we could be producing sensors under long-term contracts that will help support our existing operations and potential future growth. Management recognizes such contracts usually go through a long negotiation process and there can be no guarantee that we will be successful in our negotiations or that such contracts will be sufficient to support our current operations in the near future.
For the past twelve months we have relied on the proceeds of convertible loans from existing shareholders, funds received under the Paycheck Protection Program and proceeds from sales. During 2021 and 2020, the Company secured financing to fund its operations by issuing additional convertible notes to Capital Communications LLC, First Equity Holdings and officers, the balances of which were $930,000 and $510,000 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net of $-0- and $540,000 in notes converted to shares of restricted common stock in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The notes have an annual interest rate of 10% and default rate of 15%, have various maturity dates, and are secured by the Company’s business assets.
Management believes that our current cash burn rate is approximately $60,000 per month and that proceeds from additional convertible notes and estimated revenues for engineering design and prototype products will be sufficient to fund the next twelve months of operations. Our auditors have expressed doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and that we may not realize significant revenue or become profitable within the next twelve months. We will require additional financing to fund our short-term cash needs. We will have to rely on additional debt financing, loans from existing shareholders and private placements of common stock for additional funding. Based upon our current purchase orders and anticipated purchase orders over the next twelve months our projected revenues by the end of 2021 are anticipated to cover our projected operating expenses, based on our current burn rate. However, we cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain short-term financing, or that sources of such financing, if any, will continue to be available, and if available, that they will be on terms favorable to us. Nor is there any guarantee that the projected volume of purchase orders will meet the volumes that we anticipate.
It is also possible that in the short term we may have to continue to issue common stock to pay for services and agreements rather than use our limited cash resources. Any issuance of common stock will likely be pursuant to exemptions provided by federal and state securities laws. The purchasers and manner of issuance will be determined according to our financial needs and the available exemptions. We also note that if we issue more shares of our common stock our shareholders may experience dilution in the value per share of their common stock.
As we enter into new agreements, we must ensure that those agreements provide adequate funding for any pre-production research and development and manufacturing costs. If we are successful in establishing agreements with adequate initial funding, management believes that our operations for the long term will be funded by revenues, licensing fees and/or royalties related to these agreements. However, we have formalized only a few agreements during the past four years and there can be no assurance that the agreements will generate sufficient revenues or be profitable in the future or that a desired technological application will be successful enough to produce the volumes and profits necessary to fund our operations.
Finalizing long-term, constant revenue generating production contracts with our existing and other customers remains our greatest challenge because our on-going business is dependent on the types of revenues and cash flows generated by such contracts. Cash flow and cash requirement risks are closely tied to and are dependent upon our ability to attract significant long-term production contracts. This process has been impacted by the recent Pandemic and we are unable to determine what the long-term effect of these impacts will be at this time. We must continue to obtain funding to operate and expand our operations so that we can deliver our unique Bend Sensor® and Bend Sensor® related technologies and products to the market. Management believes that even though we are making positive strides forward with our business plan we will need to raise additional operating capital
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Our principal commitments at December 31, 2021 consist of total current liabilities of $3,634,168, which includes $728,513 in convertible notes.
We currently occupy approximately 8,029 square feet of office and manufacturing space leased from D&M Management, Inc. The building is located in a commercial business district in West Jordan, Utah which consists primarily of high-tech manufacturing firms and it is located adjacent to a major intersection, allowing easy access to Utah’s main interstate highway. The lease is for a period of twelve months with a 90-day notice clause if our intent is to renew the lease for additional periods. We pay $6,787 per month for this lease.
Our total current liabilities include accounts payable of $226,447 related to normal operating expenses, including health insurance, utilities, production supplies, legal expenses and travel expense. Accrued liabilities at December 31, 2021, were $2,203,727 and were related to payroll tax liabilities, tax expenses, accrued interest, investor relations consulting, and accrued Paid Time Off, a combination vacation-sick leave policy, and amounts due to related parties.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussions are based on the consolidated operations of Flexpoint Sensor Systems, Inc. and its former subsidiaries, Sensitron, Inc. and Flexpoint International, LLC, and should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These financial statements are included in this report at Part II, Item 8, below.
SUMMARY OF OPERATING RESULTS
For the year
ended
For the year
ended
December 31,
December 31,
Engineering, contract, licensing and testing revenue
$ 210,249
$ 99,438
Total operating costs and expenses
(923,523 )
(895,239 )
Net other income (expense)
25,572
188,735
Net loss
(687,702 )
(607,066 )
Basic and diluted loss per common share
$ (0.01 )
$ (0.01 )
Our revenue for 2021 increased $110,811 as compared to 2020. The increase resulted from increased product sales and development fees. The increase of our revenue was primarily derived from the manufacturing of sensors for the wearable and toy industries, design and development engineering, prototype products and sales of our fully integrated products. Revenue from research and development engineering and prototype product contracts is generally recognized as the services are provided and accepted by the customer. Revenue from the sale of a product is recorded at the time of shipment to the customer. Management anticipates that revenue will increase as we continue to provide engineering services and our customers continue to order more frequently and in larger quantities.
Total operating costs and expenses were $923,523 in 2021 compared to $895,239 in 2020. Administrative and marketing expenses for 2021 include $34,669 in moving expenses. As we are working to commercialize products and establish distribution channels, we are also working to bring greater efficiencies and cost reductions to our operations.
For the year ending December 31, 2021 net other income was $25,572. This compares to other income of $188,735 in 2020. Other income is comprised primarily of interest expense of $96,983 in 2021, offset by $119,000 in gain on forgiveness of PPP loans. Other income of $443,636 was offset in part by $255,185 in interest expense in 2020.
As we continued to mature into a manufacturing company our engineering design and production revenues increased. As we expand and sell our existing suite of products, and as we grow the relationship with our customers, we expect this trend to continue in the future. We are not able to guarantee that our operating losses will be reduced in the short term. The chart below presents a summary of our consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
SUMMARY OF BALANCE SHEET INFORMATION
Year ended
December 31,
Year ended
December 31,
Cash and cash equivalents
$
$ -
Total current assets
9,832
22,807
Total assets
4,920,373
4,921,225
Total liabilities
3,634,168
2,947,318
Accumulated deficit
(30,082,373 )
(29,394,671 )
Total stockholder’s equity
$ 1,346,205
$ 1,973,907
Cash and cash equivalents were $402 in 2021 compared to an overdraft of $19,650 in 2020, an increase of $20,052. The cash increase in 2021 is attributable to the funds raised to cover operating expenses. Until such time as our revenue increases, cash to fund our operations will be our most critical factor. As we expand our customer base and product offerings, we will need to raise additional operating capital during 2022. It is expected that this will be accomplished by securing additional loans from related parties and existing shareholders, through the private placement of stock, or through the licensing of our technology. We anticipate that we will need to raise approximately $500,000 to $800,000 in funding to support our existing operations and our anticipated growth during 2022.
Our current assets decreased to $4,342 during the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $22,807 during the same period in 2020. This decrease is primarily due to a decrease of $13,574 in deposits. The increase in our non-current assets at December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is due to a long-term rent deposit. Our fixed assets and patents and proprietary technology are all fully amortized.
Accrued liabilities increased at December 31, 2021 by $357,345 when compared to December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to the accrual of interest expense related to notes payable and accrued consulting fees. Total liabilities increased by $686,850 at December 31, 2021 due to the aforementioned increase in accrued liabilities and the increase in convertible notes payable as notes were issued to provide funds to meet operating expenses, offset in part by the retirement of the PPP loan through forgiveness of debt.
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PARTIES
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had accounts payable of $20,481 and $5,200 to its Chief Executive Officer for reimbursement of various operating expenses paid by him and a loan which he made the Company.
During 2019, the Company and the Company’s CEO and the Chairman of the Board agreed to convert $17,000 and $22,000, respectively, of accounts payable into convertible debt bearing 8% annual interest (with a 12% default rate) and are convertible into shares of common stock at the rate of $0.06 per share. At December 31, 2021 there are related party convertible notes outstanding with principal balances of $164,257 and $54,257 which are due to the CEO and the Chairman of the Board of the Company, respectively. Of the total balance, $114,514 are convertible notes bearing an 8% annual rate of interest (with a 12% default rate) and are convertible into shares of common stock at the rate of $0.07 per share and $104,000 are convertible notes bearing 8% annual interest (with a 12% default rate) and are convertible into shares of common stock at the rate of $0.06 per share. All the convertible notes payable related parties have a maturity date of March 31, 2022.
The Company filed an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation whereby the shareholders approved an increase in the number of shares of common stock authorized. With the filing of the amendment the Company now has sufficient authorized shares to issue to convert all convertible notes and stock options and therefore no longer needs to treat those financial instruments as derivatives. The notes are secured by the business equipment of the Company.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates of particular significance in our financial statements include goodwill and the annual tests for impairment of goodwill and valuing stock option compensation.
We annually test long-lived assets for impairment or when a triggering event occurs. Impairment is indicated if undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets. The analysis compared the present value of projected net cash flows for the remaining current year and next two years against the carrying value of the long-lived assets. Under similar analysis no impairment charge was taken during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 or the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Impairment tests will be conducted on a regular basis and, should they indicate a carrying value in excess of fair value, additional charges may be required.
We account for stock options under Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718, Stock Compensation. The pronouncement requires that recognition of the cost of employee services received in exchange for stock options and awards of equity instruments be based on the grant-date fair value of such options and awards and is recognized as an expense in operations over the period they vest. The fair value of the options we have granted is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes American option-pricing model. Option pricing models require the input of highly sensitive assumptions, including expected stock volatility. Also, our stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options, and changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. Management believes the best input assumptions available were used to value the options and that the resulting option values are reasonable. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we recognized $0 and $0, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense for our stock options and there is no additional unrecognized compensation cost related to employee stock options that will be recognized based upon the current grants issued.