Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide a comprehensive review of the Company’s operating results and financial condition. The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Information related to the comparison of the results of operations for the years December 31, 2020 to 2019 is found in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 15, 2021.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views and are not historical facts. These statements may include statements regarding projected performance for periods following the date of this report. These statements can generally be identified by use of phrases such as “believe,” “expect,” “will,” “seek,” “should,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “target,” “project,” “commit” or other words of similar import. Similarly, statements that describe our future financial condition, results of operations, objectives, strategies, plans, goals or future performance and business are also forward-looking statements. Statements that project future financial conditions, results of operations and shareholder value are not guarantees of performance and many of the factors that will determine these results and values are beyond our ability to control or predict. For those statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” sections and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. The following is a non-exclusive list of factors, that could cause our actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
◾
the pendency, duration, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
◾
changes in general economic conditions, either nationally, in California, or in our local markets;
◾
inflation, changes in interest rates, securities market volatility and monetary fluctuations;
◾
increases in competitive pressures among financial institutions and businesses offering similar products and services;
◾
higher defaults in our loan portfolio than we expect;
◾
changes in management’s estimate of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses;
◾
risks associated with our growth and expansion strategy and related costs;
◾
increased lending risks associated with our high concentration of real estate loans;
◾
legislative or regulatory changes or changes in accounting principles, policies or guidelines;
◾
technological changes;
◾
regulatory or judicial proceedings; and
◾
other factors and risks including those described under “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, estimated, expected, projected, intended, committed or believed. Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements are discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please take into account that forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (or documents incorporated by reference, if applicable).
The Company does not undertake any obligation to publicly correct or update any forward-looking statement if it later becomes aware that actual results are likely to differ materially from those expressed in such forward-looking statement, except as required by law.
Overview
Farmers & Merchants Bancorp (the “Company”, “FMCB”, or “we”) is the holding company for Farmers & Merchants Bank of Central California (the “Bank” or “FMB). The Bank is a full-service community bank providing loans, deposit and cash management services to individuals and businesses. Our primary clients are small- to medium-sized businesses that require highly personalized commercial banking products and services. The Bank has 29 branch locations and 3 ATMs that have been serving communities in the mid Central Valley of California for over 100 years.
The primary source of funding for our asset growth has been the generation of core deposits, which we raise through our existing branch locations, newly opened branch locations, or through acquisitions. Our recent loan growth is primarily the result of organic growth generated by our seasoned relationship managers and supporting associates who provide outstanding service and responsiveness to our clients or through acquisitions.
Our results of operations are largely dependent on net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income we earn on interest earning assets, which are comprised of loans, investment securities and short-term investments, and the interest we pay on our interest bearing liabilities, which are primarily deposits, and, to a lesser extent, other borrowings. Management strives to match the re-pricing characteristics of the interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities to protect net interest income from changes in market interest rates and changes in the shape of the yield curve.
We measure our performance by calculating our net interest margin, return on average assets, and return on average equity. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income, which is the difference between interest income on interest earning assets and interest expense on interest bearing liabilities, by average interest earning assets. Net interest income is our largest source of revenue. Interest rate fluctuations, as well as changes in the amount and type of earning assets and liabilities, combine to affect net interest income. We also measure our performance by our efficiency ratio, which is calculated by dividing non-interest expense by the sum of net interest income and non-interest income.
Selected Financial Data
The following condensed consolidated statements of financial condition and operations and selected performance ratios as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 and for the years then ended have been derived from our audited consolidated financial statements. The information below is qualified in its entirety by the detailed information included elsewhere herein and should be read along with this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Item 8, Financial Statement and Supplementary Data”.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In the opinion of management, the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition and related Consolidated Statements of Income, Comprehensive Income, Changes in Shareholders’ Equity and Cash Flows. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the financial statements.
Various elements of our accounting policies, by their nature, are inherently subject to estimation techniques, valuation assumptions and other subjective assessments. In particular, management has identified certain accounting policies that, due to the judgments, estimates and assumptions inherent in those policies, are critical to an understanding of our financial statements. Management believes the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the financial statements are appropriate based on the factual circumstances at the time. However, given the sensitivity of the financial statements to these critical accounting policies, the use of other judgments, estimates and assumptions could result in material differences in our results of operations or financial condition. Further, subsequent changes in economic or market conditions could have a material impact on these estimates and our financial condition and operating results in future periods. For additional information concerning critical accounting policies, see the Selected Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the following:
Use of Estimates - The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates the estimates used. Estimates are based upon historical experience, current economic conditions and other factors that management considers reasonable under the circumstances and the actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions. The allowance for credit losses, deferred income taxes, and fair values of financial instruments are estimates, which are particularly subject to change.
Allowance for Credit Losses - The Company recognizes there is risk of credit losses with financial instruments, to include loans, and unfunded loan commitments, where the Company advances funds to a counterparty. The risk of credit losses varies with, among other things, the type of financial instrument, the creditworthiness and cash flows of the counterparty, any guarantees from government agencies, and the collateral, if any, used to secure the financial instrument. The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses on loans and unfunded commitments held in accordance with GAAP. The allowance for credit losses represents our estimate of probable losses inherent in our existing loan portfolio. The allowance for credit losses is increased by charging a provision for credit losses against income and reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries.
We evaluate our allowance for credit losses quarterly based on a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, including levels and trends of past due and non-accrual loans, asset classifications, loan grades and internal loan reviews, change in volume and mix of loans, collateral value, historical loss experience, size and complexity of individual credits, loan concentrations and economic conditions. Allowance for credit losses is provided on both a specific and general basis. Specific allowances are provided for impaired credits for which the expected/anticipated loss is measurable. General valuation allowances are based on a portfolio segmentation based on risk grading, with a further evaluation of various quantitative and qualitative factors.
The Company begins its determination of credit losses by evaluating historical credit loss experience by loan segment. Historical loss information may be adjusted based on specific risk characteristics by loan segment. Such risk characteristics may include, but are not necessarily limited to, changes in lending policies and procedures, including changes in underwriting standards and collection, charge-off, and recovery practices not considered elsewhere in estimating credit losses; changes in national and local economic conditions and forecasts; changes in the nature and volume of the loans and in the terms of such instruments; changes in the experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; changes in the volume and severity of past due status, the volume of nonaccrual loans, and the volume and severity of adversely classified or graded loans; changes in the quality of the institution’s loan review system; changes in the value of underlying collateral for collateral-dependent loans; the existence and effect of any concentrations of credit, and changes in the level of such concentrations; and the effect of other external factors such as competition and legal and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses.
While the Company utilizes a systematic methodology in determining its allowance, the allowance is based on estimates, and ultimate losses may vary from current estimates. The estimates are reviewed periodically and, as adjustments become necessary, are reported in earnings in the periods in which they become known. For additional information, see Note 5, located in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments is classified in other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments is increased by charging a provision for credit losses on unfunded commitments, which was reported in other non-interest expenses for 2021 and prior.
We believe that our allowance for credit losses was adequate to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Investment Securities - GAAP requires that investment securities available for sale be carried at fair value which is based on quoted market prices or if quoted market prices are not available, fair values are extrapolated from the quoted prices of similar instruments. Management utilizes the services of a reputable third-party vendor to assist with the determination of estimated fair values. Unrealized holding gains and losses on securities classified as available for sale are excluded from earnings and are reported net of tax as accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”), a component of shareholders’ equity, until realized. Investment securities held to maturity are carried at the amortized costs of such securities.
Investment securities are evaluated for impairment on at least a quarterly basis and more frequently when economic or market conditions warrant such an evaluation to determine whether a decline in their value is other than temporary. Management utilizes criteria such as the magnitude and duration of the decline and our intent and ability to retain our investment in the securities for a period sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair value, in addition to the reasons underlying the decline, to determine whether the loss in value is other than temporary. The term “other than temporary” is not intended to indicate that the decline is permanent but indicates that the prospect for a near-term recovery of value is not favorable, or that there is a lack of evidence to support a realizable value equal to or greater than the carrying value of the investment. Once a decline in value is determined to be other-than-temporary and we do not intend to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will not be required to sell the security before recovery, only the portion of the impairment loss representing credit exposure is recognized as a charge to earnings, with the balance recognized as a charge to other comprehensive income. If management intends to sell the security or it is more likely than not that, we will be required to sell the security before recovering its forecasted cost; the entire impairment loss is recognized as a charge to earnings.
At December 31, 2021, we had no investment securities that were other-than-temporarily impaired.
Goodwill - Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase considerations paid over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of the fair values of liabilities assumed in a business combination it is not amortized but is reviewed annually, or more frequently as current circumstances and conditions warrant, for impairment. An assessment of qualitative factors is completed to determine if it is more likely than not that, the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the qualitative analysis concludes that further analysis is required, then a quantitative impairment test would be completed. The quantitative goodwill impairment compares the reporting unit’s estimated fair values, including goodwill, to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds its reporting unit’s fair value, then an impairment loss would be recognized as a charge to earnings, but is limited by the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Other Intangible Assets - Other intangible assets consists primarily of core deposit intangibles (“CDI”), which are amounts recorded in business combinations or deposit purchase transactions related to the value of transaction-related deposits and the value of the client relationships associated with the deposits. Core deposit intangibles are amortized over the estimated useful lives of such deposits. These assets are reviewed at least annually for events or circumstances that could affect their recoverability. These events could include loss of the underlying core deposits, increased competition or adverse changes in the economy. The amortization of our CDI is recorded in other non-interest expense. To the extent other identifiable intangible assets are deemed unrecoverable; impairment losses are recorded in other non-interest expense to reduce the carrying amount of the assets.
Fair Value Measurements - The Company discloses the fair value of financial instruments and the methods and significant assumptions used to estimate those fair values. The estimated fair value amounts have been determined by the Company using available market information and appropriate valuation methodologies. The use of assumptions and various valuation techniques, as well as the absence of secondary markets for certain financial instruments, will likely reduce the comparability of fair value disclosures between financial institutions. In some cases, book value is a reasonable estimate of fair value due to the relatively short period between origination of the instrument and its expected realization.
For additional information, see