Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Forum Merger IV Corporation,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Forum Merger IV Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its initial public offering filed with the SEC. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 15, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a business combination after our initial public offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $2,091,085, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $1,891,019, transaction costs allocated to warrants of $399,286, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $26,202 and a change in fair value of warrants of $173,018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 22, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 930,000 private placement units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit in which the Sponsor purchased 780,000 private placement units and Jefferies LLC purchased 150,000 private placement units, generating gross proceeds of $9,300,000.
On March 30, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,601,509 units at a price of $10.00 per unit and the sale of an additional 72,301 private placement units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit, generating total gross proceeds of $36,738,100. In connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, the Sponsor purchased an additional 54,022 private placement units and Jefferies LLC purchased an additional 18,008 private placement units. Each private placement unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-fourth of one warrant.
Following the initial public offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement units, a total of $336,015,090 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $18,998,772 in initial public offering related costs, including $6,720,300 of underwriting fees, $11,760,528 of deferred underwriting fees and $517,944 of other costs.
For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,282,875. Net loss of $2,091,085 was affected by transaction costs allocable to warrants of $399,286, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $173,018 and interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $26,202. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $608,144 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $336,041,292 consisting of money market funds. Income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,524,181. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,200,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into private placement-equivalent units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. Such units would be identical to the private placement units, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period of the underlying warrants. The terms of such working capital loans by our Sponsor or its affiliates, or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Going Concern
We have until March 22, 2023 to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 22, 2023.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On January 15, 2021, the Sponsor purchased 8,625,000 shares of our Class B common stock for an aggregate price of $25,000. The founder shares included an aggregate of up to 1,125,000 shares of Class B common stock subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment was not exercised in full or in part, so that the Sponsor will own, on an as-converted basis, 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the initial public offering (assuming the Sponsor does not purchase any public shares in the initial public offering and excluding the private placement shares). As a result of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option on March 30, 2021, a total of 224,623 founder shares were forfeited and 900,377 founder shares are no longer subject to forfeiture, resulting in an aggregate of 8,400,377 founder shares issued and outstanding.
The Sponsor has agreed, subject to certain limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of its founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a business combination or (B) subsequent to a business combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Administrative Support Agreement
We entered into an agreement, commencing on March 17, 2021, to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $30,000 per month for 24 months, or $720,000 in the aggregate, for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support (which payments will be accelerated if we consummate our initial business combination prior to the end of our 24-month term, or $720,000 in the aggregate). For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred $278,000 and paid $308,000 in fees for these services, of which $30,000 is included in prepaid expenses in the accompanying balance sheet.
Related Party Loans
On January 28, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “promissory note”). The promissory note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the completion of the initial public offering. The outstanding balance under the promissory note of $110,000 was repaid at the closing of the initial public offering on March 22, 2021. Borrowings under the promissory note are no longer available to us.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“working capital loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the working capital loans. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,200,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into units of the post business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the private placement units. As of December 31, 2021, no working capital loans were outstanding.
Due to Sponsor
The Sponsor advanced $675,038 to us in anticipation of the amount to be paid for the purchase of additional private placement units in the event the underwriters’ exercise their over-allotment option. The advance is non-interest bearing and due on demand. As of December 31, 2021, $34 remains outstanding.
Other Contractual Obligations
Other than as described herein, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Registration Rights Agreement
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on March 17, 2021, the holders of the founder shares (including any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares), private placement units, private placement shares, private placement warrants (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants), and securities that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans are entitled to registration rights requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the underwriters may not exercise their demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five and seven years after the effective date of the registration statement related to the initial public offering and may not exercise their demand rights on more than one occasion. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the initial public offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On March 30, 2021, the underwriters elected to partially exercise their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,601,509 units and forfeited their option to purchase an additional 898,491 units.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $11,760,528 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters solely in the event that we fail to complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815. We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The private placement warrants and the public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ deficit. Our public Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 15, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.