Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors" within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading medical device company exclusively focused on the foot and ankle orthopedic market and we are dedicated to improving patient lives. Our innovative orthopedic solutions, procedural approaches and instrumentation cover a wide range of foot and ankle ailments including fracture fixation, bunions, hammertoe, ankle, progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD) or flatfoot, charcot foot and orthobiologics. To treat these painful, debilitating or even life-threatening conditions, we provide a comprehensive portfolio of solutions that includes surgical implants and disposables, as well as surgical instrumentation. Our broad suite of surgical solutions comprises 73 product systems, including approximately 9,100 SKUs to help fit the specific needs of each patient. We design each of our products with both the patient and surgeon in mind, with the goal of improving outcomes, reducing ailment recurrence and complication rates, and making the procedures simpler, consistent and reproducible. We believe our passion, expertise, and exclusive focus in the foot and ankle market has allowed us to better understand the needs of our patients and physicians, which has enabled us to create innovations and enhanced solutions that disrupt and transform the foot and ankle market. As a result, we have experienced significant growth and momentum in our business.
We established Paragon 28 in 2010 as a company exclusively dedicated to the foot and ankle market. Since then, we have developed a comprehensive portfolio of foot and ankle surgical systems and procedural techniques designed to address the primary conditions requiring treatment in the foot and ankle, including fracture fixation; bunions; hammertoe; ankle; PCFD or flatfoot; charcot foot; and orthobiologics. Smart 28, the company’s ecosystem of enabling technologies for pre-operative planning, intra-operative support, and post-operative evaluation, was augmented by the Additive Orthopaedics acquisition in 2021 and the Disior acquisition in the first quarter of 2022. With the Additive acquisition, we acquired the only 3-D printed, patient specific total talus spacer authorized for marketing pursuant to an approved HDE application, plus a proprietary, pre-operative surgical planning platform. With Disior, we acquired a leading three-dimensional analytics pre-operative planning software company based in Helsinki, Finland. These transactions broadened our capabilities within the pre-operative and intra-operative stages of the foot and ankle continuum of care. We expect to continue to invest in Smart 28 to improve foot and ankle patient outcomes.
Our broad commercial footprint spans across all 50 United States and 23 other countries. In the United States we primarily sell to hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers through a network of primarily independent sales representatives, the majority of whom are exclusive. Outside the United States we primarily sell to hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers through a network of sales representatives and stocking distributors. We plan to efficiently grow our sales organization and network to expand into new territories in the United States. We are also highly focused on expanding our global network by expanding our sales footprint in existing and select new international markets based on our assessment of size and opportunity.
We currently leverage multiple third-party manufacturing relationships to ensure low cost production while maintaining a capital efficient business model. We have multiple sources of supply for many of our surgical solutions’ critical components. Nearly all of our supply agreements do not have minimum manufacturing or purchase obligations. As such, we generally do not have any obligation to buy any given quantity of products, and our suppliers generally have no obligation to sell to us or to manufacture for us any given quantity of our products or components for our products. In most cases, we have redundant manufacturing capabilities for each of our products. Except during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not experienced any significant difficulty obtaining our products or components for our products necessary to meet demand, and we have only experienced limited instances where our suppliers had difficulty supplying products by the requested delivery date. We believe manufacturing capacity is sufficient to meet market demand for our products for the foreseeable future.
Net revenue was $147.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $111.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss was $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net income of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA is not a financial measure under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for an explanation of how we compute this non-GAAP financial measure and for the reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash of $109.4 million and $17.5 million, respectively, and retained earnings (deficit) of $(0.5) million and $12.4 million, respectively. Our primary sources of capital from inception through December 31, 2021 have been from cash flows from operations, proceeds from our Series A and Series B private equity offerings, proceeds from our public offering and proceeds from our credit facilities.
On October 19, 2021, we completed our initial public offering of 8,984,375 shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $16.00 per share. The gross proceeds from the initial public offering were approximately $143.8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us. The net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions were $133.7 million. We incurred $4.3 million of offering expenses that were initially classified as deferred IPO costs and then reclassed to offset against proceeds for the year ended December 31, 2021. Upon the completion of the IPO, all convertible preferred stocks then outstanding, including 13,812,500 shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock and 6,608,700 shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock, converted into an aggregate of 20,421,200 shares of common stock. The $2.3 million of accrued cash dividends for the Series B convertible preferred stock were not declared by the board and consequently reversed upon conversion.
We believe that our existing cash and available debt borrowings will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months.
We have invested heavily in both research and development and expansion of our sales and marketing functions and expect to continue to make substantial investments in these areas. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and those of the NYSE, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. As a result of these and other factors, we may require additional financing to fund our operations and planned growth. We may also seek additional financing opportunistically. We may seek to raise any additional capital by entering into partnerships or through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, credit or loan facilities or a combination of one or more of these funding sources. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe our performance and continued success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities. These factors include:
Investments in Product Development and Innovation, including Smart 28
We expect to continue to focus on long-term revenue growth through investments in our business. In research and development, our team is continually working on new products and iterations of our existing products. Further, we anticipate we will continue to invest significantly in our Smart 28 initiatives in order to improve patient outcomes by augmenting existing products and creating new products and related services that employ advanced technologies. We are committed to continuously expanding our portfolio of foot and ankle solutions and to bring next-generation products to market. While research and development and clinical testing are time consuming and costly, we believe expanding into new indications, implementing product improvements and continuing to demonstrate the efficacy, safety and cost effectiveness of our products through clinical data are all critical to increasing the adoption of our solutions. We continue to invest in programs to educate physicians who treat foot and ankle about the advantage of products. Accordingly, in the near term, we expect these activities to increase our operating expenses, but in the longer term we anticipate they will positively impact our business and results of operations.
Continued Commercial Expansion in the United States and International Markets
In sales and marketing, we are also dedicating meaningful resources to expand our commercial team in the United States and in international markets. Our top commercial priorities in the United States include sales force expansion, expansion of our surgeon customer base, sales force channel productivity and increasing surgeon utilization. Our top commercial priorities in the international markets include expanding our market share in existing countries and targeting new countries where we can maximize strong average selling price (ASP) and margins. Our current expansion targets include Brazil, Colombia, Japan, Mexico, Sweden, Taiwan and Costa Rica, and we are exploring potential future opportunities in India. This process requires significant education and training for our commercial team to achieve the level of technical competency with our products that is expected by physicians and to gain experience
building demand for our products. Upon completion of the training, our commercial team typically requires time in the field to grow their network of accounts and increase their productivity to the levels we expect. Successfully recruiting, training and retaining additional sales representatives will be required to achieve growth, which will require significant investments by us.
Continued and Expanded Access to Hospital Facilities
In the United States, in order for physicians to use our products, the hospital facilities where these physicians treat patients often require us to enter into purchasing contracts directly with the hospital facilities or with the GPOs of which the hospital facilities are members. This process can be lengthy and time-consuming and requires extensive negotiations and management time. In markets outside the United States, we may be required to engage in a contract bidding process in order to sell our products, where the bidding processes are only open at certain periods of time, and we may not be successful in the bidding process.
Inventory, Surgical Instrumentation and Supply Chain Management
Given the large variety and number of products we sell, in order to market and sell them effectively, we must maintain significant levels of inventory and surgical instrumentation. As a result, a significant amount of cash is expended for inventory and surgical instrumentation. There may also be times in which we determine that our inventory does not meet our product requirements. We may also over- or underestimate the quantities of required components, in which case we may expend extra resources or be constrained in the amount of end product that we can procure. These factors subject us to the risk of obsolescence and expiration, which may lead to impairment charges. Additionally, as we release later generations of products that contain advancements or additional features, the earlier generations may become obsolete.
Seasonality
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience seasonality in our business, with our highest sales volumes in the U.S. occurring in the fourth calendar quarter. Our U.S. sales volumes in the fourth calendar quarter tend to be higher as many patients elect to have surgery after meeting their annual deductible and having time to recover over the winter holidays.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to COVID-19, certain states within the United States implemented shelter-in-place rules requiring certain businesses not deemed “essential,” to close and requiring elective procedures to be delayed. As a result, our revenue growth was adversely impacted particularly from March 2020 through May 2020 when such shelter-in-place restrictions were largely eased. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the United States and international economies. Further, the prevalence of new and potentially more contagious variants, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, continue to create uncertainty for the duration and impact of the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a material impact on our business and we cannot reasonably estimate the length or severity of this pandemic and its impact on the number of surgical procedures, in particular elective procedures, that are performed.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Their Limitations
In addition to our results and measures of performance determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe that certain non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating and comparing our financial and operational performance over multiple periods, identifying trends affecting our business, formulating business plans and making strategic decisions.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key performance measure that our management uses to assess our financial performance and is also used for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, together with a reconciliation to net income, helps identify underlying trends in our business and helps investors make comparisons between our company and other companies that may have different capital structures, tax rates, or different forms of employee compensation. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to a key financial metric used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making. Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and
you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these potential limitations include:
•other companies, including companies in our industry which have similar business arrangements, may report Adjusted EBITDA, or similarly titled measures but calculate them differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures;
•although depreciation and amortization expenses are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditures for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA also does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs or the potentially dilutive impact of stock based compensation; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt that we may incur.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider our non-GAAP measures only as supplemental to other GAAP-based financial measures. For a full reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP financial measure, please see “-Reconciliation Between GAAP and Non-GAAP Measure.
Reconciliation Between GAAP and Non-GAAP Measure
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, non-recurring expenses and certain other non-cash expenses. For a full reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 to the most comparable GAAP financial measure, please see the following table.
(1)Represents non-recurring other income received in connection with the forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
(2)Represents non-recurring excess and obsolete inventory expense caused by supply chain purchasing process disruption during the COVID-19 pandemic.
(3)Represents non-cash change in the fair value of earnout liability from acquisition date to December 31, 2021.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We derive our revenue from the sale of our foot and ankle orthopedic solutions, primarily implants. We also record as revenue any amounts billed to customers for shipping costs and record as cost of goods sold the actual shipping costs. We have elected to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes, such as sales, use, value-added, assessed by government authorities and collected from a customer. Therefore, revenue is recognized net of such taxes. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our net revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We expect our net revenue to increase in the foreseeable future as we expand our sales territories, add new customers and increase the utilization of our products by our existing customers, though net revenue may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors, including availability of reimbursement, the size and success of our sales force, the number of hospitals and physicians who are aware of and use our products and seasonality.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of finished products purchased from third-party suppliers, shipping costs, excess and obsolete inventory adjustments and royalties. Implants are manufactured to our specifications primarily by third-party suppliers in the United States. Cost of goods sold is recognized at the time the implant is used in surgery and the related revenue is recognized. Prior to use in surgery, the cost of our implants is recorded as inventories, net in our consolidated balance sheets. Cost of goods sold is expected to increase due primarily to increased sales volume.
We calculate gross profit as net revenue less cost of goods sold, and gross margin as gross profit divided by net revenue. We expect our gross profit to increase in the foreseeable future as our net revenue grows, though our gross profit and gross margin have been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily average selling prices, third-party manufacturing costs, change in mix of customers, excess and obsolete inventory adjustments, royalties and seasonality of our business. Our gross margin is higher for products we sell in the United States versus internationally due to higher average selling prices. We expect our gross margin to fluctuate from period to period, however, based upon the factors described above and seasonality.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense is comprised of engineering costs and research programs related to new product and sustaining product development activities, clinical studies and trials expenses, quality and regulatory expenses, and salaries, bonuses and benefits related to research and development functions. We maintain a procedurally focused approach to product development and have projects underway to add new systems across multiple foot and ankle indications and to add additional functionality to our existing systems. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we hire additional personnel to develop new product offerings and product enhancements, including Smart 28 initiatives.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of commissions paid to U.S. sales representatives, salaries, bonuses, and benefits related to selling, marketing, and general and administrative functions, and stock-based compensation. In addition, selling, general, and administrative expenses consist of the costs associated with marketing initiatives, physician and sales force medical education programs, surgical instrument depreciation, travel expenses, professional services fees (including legal, finance, audit and tax fees), insurance costs, facility expenses and other general corporate expenses.
We expect selling, general, and administrative expenses to continue to increase in the foreseeable future as we continue to grow our business, though it may fluctuate from quarter to quarter. We also expect our administrative expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, to increase as we increase our headcount and expand our facilities and business processes to support our operations as a public company. Additionally, we anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with being a public company, compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs. We also expect to see an increase in our stock-based compensation expense with the establishment of the equity plans that became effective in connection with our initial public offering and related grants either in the form of restricted stock units or options. In addition, we expect to continue to incur significant legal expenses related to the Wright Medical Litigation. Our selling, general and administrative expenses may fluctuate from period to period due to the seasonality of our business and as we continue to add direct sales territory managers in new territories.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest incurred and amortization of financing costs during the reported periods.
Results of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the period presented below:
The following table represents total net revenue by geographic area, based on the location of the customer for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net Revenue. Net revenue increased $36.5 million, or 33%, from $111.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $147.5 million in the same period in 2021. The increase in net revenue was due to a $29.6 million or 29% increase in U.S. net revenue that was largely driven by an increase in the number of producing U.S. sales representatives and a higher amount of revenue generated on average per producing sales representative. The increased revenue generated on average per producing sales representative was primarily driven by new product offerings, medical education for both surgeons and sales representatives, and higher surgical volumes due to decreased COVID-19 surgical deferrals or cancellations. International revenue increased $6.9 million or 66% due to volume increases in our three largest international markets of Australia, South Africa, and the United Kingdom.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit Margin. Cost of goods sold increased $2.9 million, or 12%, from $25.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $28.0 million in the same period in 2021. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily due to increased variable costs of goods sold resulting from higher sales volume. Gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 81.0%, compared to 77.4% in the same period of 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $3.7 million, or 3.3% of net revenue, excess and obsolete inventory expense in 2020 resulting from disruption in supply chain purchasing processes during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased $5.0 million, or 44%, from $11.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $16.1 million in the same period in 2021. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to additional investments in new product development efforts and our quality management system, including increased personnel expenses due to increased headcount.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $41.4 million, or 57%, from $72.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $114.1 million in the same period in 2021. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased sales and marketing expenses, including U.S. commission expenses related to higher net revenue, investments in the expansion of our U.S. sales force, increased medical education events, increased surgical instrument depreciation expense, increased general and administrative expenses comprised primarily comprised of personnel expenses including stock based compensation expense, third party legal, accounting, and information technology services expenses and other increased expenses related to becoming a publicly traded company.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher levels of outstanding debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash of $109.4 million and $17.5 million, respectively, and retained earnings (deficit) of $(0.5) million and $12.4 million, respectively. Our primary sources of capital from inception through December 31, 2021 have been from cash flows from operations, proceeds from our Series A and Series B private equity offerings, proceeds from our public equity offering, and proceeds from our credit facilities.
On October 19, 2021, we completed our initial public offering of 8,984,375 shares of our common stock, which includes the purchase by the underwriters of their full option to acquire 1,171,875 additional shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $16.00 per share. The gross proceeds from the initial public offering were approximately $143.8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us. The net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions were $133.7 million. In addition, we incurred $4.3 million of offering expenses that were initially classified as deferred IPO costs and then reclassed to offset against proceeds for the year ended December 31, 2021.
On May 6, 2021, we entered into a new credit agreement with Midcap Financial Trust (Midcap) to provide up to $70.0 million in total borrowings, including a $30.0 million revolving loan and a $40.0 million deferred draw term loan, secured by our intellectual property and other assets, and used a portion of proceeds to repay our former term loan agreement. At December 31, 2021, we have $10.0 million of Midcap debt outstanding under the Midcap Term Loan (defined below) and $0 under the Midcap Revolving Loan (defined below). We believe that our existing cash, additional available borrowings under our Midcap credit facility and expected revenues will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for the next 12 months. However, we may decide to raise additional financing to support further growth of our operations.
Long-Term Obligations
Vectra Bank Colorado Loan Agreements
On March 27, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated VBC Loan Agreement (the New VBC Loan Agreement) with Vectra Bank Colorado (VBC). The New VBC Loan Agreement refinanced our previously existing Term Loan and existing Buyout Loan into a single term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $6.8 million (the New 2020 Term Loan) and increased the maximum principal amount of the existing Revolving Loan to $15.0 million (the New 2020 Revolving Loan). The maturity date for both loans was September 30, 2020 and was subsequently extended to October 5, 2023. We repaid the New 2020 Loans in 2021 in connection with entering into the Midcap Term Loan Agreement.
Midcap Loan Agreement
On May 6, 2021, we entered into a term loan agreement (the Midcap Term Loan Agreement) with Midcap Financial Trust (Midcap) as agent and lenders named therein. The Midcap Term Loan Agreement includes two tranches, with the first being for a total of $10.0 million (the First Tranche) and the second being for a total of $30.0 million (the Second Tranche, and together with the First Tranche, the Midcap Term Loans). The First Tranche was fully funded on May 6, 2021. The Second Tranche remains fully available and may be funded from May 6, 2021 until December 31, 2022, or if earlier, upon the occurrence of an event of default under the Midcap Term Loan Agreement. The Midcap Term Loans mature on May 1, 2026. The Midcap Term Loans accrue interest at the LIBOR Rate plus 6.00% per annum.
On May 6, 2021, we also entered into a revolving loan agreement (the Midcap Revolving Loan Agreement, and together with the Midcap Term Loan Agreement, the Midcap Loan Agreements) with Midcap as an agent and the lenders named therein. Pursuant to the terms of the Midcap Revolving Loan Agreement, as of May 6, 2021 we had access to a $20.0 million revolving line of credit (the Midcap Revolving Loan), that can increase by an additional $10.0 million upon our written request and the consent of the agent and lenders. The Midcap Revolving Loan Agreement matures on May 1, 2026. The Midcap Revolving Loan accrues interest at the LIBOR Rate plus 3.00% per annum.
The Midcap Loan Agreements are secured by all of our assets and personal property, including all goods, equipment, inventory, cash, intellectual property, and certificates of deposit. The Midcap Loan Agreements include customary conditions to borrowing, events of default, and covenants, including affirmative covenants and negative covenants that restrict our and our subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, create or incur liens, merge or consolidate with other companies, liquidate or dissolve, sell or transfer assets, pay dividends or make distributions, subject to certain exceptions. The Midcap Loan Agreements require us to maintain minimum net product sales and minimum consolidated EBITDA, (each term as defined in the Midcap Loan
Agreements), for the preceding twelve month period. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Midcap Loan Agreements.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021 the company leased office space under a long-term lease agreement expiring in 2029. Future minimum lease payments through the lease term were $8.1 million. Subsequently, in January 2022, the Company purchased the building and terminated the lease agreement; therefore, as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K there is no remaining future obligation.
Funding Requirements
We use our cash to fund our operations, which primarily include the costs of purchasing our foot and ankle orthopedic implants and disposables and associated instrumentation, as well as our operating expenses, including research and development and selling, general and administrative. We expect our operating expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in expanding our research and development initiatives and as we continue to expand our sales and marketing infrastructure and programs to both drive and support anticipated sales growth. In addition, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we hire personnel and expand our infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth in our organization. We will also incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company and also expect to increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
•the research and development activities we intend to undertake in order to improve our existing products and development new products and solutions;
•the costs of our ongoing commercialization activities in the United States and elsewhere, including expanding territories, increasing sales and marketing personnel, actual and anticipated product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•whether or not we pursue acquisitions or investments in businesses, products or technologies that are complementary to our current business;
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of our products;
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems;
•the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments;
•any product liability or other lawsuits;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•changes or fluctuations in our inventory and surgical instrumentation;
•our implementation of various computerized information systems;
•the costs associated with being a public company; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and business.
We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, credit or loan facilities or a combination of one or more of these or other funding sources. Additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we fail to obtain necessary capital when needed on acceptable terms, or at all, we could be forced to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs, commercialization efforts or other operations. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders will suffer dilution and the terms of any financing may adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. In addition, as a condition to providing additional funds to us, future investors may demand, and may be granted, rights superior to those of existing stockholders. If we raise additional capital through collaborations agreements, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product or grant licenses that may not be favorable to us. Debt financing, if available, is likely to involve restrictive covenants limiting our flexibility in conducting future business activities, and, in the event of insolvency, debt holders would be repaid before holders of our equity securities received any distribution of our corporate assets.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods presented below:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.3 million, consisting primarily of net loss of $13.7 million plus non-cash expenses of $19.2 million, which primarily consisted of $9.0 million of depreciation and amortization, $2.8 million provision for excess and obsolete inventory, and $4.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, and negative changes in working capital of $8.8 million, including a $11.1 million increase in inventory primarily due to purchases of inventory and a $6.5 million increase in accounts receivable offset partially by an increase in accounts payable of $3.4 million and an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $7.1 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $1.1 million, consisting primarily of net income of $3.5 million plus non-cash expenses of $18.4 million, which primarily consisted of $6.4 million of depreciation and amortization, $7.5 million provision for excess and obsolete inventory and $1.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, and negative changes in working capital of $20.8 million, including $14.8 million of inventory purchases and a $6.2 million reduction in accounts payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $35.5 million, consisting primarily of our purchase of the assets of Additive Orthopedics for $15.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $18.3 million, primarily consisting of purchases of surgical instrumentation.
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020 was $10.3 million, consisting primarily of surgical instrumentation purchases.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $131.1 million, consisting primarily of $129.4 million of net proceeds from our IPO and $10.0 million of proceeds from the Midcap Term Loan, which was partially offset by other long-term debt repayments of $6.0 million and the payment of $3.1 million in debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $24.0 million, consisting of $38.1 million of net proceeds from equity transactions, including $36.0 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, from our Series B preferred equity financing, offset partially by net debt repayments of $14.1 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
The following discussion addresses our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenue is generated primarily from the sale of our implants and disposables and, to a much lesser extent, from the sale of our surgical instrumentation. We sell our products through employee sales personnel, and independent sales representatives in the U.S. Outside the U.S. sales are through independent sales representatives and to stocking distributors. We have consignment agreements with certain distributors and hospitals. Our customers are primarily hospitals and surgery centers.
Revenue is recorded when our performance obligation is satisfied which is when our customers take title of the product, and typically when the product is used in surgery. We generally have written contracts with our customers which incorporate pricing and our standard terms and conditions. Any discounts we offer are outlined in our customer agreements. As the discounts are known at the time of purchase, no estimates are required at the time of revenue recognition. Shipping and handling costs are recorded as cost of goods sold and amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling costs are recorded in revenue. We record as revenue any amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling costs and record as cost of goods sold the actual shipping costs incurred. We have elected to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes (e.g., sales, use, value-added) assessed by government authorities and collected from a customer. Therefore, revenue is recognized net of such taxes. We have elected to use the practical expedient allowed under ASC 606 to account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of a promised good as fulfillment costs rather than as an additional promised service and, therefore, we do not allocate a portion of the transaction price to a shipping service obligation. Commissions to sales agents for the sales exceeding their quotas are classified as incremental costs of obtaining a contract as such costs would not have been incurred if the contract was not signed. We have elected to use the practical expedient to expense such costs that should be capitalized as the amortization period of the costs would be less than one year.
Due to the nature of our products, returns are minimal and an estimate for returns is not material. The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to our customers. We have recorded unbilled accounts receivable involving management judgement related to this timing difference of $3,637 and $3,273 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Inventories, Net
Inventories are considered finished goods and are purchased from third party contract manufacturers. These inventories consist of implants, hardware, and consumables and are held in our warehouse, with third-party independent sales representatives or distributors, or consigned directly with hospitals.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (weighted average cost basis) or net realizable value. When sold, inventory is relieved at weighted average cost. We evaluate the carrying value of our inventories in relation to the estimated forecast of product demand, which takes into consideration the life cycle of the product. A significant decrease in demand or development of products could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory on hand, which could lead to additional charges for excess and obsolete inventory. The Company estimates a reserve for obsolete and slow-moving inventory based on current inventory levels, historical sales and future projected demand. Charges for excess and obsolete inventory are included in Cost of goods sold and were $2,850, $7,467 and $1,712 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The inventory reserve was $19,374 and $16,771 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The need to maintain substantial levels of inventory impacts our estimates for excess and obsolete inventory. Each of our implant systems are designed to include implantable products that come in different sizes and shapes to accommodate the surgeon’s needs related to the patient’s anatomical size. Typically, a small number of the set components are used in each surgical procedure. Certain components within each set may become obsolete before other components based on the usage patterns. We adjust inventory values, as needed, to reflect these usage patterns and life cycle.
Stock-Based Compensation
All stock-based awards to employees and nonemployee contractors, including any grants of stock, stock options, restricted stock units (“RSU”), performance stock units ("PSU") and the option to purchase common stock under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”), are measured at fair value at the grant date and recognized over the relevant vesting period in accordance with the ASC Topic 718 (“ASC 718”). Stock-based awards to non-employees are recognized as a selling, general and administrative expense over the period of performance. Such awards are measured at fair value at the date of grant. In addition, for awards that vest immediately, the awards are measured at fair value and recognized in full at the grant date.
The Company estimates the fair value of each stock-based award containing service and/or performance conditions on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option valuation model which incorporates assumptions as to stock price volatility, the expected
life of the options, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. Before the IPO, there was no active external or internal market for our common stock. Thus, it was not possible to estimate the expected volatility of our stock price in estimating fair value of options granted. Accordingly, as a substitute for such volatility, the Company used the historical volatility of the common stock of other companies in the same industry over a period commensurate with the expected term of the options awarded. The Company will continue to apply this method until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its stock price becomes available. The Company uses the simplified method of calculation for estimating expected term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. The Company does not anticipate that dividends will be distributed in the near future. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur, and when they occur compensation expense previously recognized is reversed in the period of the forfeiture. Option awards are generally granted with an exercise price equal to the fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of grant.
Subsequent to the initial public offering, the fair value of the Company’s common stock underlying its equity awards is based on the quoted market price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date. Prior to the initial public offering, because there was no public market for the Company’s common stock, the fair value of the common stock underlying the stock awards has historically been determined at the time of grant of the stock option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including sales of common stocks, third-party valuations performed, important developments in the Company’s operations, actual operating results and financial performance, the conditions in the medical device industry and the economy in general, and the stock price performance, volatility of comparable public companies, and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability, among other factors.
Income Taxes
The income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to income taxes in the United States, Ireland, and South Africa. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax provision.
Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, the Company determines deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company’s 2021 and 2020 income tax expense and rates differed from the amount of income tax determined by applying the U.S. Federal income tax rate to pre-tax income primarily as a result of the U.S. jurisdiction that has a full valuation allowance recorded on U.S. deferred tax assets. In addition, the tax rate is lower than the U.S. statutory federal tax rate as a result of foreign earnings that are taxed at lower tax rates.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. ASC No. 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more-likely-than-not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of its technical merits. The Company records unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjusts these liabilities when management’s judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
Contingent Earn-out Consideration
Business combinations may include contingent earn-out consideration as part of the purchase price under which the Company will make future payments to the seller upon the achievement of certain milestones. The fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration is estimated as of the acquisition date at the present value of the expected contingent payments. Two methodologies may be considered in the valuation: the scenario-based model (“SBM”) and Monte Carlo simulation. The SBM relies on multiple outcomes to estimate the likelihood of future payoff of the contingent consideration. The resulting earnout payoff is then probability-weighted and discounted at an appropriate risk adjusted rate in order to arrive at the present value of the expected earnout payment. The Monte Carlo simulation is used to value the non-linear contingent considerations based on projected financial metrics. Each trial of the Monte Carlo simulation draws a value from the assumed distribution for the underlying metric. The earnout payoff for each simulation trial is calculated based on that particular simulated path for the underlying metrics and then discounted to present value using the risk-free rate, adjusted for counterparty credit risk. The value of the earnout is estimated as the average value from all simulation trials. The fair value estimates use unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions as to the ability of the acquired business to meet the targeted benchmarks and discount rates used in the calculations. The unobservable inputs are defined in ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” as Level 3 inputs.
We review the probabilities of achievement of the earnout milestones to determine impact on the fair value of the earnout consideration on a quarterly basis over the earn-out period. Actual results are compared to the estimates and probabilities of achievement used in our forecasts. Should actual results of the acquired business increase or decrease as compared to our estimates and assumptions, the estimated fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration liability will increase or decrease, up to the contractual limit, as applicable. Changes in the estimated fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration are reflected in our results of operations in the period in which they are identified. Changes in the estimated fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration may materially impact or cause volatility in our operating results.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for new accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this report.