Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. You should carefully read the section titled “Risk Factors” set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” You should, therefore, not rely on these forward-looking statements as representing our views as of any date subsequent to the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage microbiome therapeutics company leveraging our Human-First Discovery platform to develop a novel class of orally administered biological drugs. The microbiome consists of trillions of microbes that live symbiotically in and on every human and are essential to our health. When key microbes are lost, the resulting dysbiosis can increase susceptibility to immune disorders, infections, neurological conditions, cancer and other serious diseases. We are developing novel therapeutics designed to deliver missing microbes and their clinically relevant biochemical functions to correct dysbiosis and the diseases that emerge from it. Our Human-First Discovery platform uses reverse translation to identify diseases of dysbiosis and to design microbiome therapeutics that address them. We believe that our differentiated platform, rich pipeline and the broad therapeutic potential of this new field of medicine position us to transform care for a wide range of unmet medical needs.
Our lead product candidate, CP101, is an orally administered complete microbiome therapeutic in development for the prevention of recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection, or CDI. In June 2020, we reported positive topline data from our Phase 2 placebo-controlled clinical trial of CP101 for the prevention of recurrent CDI, which we refer to as the PRISM3 trial, and in November 2021, we reported positive topline data from our open-label, Phase 2 clinical trial of CP101 for the prevention of recurrent CDI, which we refer to as the PRISM-EXT trial. We have designed a Phase 3 clinical trial, which we refer to as the PRISM4 trial, to serve as our second pivotal trial of CP101 for the prevention of recurrent CDI. On March 1, 2022, we announced that enrollment in PRISM4 was paused following receipt of a clinical hold letter on February 24, 2022 from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, in connection with our investigational new drug application, or IND, for CP101, requesting additional information regarding our SARS-CoV-2 donor screening protocols, including, among other things, that we address the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the informed consent process, additional detail on how samples are shipped to the vendor performing the SARS-CoV-2 testing of the donor material and how inconclusive test results will be handled. We are also preparing to initiate a Phase 1b clinical trial of FIN-211 in autism spectrum disorder, or ASD; however, because FIN-211 includes donor-derived components, the clinical hold related to our IND for CP101 will also delay initiation of our clinical trial in ASD. We plan to manufacture additional lots of CP101 and FIN-211 to satisfy the FDA's requests related to SARS-CoV-2 screening and testing. We are currently evaluating the extent of the delay the clinical hold and related manufacturing activities will have on the timing for our clinical trials in CDI and ASD, which we expect to be at least one quarter; we describe the clinical hold and related matters further above in the section entitled “Item 1. Business--Our Clinical Programs”.
Following a strategic review of our pipeline and business, we announced in March 2022 the decision to pause the development of CP101 for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B virus, or HBV. We believe this decision will allow us to maximize our working capital available for investment in our wholly-owned recurrent CDI and ASD programs. We continue to partner with Takeda on the development of targeted microbiome therapeutics for inflammatory bowel disease. We believe that development of our targeted microbiome therapeutics, which are composed of strains grown from master cell banks, is not affected by the clinical hold.
Since our inception, we have focused primarily on developing and progressing our product candidates through clinical development, organizing and staffing our company, research and development activities, establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, including for our Human-First Discovery platform, and raising capital. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the IPO, the sale of convertible preferred stock and from collaboration revenue.
On March 12, 2021, we effected a 1-for-14.444 reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock, as well as effected a proportional adjustment to the existing conversion ratios for our redeemable convertible preferred stock. All historical share and per share information shown herein and in our audited financial statements and related notes have been retroactively adjusted to give effect to the reverse stock split.
On March 18, 2021, we completed an IPO in which we issued and sold 7,500,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $127.5 million. On April 20, 2021, we issued and sold 192,877 additional shares of common stock, pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their overallotment option, at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $3.3 million. Inclusive of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, we received approximately $118.8 million in net proceeds from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs. Upon completion of the IPO, all 31,253,609 shares of outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock automatically converted into 31,253,609 shares of common stock.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $58.2 million and $39.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $161.0 million. We expect to continue to generate operating losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future if and as we:
•continue the research and development of our product candidates;
•initiate clinical trials for, or additional preclinical development of, our product candidates;
•further develop and refine the manufacturing processes for our product candidates;
•seek regulatory and marketing authorizations for any of our product candidates that successfully complete development;
•seek to identify and validate additional product candidates;
•acquire or license other product candidates, technologies or biological materials;
•make milestone, royalty or other payments under any current or future license agreements;
•obtain, maintain, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
•seek to attract and retain new and existing skilled personnel;
•incur lease and construction expenses in connection with the expansion of our corporate headquarters;
•create additional infrastructure to support our operations as a public company, and incur increased legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses; and
•experience delays or encounter issues with any of the above.
We will not generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our operating activities as we advance our product candidates through clinical development, seek regulatory approval and prepare for and, if any of our product candidates are approved, proceed to commercialization. Until such time, if ever, that we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including collaborations, licenses or similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed or on favorable terms, if at all.
If we are unable to obtain funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion or commercialization efforts, which could adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations. Although we continue to pursue these plans, there is no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund continuing operations, if at all.
We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents of $133.5 million as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into mid-2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
COVID-19 Business Update
In response to the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic, we established a cross-functional task force and have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business, including our clinical trials. We have taken measures to secure our research and development activities, while work in laboratories and facilities has been organized to reduce risk of COVID-19 transmission. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants of COVID-19, on our business, operations and clinical development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, including with respect to variants of the virus, and its impact on our clinical trial enrollment, trial sites, contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations, and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. Given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition and results of operations ultimately could be materially adversely affected. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evolve our business continuity plans, clinical development plans and response strategy.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale. We have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of licensed products for the foreseeable future. Our revenue to date has been generated primarily through collaboration and license agreements. We recognize revenue over our expected performance period under each agreement. We expect that our revenue for the next several years will be derived primarily from our current collaboration agreement and any additional collaborations that we may enter into in the future, and any collaboration revenue we generate will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing and amount of milestones and other payments. To date, we have not received any royalties under our collaboration agreement with Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, or Takeda. However, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we received royalties in the aggregate of $0.3 million pursuant to our 2019 Asset Purchase and License Agreement, or APL Agreement, with OpenBiome, which was terminated in November 2020. We will continue to earn royalties under the OpenBiome Agreement based on sales of FMT materials.
Collaboration and License Agreement with Takeda
In January 2017, we entered into a research collaboration and exclusive license agreement, or the Takeda Agreement, with Takeda, pursuant to which we granted Takeda a worldwide, exclusive license, with the right to grant sublicenses, under our rights in certain patents, patent applications and know-how to develop, have developed, manufacture, have manufactured, make, have made, use, have used, offer for sale, sell, have sold, commercialize, have commercialized and import our microbiome therapeutic candidate TAK-524, for the prevention, diagnosis, theragnosis or treatment of diseases in humans. We subsequently amended and restated the Takeda Agreement in October 2019 to provide a similar worldwide, exclusive license to a second microbiome therapeutic candidate, FIN-525. We amended the Takeda Agreement in August 2021 to transition primary responsibility for further development and manufacturing activities with respect to TAK-524 from us to Takeda in accordance with a transition plan, and Takeda will assume sole responsibility for regulatory matters with respect to TAK-524. In November 2021, we amended the Takeda Agreement to enable us to carry out certain FIN-525 preliminary evaluation activities.
In connection with entry into the Takeda Agreement, we received a one-time, upfront payment from Takeda in the amount of $10.0 million. Additionally, we received $4.0 million in the aggregate for the achievement of certain development milestones for TAK-524 therapeutic products and are entitled to receive up to $176.0 million in the aggregate, for the achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial sale milestones for TAK-524 therapeutic products. We are entitled to receive up to $177.7 million in the aggregate, for the achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial sale milestones for FIN-525 therapeutic products, subject, to certain specified reductions based upon the nature of the FIN-525 product and certain additional milestones to be negotiated by the parties. We are also entitled to receive up to $10.0 million for the first diagnostic product for each of TAK-524 and FIN-525, subject to certain reductions in the event that Takeda uses a third party to develop such diagnostic products. None of these milestones were impacted by the amendments to the Takeda Agreement noted above. Revenue under the Takeda Agreement is recognized as our research and development services are provided and is recorded as collaboration revenue on our consolidated statement of operations.
Agreements with OpenBiome
We have historically collaborated with OpenBiome under several agreements related to, among other things, the license of various technology and intellectual property rights, and the supply of certain materials, as further described below.
In February 2017, we entered into the Quality System and Supply Agreement, or QSS Agreement, with OpenBiome, which was subsequently amended in September 2017 and was partially terminated in February 2019. Under the QSS Agreement, OpenBiome granted us an exclusive license, eligible for sublicense, of certain OpenBiome technology and intellectual property. Additionally, we acquired certain assets of OpenBiome for use in manufacturing and supplying product. The QSS Agreement allowed us to use the licensed OpenBiome technology and intellectual property for our own research and development efforts in exchange for up to $27.5 million in milestone payments associated with development and commercialization efforts. We were responsible for providing support to OpenBiome related to manufacturing product, produced to OpenBiome’s specifications, which has been included as service revenue in our consolidated statements of operations. Revenue under the QSS Agreement was recorded as either contract manufacturing revenue or royalty revenue in our consolidated statements of operations.
On November 19, 2020, we entered into the LMIC License Agreement, or the LMIC Agreement, with OpenBiome, pursuant to which we granted OpenBiome a non-exclusive royalty-bearing license, with the right to grant sublicenses, under certain patents, patent applications, and know-how that are reasonably necessary or useful for the exploitation of products manufactured directly from stool from a stool donor source without the use of culturing or replication, or certain natural products. The license granted to OpenBiome excludes a license under our intellectual property to exploit a lyophilized Natural Product (such as CP101) where processed stool is lyophilized. The only consideration provided to us under the LMIC Agreement is in the form of future royalties on net sales of these products, which are not currently commercially viable. We are entitled to receive tiered royalties on net sales of certain products, ranging from mid-single digit to low second decile digits on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis. We did not recognize any revenue related to the LMIC Agreement for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as there are currently no products available for sale.
Also on November 19, 2020, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with OpenBiome, or the OpenBiome Agreement, the effect of which was to terminate certain existing agreements with OpenBiome and internalize some of the functions for which we have previously relied on OpenBiome. Pursuant to the OpenBiome Agreement, we acquired certain biological samples and obtained a license to certain OpenBiome technology and, upon closing of the transaction, which occurred March 1, 2021, we acquired certain additional assets, including biological samples, capital equipment and contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we have made payments of $5.0 million to OpenBiome related to the OpenBiome Agreement, which is the full amount agreed upon. We are also required to pay certain milestones up to $26.0 million upon the occurrence of certain research and development events, regulatory approvals, and commercial sales, and low single digit royalties on net sales of products on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, as well as a mid-single digit royalties on sublicensing revenue related to such products.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred, which include:
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•upfront, milestone and maintenance fees incurred under license, acquisition and other third-party agreements;
•costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing study materials;
•facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs; and
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees and related travel expenses engaged in research and development functions.
Costs for external development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we initiate and conduct clinical trials for our product candidates and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates. If any of our product candidates enter into later stages of clinical development, they will generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any product candidates we may develop in the future, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development program and plans. We do not allocate certain employee-related costs, external costs directly related to our Human First Discovery platform, and other indirect costs to specific research and development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under development and, as such, are classified as costs of our platform research.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate and business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, patent, accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services, travel expenses and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our general and administrative headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates and expand our corporate headquarters. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax compliance services, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Total Other Income, Net
Gain on Extinguishment of PPP Loan
Gain on extinguishment of PPP Loan relates to the forgiveness of our PPP Loan, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP, of the CARES Act.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Our interest income has not been significant due to low interest earned on cash balances related to our sweep account.
Gain (Loss) on Disposal of Fixed Assets
Gain on disposal of fixed assets relates to the gain we realized when we sold certain lab equipment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of realized gains and losses on foreign exchange.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenue
Revenue of $18.5 million and $7.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily consisted of collaboration revenue earned under the Takeda Agreement. Our collaboration revenue increased by $11.2 million in 2021 primarily due to our completion of the performance obligation under the Takeda Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $57.3 million, as compared to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $24.1 million in research and development expense for fiscal year 2021 included a $20.5 million increase in our platform related costs, which is primarily driven by a $10.4 million increase in personnel costs, a $4.4 million increase in manufacturing related expenses, a $1.9 million increase in external costs, and a $1.4 million increase in donor related costs. With the execution of the OpenBiome Agreement in the first quarter of 2021, we enhanced our internal manufacturing and platform research capabilities, which drove an overall increase in platform related costs, as we continue to build our platform and prepare for the future development of commercial supply needs. Additionally, there was a $3.7 million increase in expenses related to the expansion and development of our ASD program driven by a $2.1 million increase in external costs and a $1.0 million increase in personnel costs. The change also
included a $2.4 million increase in expenses related to the expansion and development of our HBV program driven by a $1.1 million increase in personnel costs and $0.8 million in contract manufacturing costs.
This increase was offset by a $3.1 million decrease in costs related to our CDI program, driven by a $1.2 million decrease in external costs, as we brought more of our development activities in-house upon execution of the OpenBiome Agreement, as well as a $1.0 million decrease in personnel related costs. Additionally, we had a $1.3 million decrease in IBD program expenses driven primarily by personnel costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses were $21.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $7.2 million for fiscal year 2021 was primarily due to a $2.8 million increase in other expenses, a $2.7 million increase in personnel expenses, and a $2.0 million increase in legal and professional fees. The increase in other expenses is primarily related to directors and officers insurance costs, while the increase in personnel expenses is related to an increase in headcount to support our operational growth. The increase in professional fees is related to our transition to a public company in March 2021.
Other Income, Net
Total other income, net was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.7 million was primarily due to the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in full in the amount of $1.8 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have not recognized any product revenue and have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have not yet commercialized any product and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for several years, if at all. We have funded our operations primarily through equity financings and from collaboration revenue. We have raised an aggregate of approximately $177.0 million from the sale of convertible preferred stock and $14.0 million in collaboration revenue from the upfront payment and milestone payments received under our collaboration agreement. In March 2021, we completed our IPO whereby we sold an aggregate of 7,500,000 shares of our common stock. In April 2021, we sold an additional 192,877 shares of our common stock, pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their overallotment option, at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $3.3 million. In aggregate, we received approximately $118.8 million in net proceeds related to our IPO after deducting $9.2 million of underwriting discounts and commissions and $2.9 million of offering expenses.
In April 2020, we received proceeds of $1.8 million from the PPP Loan. We used the PPP Loan to retain current employees, maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments. On May 8, 2021, we received notice from the SBA that the entirety of the PPP Loan we received was forgiven. Accordingly, we are no longer required to repay the $1.8 million in principal and approximately $19,000 in accrued interest borrowed under the PPP Loan. Gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan is recorded in other income on the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $67.1 million. This cash outflow was primarily related to our net loss of $58.2 million. The cash outflow included $4.2 million in stock-based compensation expense, $2.3 million in non-cash depreciation and amortization, and $1.8 million gain on extinguishment of PPP Loan. The outflow was also impacted by a net decrease in our operating assets and liabilities of $14.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities includes a $13.6 million decrease in deferred revenue, a $4.7 million decrease in other non-current assets, and a $3.2 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets. This was offset by a $5.4 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $2.3 million increase in accounts payable, and a $0.5 million increase in accounts receivable.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $31.3 million. This cash outflow was primarily related to our net loss of $39.3 million and was offset by non-cash charges, including $0.8 million in depreciation and amortization expense on our fixed assets and $3.1 million in stock-based compensation expense. Of the $3.1 million in stock-based compensation expense, $2.8 million was related to the sale of our common stock by certain executives and founders to SIG Global US Fund I, LLLP. The net loss was also offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities, including a $3.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets. The changes in operating assets and liabilities also include a $3.5 million decrease in due from related party for the amounts received in 2020 related to the signing of the APL Agreement in 2019, and a $3.0 million increase in deferred revenue related to our adjustment to the amount we expect to receive for reimbursable costs under the Takeda Agreement.
Investing Activities
During the years ended years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we used $15.9 million and $2.6 million, respectively, of cash in investing activities. The $15.9 million used during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $1.5 million of the cash used during the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to the purchases of property and equipment. The remaining $1.2 million of cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to payments we made to OpenBiome in conjunction with the signing of the OpenBiome Agreement in November 2020.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $119.1 million, primarily related to $118.6 million of proceeds received from the IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and $3.0 million of proceeds from the underwriters’ exercise of their overallotment option, net of underwriting discounts and commissions. The proceeds are partially offset by $2.7 million of payments of issuance costs related to the IPO.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $91.5 million, primarily related to $90.0 million of gross proceeds received from the issuance of Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock during the year, as well as proceeds of $1.8 million from our PPP Loan. The cash provided by financing activities was offset by the payment of $0.2 million of deferred offering costs and $0.1 million in issuance costs related to the series D redeemable convertible preferred stock issuance.
Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $133.5 million. We believe that our existing cash on hand will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into mid-2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could expend our capital resources sooner than we expect.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials of our product candidates. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•continue the research and development of our product candidates;
•initiate and conduct clinical trials for, or additional preclinical development of, our product candidates;
•further develop and refine the manufacturing process for our product candidates;
•change or add manufacturers or suppliers of product candidate materials;
•seek regulatory and marketing authorizations for any of our product candidates that successfully complete development;
•seek to identify and validate additional product candidates;
•acquire or license other product candidates, technologies or biological materials;
•make milestone, royalty or other payments under any current or future license agreements;
•obtain, maintain, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
•seek to attract and retain new and existing skilled personnel;
•create additional infrastructure to support our operations and incur increased legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses; and
•experience delays or encounter issues with any of the above.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the effects of such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in thousands):
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts.
Lease Commitments
We have entered into operating leases for rental space in Somerville, Cambridge, and Charlestown Massachusetts (see Note 5 to our annual consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report). The table above includes future minimum lease payments under the non-cancelable lease arrangements. The table above also includes payments due under our capital lease obligation, as related to leased equipment.
License Agreements
We have also entered into license agreements under which we are obligated to make milestone and royalty payments and incur annual maintenance fees. We owe an annual maintenance fee of $5,000 under our agreement with University of Minnesota, as well as escalating minimum royalty amounts. We also are required to pay minimum royalties under the agreement with Arizona State University of $5,000 annually until 2023, which increases to $20,000 in 2024. Future minimum payments through 2028 have been included in the table above, but our minimum payments continue in perpetuity for University of Minnesota until the agreement is terminated. We are also obligated to make regulatory milestone payments to OpenBiome aggregating up to $6.0 million upon the achievement of regulatory approvals, and sales-based milestone payments of up to $20.0 million upon the achievement of certain net sales criteria. We were also obligated to pay OpenBiome $1.25 million upon the closing of the OpenBiome Agreement, included as a portion of the closing fees of $3.9 million, as related to milestones previously achieved. We are obligated to pay to OpenBiome a low single digit royalty on net sales of licensed natural products by us and our affiliates and a high single digit percentage of certain sublicensing revenue (including royalties) received in connection with licensed natural products. These royalties are calculated on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis. See the sections titled “Business-Our Collaborations and License Agreements” and “Business-Agreements with OpenBiome” elsewhere in this Annual Report as well as Note 7 to our annual consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report for a description of our license agreements.
Purchase and Other Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs and other third parties for preclinical studies, clinical trials and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts generally do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancelable obligations of our service providers up to one year after the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table above as the amount and timing and such payments are not known.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing in this Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
To date, our revenues have consisted of payments received related to our licensing agreement with Takeda. We apply the revenue recognition guidance in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Subtopic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which was adopted January 1, 2017 using the full retrospective method. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to our customer. All variable consideration, including milestones and royalties, are constrained until the cumulative revenue related to the consideration is no longer probable of reversal.
The consideration allocated to each performance obligation is recognized as revenue when control is transferred for the related goods or services. For performance obligations which consist of licenses and other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. We currently measure progress according to the expenditure of research and development efforts, based on costs incurred, as this is the best indicator of performance.
We receive payments from our customers based on billing schedules established in each contract. Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due until we satisfy our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional.
Goodwill and Acquired In-Process Research and Development
Goodwill is the amount by which the purchase price of acquired net assets in a business combination exceeded the fair values of net identifiable assets on the date of acquisition. Acquired In-Process Research and Development, or IPR&D, represents the fair value assigned to research and development assets that we acquire that have not been completed at the date of acquisition or are pending regulatory approval in certain jurisdictions. The value assigned to the acquired IPR&D is determined by estimating the costs to develop the acquired technology into commercially viable products, estimating the resulting revenue from the projects, and discounting the net cash flows to present value. Our IPR&D is considered an intangible asset with an indefinite life.
Goodwill and IPR&D are evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Factors we consider important, on an overall company basis, that could trigger an impairment review include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, significant negative industry or economic trends, a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period, or a reduction of our market capitalization relative to net book value. We have historically performed our annual goodwill and IPR&D impairment assessments as of the last day in each fiscal year. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we changed our annual impairment assessment date to the first day of the fourth quarter, or October 1.
To conduct impairment tests of goodwill, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment loss to the extent that the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. Our annual assessments for impairment of goodwill as of October 1, 2021 and 2020 indicated that the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit.
To conduct impairment tests of IPR&D, the fair value of the IPR&D asset is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment loss to the extent that the carrying value of the IPR&D asset exceeds its fair value. We estimate the fair value for our IPR&D asset using discounted cash flow valuation models, which require the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including, but not limited to, estimating the timing of and expected costs to complete the in-process projects, projecting regulatory approvals, estimating future cash flows from product sales resulting from completed projects and in-process projects, and developing appropriate discount rates. Our annual assessments for impairment of IPR&D indicated that the fair value of our other IPR&D asset as of October 1, 2021 and 2020 exceeded their respective carrying values.
Through December 31, 2021, there have not been any events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the carrying value of goodwill or acquired intangible assets may not be recoverable. The FDA clinical hold issues could negatively impact the fair value of IPR&D and goodwill. We continue to monitor and evaluate the financial performance of our business, including the impact of general economic conditions, to assess the potential for the fair value of the reporting unit to decline below its book value. There can be no assurance that, at the time future impairment tests are completed, a material impairment charge will not be recorded.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service
fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our annual consolidated financial statements within this Report for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” or EGC, under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of delayed adoption of new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as private entities.
As an EGC, we may take advantage of certain exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions, as an EGC:
•we may present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations;
•we may avail ourselves of the exemption from providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
•we may avail ourselves of the exemption from complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis;
•we may provide reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements; and
•we may not require nonbinding advisory votes on executive compensation or stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments.
We will remain an emerging growth company until December 31, 2026 or, if earlier, (i) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (ii) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the prior June 30th or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a ‘‘smaller reporting company,’’ meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million and our annual revenue was less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million.
If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an EGC, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to EGCs, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.