ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this filing. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See the cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements set forth at the beginning of Part I of this Annual Report.
Overview
Founded in 2000, Floor & Decor is a high-growth, differentiated, multi-channel specialty retailer of hard surface flooring and related accessories with 160 warehouse-format stores across 33 states as of December 30, 2021. We believe that we offer the industry’s broadest assortment of tile, wood, laminate, vinyl, and natural stone flooring along with decorative and installation accessories and adjacent categories at everyday low prices positioning us as the one-stop destination for our customers’ entire hard surface flooring needs. We appeal to a variety of customers, including professional installers and commercial businesses (“Pro”), Do it Yourself customers (“DIY”), and customers who buy the products for professional installation (“Buy it Yourself” or “BIY”). Our warehouse-format stores, which average approximately 78,000 square feet, carry on average approximately 4,200 flooring and decorative and installation accessory SKUs, 1.1 million square feet of flooring products, and $2.3 million of inventory at cost. We believe that our inspiring design studios and creative and informative visual merchandising also greatly enhance our customers’ renovation experience. In addition to our stores, our website FloorandDecor.com showcases our products.
We believe our strong financial results are a reflection of a growing domestic hard surface flooring market, a unique approach to selling hard surface flooring, and our consistent and disciplined culture of innovation and reinvestment, together creating a differentiated business model in the hard surface flooring category. In fiscal 2021, we experienced our thirteenth year of comparable store sales growth, averaging 14.2% over this time period and 12.4% over the past three years.
(1) Fiscal 2020 comparable store sales exclude sales from the 53rd week.
During fiscal 2021, we continued to make key long-term strategic investments, including:
•investing in new solutions for new and existing commercial customers through our purchase of Spartan, a specialty hard-surface flooring distribution company that primarily serves the architectural and design community, end-users, and commercial flooring contractors (refer to Note 14, “Acquisition” for additional details);
•supporting our stores and distribution centers during this heightened period of sales, with particular emphasis on increasing staffing levels and working collaboratively throughout our supply chain to improve our in-stock inventory levels;
•opening 27 new warehouse-format stores, ending the year with 160 warehouse-format stores and two design studios;
•focusing on innovative new products and localized assortments, supported by inspirational in-store and online visual merchandising solutions;
•investing in our connected customer, in-store designer, and customer relationship and store focused technology;
•adding more resources dedicated to serving our Pro customers, including hiring a professional external sales staff to drive more commercial sales;
•providing proprietary credit offerings, including through our non-recourse Pro credit card; and
•investing capital to continue enhancing the in-store shopping experience for our customers.
COVID-19 Update
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues into fiscal 2022, we remain focused on five priorities while navigating through this period of volatility and uncertainty:
•First, protect the health and safety of our employees and customers through enhanced safety and sanitation measures at our stores, distribution centers, and store support center.
•Second, keep our brand strong and support all of our customers, including the numerous small businesses that rely upon us such as general contractors and flooring installers.
•Third, invest in store and distribution center staffing to support the heightened demand.
•Fourth, work with all of our supply chain partners to increase our in-stock inventory positions.
•Fifth, position Floor & Decor to emerge strong from this event.
We are working hard to continue monitoring and quickly responding to the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including communicating often throughout the organization and adapting our operations to follow evolving federal, state, and local ordinances as well as health guidelines on mitigating the risk of COVID-19 transmission. We have teams in place monitoring this evolving situation and recommending risk mitigation actions, and we are encouraging social distancing practices.
We have also assessed and continue to implement supply chain continuity plans. While sales have remained strong as we continue to maintain a broad assortment of in-stock inventory, labor shortages and supply chain disruptions continue to cause logistical challenges for us and the entire hard surface flooring industry. In particular, there is significant congestion at ports of entry to the United States, which is increasing the time and cost to ship goods to our distribution centers and stores and has resulted in a decrease in our in-stock levels for certain products. While we have passed some of these higher transportation costs to our customers, we remain focused on providing exceptional value to our customers through our broad assortment and “everyday low price” strategy. We believe that our strong relationships with our suppliers and transportation partners have been instrumental in helping us to navigate this difficult supply chain environment; however, the potential significance and duration of these supply chain disruptions is uncertain, and future capacity shortages or cost increases could have an adverse impact upon our business.
There remains substantial uncertainty regarding the potential duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including how public health restrictions imposed to slow the spread of the virus may evolve. There may also be future “waves” or new variants of COVID-19 infections despite vaccines and other measures implemented to mitigate its spread. Although our stores are currently open to the public, we may face future closure requirements and other operational restrictions at some or all of our physical locations for prolonged periods of time if federal, state, and local authorities impose new and potentially more stringent restrictions such as shelter-in-place orders. We also may face store closures due to staffing challenges, including if store and distribution center associates are in quarantine due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, changes in consumer behavior due to financial, health, or other concerns may continue even after the COVID-19 pandemic and may reduce consumer demand for our products. Further, some of the countries from which we source inventory and other necessary supplies are not vaccinating their populations as quickly or effectively as the U.S., which could further constrain our ability to obtain inventory and other necessary supplies. As a result of these and other uncertainties, the full financial impact of the pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Fiscal 2022 - A Look At The Upcoming Year
We believe that our compelling business model, in addition to the projected growth of the large and highly fragmented hard surface flooring market, provides us with an opportunity to significantly expand our store base in the U.S. from 160 warehouse-format stores as of December 30, 2021 to at least 500 stores nationwide within the next 8 to 10 years based on our past success as well as internal research with respect to housing density, demographic data, competitor concentration, and other variables in both new and existing markets. In 2022, we plan to grow our warehouse store base by approximately 20% and add four small design studios. In addition to opening new stores, our focus will be on executing our core strategies, expanding our commercial business by adding Floor & Decor commercial sales representatives and growing sales at our Spartan subsidiary, and continuing to make other investments that we believe will support our long-term growth, as outlined in “Item 1. Business - Our Growth Strategy.” Our ability to open profitable new stores depends on many factors, including the successful selection of new markets and store locations, our ability to negotiate leases on acceptable terms, and our ability to attract highly qualified managers and staff. For further information, see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business.”
Key Performance Indicators
We consider a variety of performance and financial measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key measures we use to determine how our business is performing are comparable store sales, the number of new store openings, gross profit and gross margin, operating income, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Comparable Store Sales
Our comparable store sales growth is a significant driver of our net sales, profitability, cash flow, and overall business results. We believe that comparable store sales growth is generated by continued focus on providing a dynamic and expanding product assortment in addition to other merchandising initiatives, quality of customer service, enhancing sales and marketing strategies, improving visual merchandising and overall aesthetic appeal of our stores and our website, effectively serving our Pro customers, continued investment in store staff and infrastructure, growing our proprietary credit offering, and further integrating connected customer strategies and other key information technology enhancements.
Comparable store sales refer to period-over-period comparisons of our net sales among the comparable store base and are based on when the customer obtains control of the product, which is typically at the time of sale. A store is included in the comparable store sales calculation on the first day of the thirteenth full fiscal month following a store’s opening, which is when we believe comparability has been achieved. Changes in our comparable store sales between two periods are based on net sales for stores that were in operation during both of the two periods. Any change in the square footage of an existing comparable store, including for remodels and relocations within the same primary trade area of the existing store being relocated, does not eliminate that store from inclusion in the calculation of comparable store sales. Stores that are closed for a full fiscal month or longer are excluded from the comparable store sales calculation for each full fiscal month that they are closed. Since our e-commerce, regional account manager, and design studio sales are fulfilled by individual stores, they are included in comparable store sales only to the extent the fulfilling store meets the above mentioned store criteria. Sales through our Spartan subsidiary do not involve our stores and are therefore excluded from the comparable store sales calculation.
Our fiscal 2020 year, which ended December 31, 2020, includes a 53rd week. When presenting comparable store sales for fiscal 2020, we have excluded the last week of fiscal 2020.
Definitions and calculations of comparable store sales differ among companies in the retail industry; therefore, comparable store metrics disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
We believe that comparable store sales is a useful measure as it allows management as well as analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate the sales performance of our retail stores. In addition, comparable store sales highlights our sales and market share growth. Management uses comparable store sales to evaluate the effectiveness of our selling strategies, to make budgeting decisions, and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures.
Various factors affect comparable store sales, including:
•national and regional economic conditions;
•the retail sales environment and other retail trends;
•the home improvement spending environment;
•the hard surface flooring industry trends;
•the impact of competition;
•changes in our product mix;
•changes in staffing at our stores;
•cannibalization resulting from the opening of new stores in existing markets;
•changes in pricing;
•changes in advertising and other operating costs; and
•weather conditions.
Number of New Stores
The number and timing of new store openings, and the costs and fixed lease obligations associated with those openings, have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant impact on our results of operations. The number of new stores reflects the number of stores opened during a particular reporting period. Before we open new stores, we incur pre-opening expenses, which are defined below. While net sales at new stores are generally lower than net sales at our stores that have been open for more than one year, our new stores have historically been profitable in their first year. Generally, our newer stores have also averaged higher comparable store sales growth than our total store average. Our ability to open new, profitable stores is important to our long-term sales and profit growth goals.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in net sales. Our gross profit and gross margin can also be impacted by changes in our prices, our merchandising assortment, shrink, damage, selling of discontinued products, the cost to transport our products from the manufacturer to our stores, and our distribution center costs. With respect to our merchandising assortment, certain of our products tend to generate somewhat higher margins than other products within the same product categories or among different product categories. We have experienced inflation increases in certain of our product categories but historically have been able to source from a different manufacturer or pass increases onto our consumers. Our gross profit and gross margin, which reflect our net sales and our cost of sales and any changes to the components thereof, allow us to evaluate our profitability and overall business results.
Gross profit is calculated as net sales less cost of sales. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales is referred to as gross margin. Cost of sales consists of merchandise costs, as well as freight costs to transport inventory to our distribution centers and stores, and duty and other costs that are incurred to distribute the merchandise to our stores. Cost of sales also includes shrinkage, damage product disposals, distribution, warehousing costs, sourcing and compliance costs. We receive cash consideration from certain vendors related to vendor allowances and volume rebates, which is recorded as a reduction of costs of sales as the inventory is sold or as a reduction of the carrying value of inventory while the inventory is still on hand. Costs associated with arranging and paying for freight to deliver products to customers is included in cost of sales. The components of our cost of sales may not be comparable to the components of cost of sales, or similar measures, of other retailers. As a result, data in this filing regarding our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
We believe that gross profit and gross margin are useful measures as they allow management and analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate the cost and profitability of our products and overall cost of sales, which is our largest expense. Gross profit and gross margin are also important indicators of our ability to grow profits and leverage our expenses on a growing sales base. Management uses gross profit and gross margin, among other measures, to make decisions related to product, pricing, supplier, and distribution strategies as well as other areas affecting the products we offer to our customers.
Operating Income, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA
Operating income, EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA are key metrics used by management and our Board to assess our financial performance and enterprise value. We believe that operating income, EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA are useful measures, as they eliminate certain expenses that are not indicative of our core operating performance and facilitate a comparison of our core operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period. We also use Adjusted EBITDA as a basis to determine covenant compliance with respect to our Credit Facilities, to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions, and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. Operating income, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties as performance measures to evaluate companies in our industry.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We define EBITDA as net income before interest, (gain) loss on early extinguishment of debt, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, (gain) loss on early extinguishment of debt, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures of our financial performance and should not be considered as alternatives to net income as a measure of financial performance or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP and they should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Additionally, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not intended to be measures of liquidity or free cash flow for management's discretionary use. In addition, these non-GAAP measures exclude certain non-recurring and other charges. Each of these non-GAAP measures has its limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. In evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the items eliminated in the adjustments made to determine EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, such as stock-based compensation expense, losses on asset impairments and disposals, and other adjustments. Our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed to imply that our future results will be unaffected by any such adjustments. Definitions and calculations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differ among companies in the retail industry, and therefore EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
Other Key Financial Definitions
Net Sales
The retail and commercial sectors in which we operate are cyclical, and consequently our sales are affected by general economic conditions. Purchases of our products are sensitive to trends in the levels of consumer spending, which are affected by a number of factors such as consumer disposable income, housing market conditions, unemployment trends, stock market performance, consumer debt levels and consumer credit availability, interest rates and inflation, tax rates and overall consumer confidence in the economy.
Net sales reflect our sales of merchandise, less discounts and estimated returns and include our in-store sales and e-commerce sales. In certain cases, we arrange and pay for freight to deliver products to customers and bill the customer for the estimated freight cost, which is also included in net sales. Revenue is recognized when we satisfy the performance obligations in contracts with our customers. Our performance obligations for our retail store sales, as well as for orders placed through our website and shipped to our customers, are satisfied at the point at which the customer obtains control of the inventory, which is typically at the point-of-sale.
Selling and Store Operating Expenses
We expect that our selling and store operating expenses will increase in future periods with future growth. Selling and store operating expenses consist primarily of store personnel wages, bonuses and benefits, rent and infrastructure expenses, supplies, depreciation and amortization, training expenses, and advertising costs. Credit card fees, insurance, personal property taxes, and other miscellaneous operating costs are also included.
The components of our selling and store operating expenses may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other retailers.
General and Administrative Expenses
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods with future growth and in part due to additional legal, accounting, insurance, and other expenses that we expect to incur as a result of being a public company, including compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. General and administrative expenses include both fixed and variable components, and therefore, are not directly correlated with net sales.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs incurred outside of our stores and include administrative personnel wages in our store support center and regional functions, bonuses and benefits, supplies, depreciation and amortization, and store support center expenses. Insurance, legal expenses, information technology costs, consulting, and other miscellaneous operating costs are also included.
The components of our general and administrative expenses may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other retailers.
Pre-opening Expenses
We account for non-capital operating expenditures incurred prior to opening a new store or relocating an existing store as “pre-opening” expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income. Our pre-opening expenses begin, on average, three months to one year in advance of a store opening or relocating due to, among other things, the amount of time it takes to prepare a store for its grand opening. The majority of pre-opening expenses are incurred during the three months before a store opens. Pre-opening expenses primarily include the following: rent, advertising, training, staff recruiting, utilities, personnel, and equipment rental. A store is considered to be relocated if it is closed temporarily and re-opened within the same primary trade area.
Segments
We have two operating segments and one reportable segment. For additional segment information, refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 26, 2019 can be found in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (the “2020 Annual Report”) located within Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Results of operations for prior periods should not be considered indicative of future results. While our revenue and earnings were strong during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our business remains highly uncertain. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - COVID-19 Update” and Item 1A., “Risk Factors” for more information about the potential impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our results of operations and overall financial performance for future periods.
For the fiscal years ended December 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, in dollars and as a percentage of net sales (actuals in thousands, dollar changes in millions; certain numbers may not sum due to rounding):
NM- Not Meaningful
(1) Comparable store sales, comparable average ticket, and comparable customer transactions exclude sales from the 53rd week in fiscal 2020.
(2) Refer to “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures” further below for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income.
Impact of the 53rd Week in Fiscal 2020
The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 added approximately $41.8 million in net sales as well as an estimated $8.5 million in operating income, $6.4 million in net income, $0.06 in diluted earnings per share, $8.5 million in EBITDA, and $8.8 million in adjusted EBITDA. When presenting comparable store sales for fiscal 2020, we have excluded the last week of fiscal 2020.
Net Sales
Net sales during fiscal 2021 increased $1,007.7 million, or 41.5%, compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in comparable store sales of 27.6% and the addition of 27 new warehouse stores during the year. The comparable store sales increase during the period of 27.6%, or $657.9 million, was driven by a 19.1% increase in comparable customer transactions and a 7.2% increase in comparable average ticket. Comparable sales increased among all of our product categories during fiscal 2021. Non-comparable store sales increased $349.8 million during the same period primarily due to the increase in new stores and sales from our Spartan subsidiary, acquired in June 2021.
We believe the increase in sales for fiscal 2021 is also due in part to (i) unprecedented government intervention to help mitigate the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and (ii) customers investing in home improvements while spending less on leisure activities like travel, eating out, sporting events, and hotels. We also believe that our business model, with its focus on substantial amounts of trend-right, in-stock inventory, is also contributing to the sales increase. In addition, our total sales growth and associated comparable store sales growth for fiscal 2021 were particularly strong because in late March of fiscal 2020, we closed the interior of our stores to the public as a precautionary measure due to COVID-19. We began re-opening our stores in early May of fiscal 2020, and by early June, all of our stores were fully open to the public. Further, the addition of a 53rd-week in fiscal 2020, which was the last week in December, a historically low volume week, shifted the beginning of fiscal 2021 to January and modestly benefited fiscal 2021 comparable store sales growth.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit during fiscal 2021 increased $387.4 million, or 37.4%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by the 41.5% increase in net sales, partially offset by a decrease in gross margin to 41.4%, down approximately 130 basis points from 42.7% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to higher freight costs.
Selling and Store Operating Expenses
Selling and store operating expenses during fiscal 2021 increased $195.3 million, or 29.9%, compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by the opening of 27 new warehouse stores during the year as well as additional staffing to satisfy sales growth. As a percentage of net sales, our selling and store operating expenses decreased by approximately 230 basis points to 24.7%, down from 27.0% in fiscal 2020. Comparable store selling and store operating expenses as a percentage of comparable store sales decreased by approximately 300 basis points. The decreases in selling and store operating expenses as a percentage of both overall sales and comparable store sales were primarily due to leverage of occupancy, payroll, and advertising costs driven by significantly higher sales during fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020 when our stores were limited to curbside services and not fully open to the public during the first and second quarters.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $54.7 million, or 37.8%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to higher incentive compensation expense and costs to support store growth, including increased store support staff, higher depreciation related to technology and other store support center investments, and expenses related to the Spartan acquisition. Our general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 20 basis points to 5.8%, down from 6.0% in the prior year. The decline as a percentage of net sales was primarily driven by sales growing faster than increases in store support staffing and occupancy costs, partially offset by acquisition-related expenses and intangible asset amortization resulting from our purchase of Spartan in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 (refer to Note 14, “Acquisition” for additional information regarding the Spartan acquisition).
Pre-Opening Expenses
Pre-opening expenses during fiscal 2021 increased $12.9 million, or 60.2%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase is primarily the result of an increase in the number of stores that we either opened or were preparing for opening compared to the prior year period. We opened 27 warehouse stores during fiscal 2021 as compared to opening 13 warehouse stores and one design studio in fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense
Net interest expense in fiscal 2021 decreased $3.5 million, or 41.3%, compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower revolver and term loan borrowings and a decrease in term loan interest rates compared to the prior year.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $50.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $12.2 million in fiscal 2020. The effective tax rate was 15.2% for fiscal 2021 compared to 5.9% for fiscal 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the recognition of income tax benefits in connection with the CARES Act during fiscal 2020 and higher earnings in fiscal 2021.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
For the periods presented, the following table reconciles EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP:
(a) Excludes amortization of deferred financing costs, which is included as part of interest expense, net in the table above.
(b) Represents gain on partial debt extinguishment in connection with the May 2020 amendment to the senior secured term loan credit facility.
(c) Non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation programs, which vary from period to period depending on the timing of awards and forfeitures.
(d) Represents third-party transaction, legal, and consulting costs directly related to the acquisition of Spartan.
(e) Represents a reduction in estimated tariff refund receivables during fiscal 2021 and income for incremental tariff refunds recognized for certain bamboo and other flooring products during fiscal 2020. Interest income for tariff refunds is included within interest expense, net in the table above.
(f) Amounts are comprised of sanitation, personal protective equipment, and other costs directly related to efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
(g) Other adjustments include amounts management does not consider indicative of our core operating performance. Amounts for fiscal 2021 primarily relate to relocation expenses for our Houston distribution center and changes in the fair value of the contingent earn-out liability associated with the Spartan acquisition. Amounts for fiscal 2020 primarily relate to relocation expenses for our Houston distribution center, costs associated with two secondary public offerings of the Company’s Class A common stock by certain of our stockholders, and legal fees associated with the February 2020 amendment to our senior secured term loan credit facility. The Company did not sell any shares in the offerings and did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares by the selling stockholders.
Seasonality
Historically, our business has had very little seasonality. Our specialty hard surface flooring and decorative home product offering makes us less susceptible to holiday shopping seasonal patterns compared to other retailers. However, we generally conduct a clearance event during our third fiscal quarter followed by a smaller clearance event towards the end of the year. The timing of these clearance events is driven by operational considerations rather than customer demand and could change from year to year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is provided primarily by our cash flows from operations and our $400.0 million ABL Facility. Unrestricted liquidity based on our December 30, 2021 financial data was $516.9 million, consisting of $139.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and $377.5 million immediately available for borrowing under the ABL Facility without violating any covenants thereunder. Our liquidity is not generally seasonal, and our uses of cash are primarily tied to when we open stores and make other capital expenditures.
Our primary cash needs are for merchandise inventories, payroll, store rent, and other operating expenses and capital expenditures associated with opening new stores and remodeling existing stores, as well as information technology, e-commerce, and store support center infrastructure. We also use cash for the payment of taxes and interest and, as applicable, acquisitions.
The most significant components of our operating assets and liabilities are merchandise inventories and accounts payable, and, to a lesser extent, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, other current and non-current liabilities, and tax payables and receivables. Merchandise inventory is considered “in-transit” or “available for sale” based on whether we have physically received the products at an individual store location or in one of our four distribution centers. In-transit inventory generally varies due to contractual terms, country of origin, transit times, international holidays, weather patterns, and other factors.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Liquidity
While our primary sources of funds for business activities are typically cash flows from operations and our existing credit facilities, the full potential impact of the pandemic on our sources of funds and liquidity cannot be reasonably estimated at this time due to uncertainty regarding the potential severity and duration of the pandemic and its future effect on our business. For additional discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - COVID-19 Update.”
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and may, as necessary, reduce expenditures, borrow additional amounts under our Term Loan Facility and ABL Facility, or pursue other sources of capital that may include other forms of external financing in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility. The pandemic may continue to drive volatility and uncertainty in financial and credit markets. Our continued access to external sources of liquidity depends on multiple factors, including the condition of debt capital markets, our operating performance, and maintaining strong credit ratings. If the impacts of the pandemic continue to create severe disruptions or turmoil in the financial markets, or if rating agencies lower our credit ratings, it could adversely affect our ability to access the debt markets, our cost of funds, and other terms for new debt or other sources of external liquidity. We expect that cash generated from operations together with cash on hand, the availability of borrowings under our credit facilities, and if necessary, additional funding through other forms of external financing, will be sufficient to meet liquidity requirements, anticipated capital expenditures, and payments due under our credit facilities for the next twelve months and the foreseeable future.
The exact scope of our capital plans is evolving and will ultimately depend on a variety of factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Total capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 are planned to be between approximately $550 million to $590 million and will be funded primarily by cash generated from operations and borrowings under the ABL Facility. Our capital needs may change in the future due to changes in our business, including in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, or new opportunities that we choose to pursue. We currently expect the following for capital expenditures in fiscal 2022:
•open 32 warehouse-format stores and four small-format design studios, relocate stores, and begin construction on stores opening in fiscal 2023 using approximately $405 million to $430 million of cash;
•invest in existing store remodeling projects and our distribution centers using approximately $100 million to $110 million of cash; and
•invest in information technology infrastructure, e-commerce, and other store support center initiatives using approximately $45 million to $50 million of cash.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of our operating, investing, and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of (i) net income adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, and stock-based compensation and (ii) changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $301.3 million for fiscal 2021 and $406.2 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily the result of a net increase in inventory and other working capital items to support our operations that more than offset the increase in cash earnings.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Investing activities typically consist primarily of capital expenditures for new store openings, existing store remodels (including leasehold improvements, new racking, new fixtures, new product and display vignettes, and enhanced design studios) and new infrastructure and information systems. Cash payments to acquire a business are also included in investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $471.2 for fiscal 2021 and $212.4 for fiscal 2020. The increase in net cash used in investing activities was driven by a $258.8 million increase in capital expenditures and $63.6 million in cash paid as part of the purchase price to acquire Spartan (refer to Note 14, "Acquisition" for additional details). The year-over-year growth in capital expenditures was primarily driven by (i) an increase in new stores that opened or were under construction, as we generally incur significant capital expenditures for new stores a few to several months in advance of opening, (ii) ongoing construction for the Houston distribution center relocation, and (iii) an increase in existing store remodels. During fiscal 2021, approximately 68% of non-acquisition related capital expenditures were for new stores and 27% were for existing stores and distribution centers, while the remaining spending was primarily associated with information technology, e-commerce, and store support center investments to support our growth.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of borrowings and related repayments under our credit agreements as well as proceeds from the exercise of stock options and our employee share purchase program.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.6 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $87.0 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the repayment of a portion of our Term Loan Facility during fiscal 2021 compared with net proceeds from the Term Loan Facility during fiscal 2020.
Our Credit Facilities
As of December 30, 2021, total Term Loan Facility debt was $197.9 million, while no amounts were outstanding under our ABL Facility. For details regarding our Term Loan Facility and ABL Facility, including applicable covenants, please refer to Note 10, “Debt.”
On February 9, 2021 (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a fifth amendment to the credit agreement governing our senior secured term loan facility (as amended, the “Term Loan Facility”). The fifth amendment provided for, among other things, a supplemental term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $65.0 million (the "Supplemental Term Loan Facility") that increased the term loan B facility. The Supplemental Term Loan Facility has the same maturity date (February 14, 2027) and terms as the term loan B facility, except that voluntary prepayments made within six months after the Effective Date are subject to a 1% soft call prepayment premium. The other terms of loans under the Term Loan Facility remain unchanged, including the applicable margin for loans under the term loan B facility. The proceeds of the Supplemental Term Loan Facility, together with cash on hand, were used to (i) repay the $75.0 million term loan B-1 facility and (ii) pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Supplemental Term Loan Facility.
In July 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority (the authority that regulates LIBOR) announced it intends to stop compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee (“ARRC”) has proposed that the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) is the rate that represents best practice as the alternative to USD-LIBOR for use in derivatives and other financial contracts that are currently indexed to USD-LIBOR. ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR from USD-LIBOR and organizations are currently working on industry wide and company specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to USD-LIBOR. Both of our debt facilities are indexed to USD-LIBOR, and we believe all our material agreements have appropriate language to negotiate a transition to an alternative index rate. While we are continuing to monitor this activity and evaluate the potential risks, we do not expect this transition to have a material impact on interest due under our existing credit facilities.
Credit Ratings
Our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by rating agencies. In November 2021, Moody's reaffirmed the Company's issuer corporate family rating of Ba3 and changed its outlook for the Company to positive from stable. In December 2021, Standard & Poor's reaffirmed the Company's corporate credit rating of BB- and the Company’s positive outlook. These ratings and our current credit condition affect, among other things, our ability to access new capital. Negative changes to these ratings may result in more stringent covenants and higher interest rates under the terms of any new debt. Our credit ratings could be lowered or rating agencies could issue adverse commentaries in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity. In particular, a weakening of our financial condition, including an increase in our leverage or decrease in our profitability or cash flows, could adversely affect our ability to obtain necessary funds, result in a credit rating downgrade or change in outlook, or otherwise increase our cost of borrowing.
Supply Chain Finance Program
As part of our ongoing efforts to improve cash flow and liquidity, we facilitate a voluntary supply chain finance program (the “Finance Program”) for certain of our suppliers. Suppliers that participate in the Finance Program extend our payment terms by approximately 40 days on average. Under with the Finance Program, participating suppliers may choose to sell receivables due from us to a participating financial institution at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institution. The Finance Program is administered by a third-party financial institution, and the Company's responsibility is limited to making payment on the terms originally negotiated with participating suppliers, regardless of whether such suppliers sell receivables to the financial institution. Suppliers who choose to participate in the Finance Program may, at their sole discretion, make offers to the financial partners who administer the Finance Program to finance one or more payment obligations of the Company prior to their scheduled due dates at a discounted price to the third party financial institution.
Accordingly, amounts due to our suppliers that elected to participate in the Finance Program totaled $160.4 million and $88.2 million as of December 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and are included in trade accounts payable in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Payments made under the Finance Program are reflected in net cash provided by operating activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Material Cash Requirements, including Contractual Obligations to Third Parties
We enter into long-term obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily debt obligations and non-cancelable operating leases. The following table summarizes our material cash requirements over the next several periods from known contractual or other obligations as of December 30, 2021:
(1)We enter into operating leases during the normal course of business. Most lease arrangements provide us with the option to renew the leases at defined terms. The future operating lease obligations set forth above would change if we were to exercise these options or enter into additional operating leases.
(2)Purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, container commitments, software and license commitments, and legally binding service contracts. Purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above.
(3)For purposes of this table, interest has been estimated based on interest rates in effect for our indebtedness as of December 30, 2021 and estimated borrowing levels in the future. Actual borrowing levels and interest costs may differ.
For fiscal 2021, we were not party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, net sales, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. We do not have any relationship with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
U.S. Tariffs and Global Economy
The current domestic and international political environment, including existing and potential changes to U.S. policies related to global trade and tariffs, have resulted in uncertainty surrounding the future state of the global economy. In particular, the ongoing trade dispute between the U.S. and China has resulted in the U.S. imposing tariffs of 25% on many products from China. While exclusions from tariffs were granted for certain products from China, nearly all of these exclusions have expired. In fiscal 2021, approximately 30% of the products we sold were produced in China. As we continue to manage the impact these tariffs may have on our business, we continue taking steps to mitigate some of these cost increases through negotiating lower costs from our vendors, increasing retail pricing as we deem appropriate, and sourcing from alternative countries. While our efforts have mitigated a substantial portion of the overall effect of increased tariffs, the enacted tariffs have increased our inventory costs and associated cost of sales for the remaining products still sourced from China.
Tariff Refunds
In November 2019, the U.S. Trade Representative (“USTR”) made a ruling to retroactively exclude certain flooring products imported from China from the Section 301 tariffs that were implemented at 10% beginning in September 2018 and increased to 25% in June 2019. The granted exclusions apply to certain “click” vinyl and engineered products that we have sold and continue to sell. As these exclusions were granted retroactively, we are entitled to a refund from U.S. Customs for the applicable Section 301 tariffs previously paid on these goods. Tariff refund claims are subject to the approval of U.S. Customs, and the Company currently expects to recover $22.0 million, including interest, related to these Section 301 tariff payments. Of the expected refunds, $14.6 million has been received as of December 30, 2021. Refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional details regarding tariff refunds.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for information on the recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements that are applicable to the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates, and judgments on an ongoing basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ under different assumptions and conditions, and such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following accounting policies are critical as they involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are the most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. All of our significant accounting policies are discussed in “Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
Description. We recognize revenue and the related cost of sales when we satisfy the performance obligations in contracts with our customers in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“Topic 606”). Our performance obligations for our retail store sales, as well as for orders placed through our website and shipped to our customers, are satisfied at the point-of-sale, which is typically the point at which the customer obtains control of the inventory. In some cases, merchandise is not physically ready for transfer to the customer at the point-of-sale, and revenue recognition is deferred until the customer has control of the inventory. Shipping and handling activities are accounted for as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer goods rather than as separate performance obligations as outlined within Topic 606. Payment is generally due from the customer immediately at the point-of-sale for both retail store sales and website sales.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. Our customers have the right to return the goods sold to them within a reasonable time period, typically 90 days. The right of return is an element of variable consideration as defined within Topic 606. We estimate a reserve for future returns of previously sold goods based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. Merchandise exchanges of similar product and price are not considered merchandise returns and, therefore, are excluded when calculating the sales returns reserve. While we believe that our current sales returns reserves are adequate, there can be no assurances that historical data and trends will accurately predict returns or that future developments might not lead to a significant change in the reserve.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our sales returns reserves and related return asset accruals at December 30, 2021 would have had a net impact of approximately $1.6 million on operating income in fiscal 2021. Sales returns reserves and related return asset accruals have increased primarily in proportion to our sales growth over the last few years.
Gift Cards and Merchandise Credits
Description. We sell gift cards to our customers in our stores and through our website and issue merchandise credits in our stores. We account for the programs by recognizing a liability at the time the gift card is sold or the merchandise credit is issued. The liability is relieved and revenue is recognized upon redemption. Additionally, we recognize breakage income in proportion to the pattern of rights exercised by the customer when we expect to be entitled to breakage. Net sales related to the estimated breakage are included in net sales in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income. We have an agreement with an unrelated third-party who is the issuer of the Company's gift cards and also assumes the liability for unredeemed gift cards. The Company is not subject to claims under unclaimed property statutes, as the agreement effectively transfers the ownership of such unredeemed gift cards and the related future escheatment liability, if any, to the third-party.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. Our gift card breakage assumptions require judgments in assessing the level at which we group gift cards for analysis of breakage rates, redemption patterns, and the ultimate value of gift cards which we do not expect to be redeemed.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our accrual for estimated gift card breakage at December 30, 2021 would have affected operating income by approximately $1.2 million in fiscal 2021. Accruals for estimated gift card breakage have increased approximately in proportion to growth in gift card sales over the last few years.
Loyalty Program
Description. Our Pro Premier loyalty program allows customers to earn points through purchases in our stores and our website. Loyalty points are typically awarded at 1%, but may be awarded at up to 3% percent for our higher volume customers, of the relative standalone selling price of the merchandise sold and are recognized at the time of sale as a liability with a corresponding reduction to net sales. Additionally, loyalty breakage is recognized based on our estimate of the balance of loyalty points for which the likelihood of redemption by the customer is deemed remote.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. With assistance from the third party servicer that manages the loyalty program, we estimate and recognize loyalty breakage based on historical redemption trends, market benchmarks for the pattern of redemptions for other retail loyalty programs, and other assumptions related to the likelihood of customer redemptions.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. The loyalty program was rolled out to all stores in late fiscal 2018. As the program matures, we may find that actual customer redemption patterns differ significantly from our estimated breakage rates. A 10% change in our accrual for estimated loyalty breakage at December 30, 2021 would have affected operating income by approximately $0.5 million in fiscal 2021. Accruals for estimated loyalty breakage have increased approximately in proportion to our sales growth over the last few years.
Inventory Valuation and Shrinkage
Description. Inventories consist of merchandise held for sale and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. When evidence exists that the net realizable value of inventory is lower than its cost, the difference is recorded in cost of sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income as a loss in the period in which it occurs. We determine inventory costs using the moving weighted average cost method. We capitalize transportation, duties, and other costs to get product to our retail locations.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. We provide provisions for losses related to shrinkage and other amounts that are otherwise not expected to be fully recoverable. These provisions are calculated based on historical shrinkage, selling price, margin, and current business trends. The estimates have calculations that require management to make assumptions based on the current rate of sales, age, salability and profitability of inventory, historical percentages that can be affected by changes in our merchandising mix, customer preferences, rates of sell through, and changes in actual shrinkage trends.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our inventory valuation and shrinkage reserves at December 30, 2021 would have affected operating income by approximately $0.7 million in fiscal 2021. Inventory valuation and shrinkage reserves have increased approximately in proportion to our inventory growth over the last few years.
Vendor Rebates and Allowances
Description. Vendor allowances consist primarily of volume rebates that are earned as a result of reaching certain inventory purchase levels and advertising allowances or incentives for the promotion of vendors' products. These vendor allowances are accrued as earned and are estimated based on annual projections. Vendor allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of inventory and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product is sold. Certain incentive allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental, and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors’ products are recorded as an offset against these promotional expenses.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. For vendor allowances, we develop accrual rates based on the provisions of the agreements in place. Due to the complexity and diversity of the individual vendor agreements, we perform analyses and review historical purchase trends and volumes throughout the year, adjust accrual rates as appropriate, and confirm actual amounts with select vendors to ensure the amounts earned are appropriately recorded. Amounts accrued throughout the year could be impacted if actual purchase volumes differ from projected purchase volumes, especially in the case of programs that provide for increased funding when graduated purchase volumes are met.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to recognize vendor allowances during the past three fiscal years. If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions and estimates used, we could be exposed to additional adjustments that could positively or negatively impact gross margin and inventory. However, substantially all receivables associated with vendor rebates and allowances do not require subjective long-term estimates because they are collected soon after quarter end, primarily within the first two months. Adjustments to gross margin and inventory in the following fiscal year have historically not been material.
Leases
Description. We recognize lease assets and corresponding lease liabilities for all operating leases on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, excluding short-term leases (leases with terms of 12 months or less) as described under ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842).” The majority of our long-term operating lease agreements include options to extend, which are also factored into the recognition of their respective assets and liabilities when appropriate based on management’s assessment of the probability that the options will be exercised. Lease payments are discounted using the rate implicit in the lease, or, if not readily determinable, a third-party secured incremental borrowing rate based on information available at lease commencement. The secured incremental borrowing rate is estimated based on yields obtained from Bloomberg for U.S. consumers with a BB- credit rating and is adjusted for collateralization as well as inflation. Additionally, certain of our lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms which, under Topic 842, results in rent being expensed on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease that commences on the date we have the right to control the property.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. The determination of an appropriate secured incremental borrowing rate requires judgments in selecting an appropriate yield curve and estimating adjustments for collateralization and inflation.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. Based on the volume of new store leases that we enter into each year, a significant increase or decrease in the incremental borrowing rates used to discount lease payments could have a significant impact on the value of operating lease liabilities and right-of-use assets subsequently reported on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.