Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the historical financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The information in this section contains forward-looking statements. Please read “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ significantly from the results suggested by these forward-looking statements and from our historical results. Some factors that may cause our results to differ are described in “Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a leading partnership of independent, fiduciary wealth management firms operating in the highly fragmented RIA industry, with a footprint of over 80 partner firms primarily in the United States. We have achieved this market leadership by positioning ourselves as the partner of choice for many firms in an industry where a number of secular trends are driving consolidation. Our partner firms primarily service ultra-high net worth and high net worth individuals and families by providing highly differentiated and comprehensive wealth management services. Our partner firms benefit from our intellectual and financial resources, operating as part of a scaled business model with aligned economic interests, while retaining their entrepreneurial culture and independence.
Our partnership is comprised of trusted professionals providing comprehensive wealth management services through a largely recurring, fee-based model, which differentiates our partner firms from the traditional brokerage platforms whose revenues are largely derived from commissions. We derive a substantial majority of our revenues from wealth management fees for investment advice, financial and tax planning, consulting, tax return preparation, family office services and other services. We also generate other revenues primarily from recordkeeping and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services.
Since we began revenue-generating and acquisition activities in 2006, we have created a partnership of over 80 partner firms, the substantial majority of which are RIAs registered with the SEC and built a business with revenues of $1.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, in excess of 95% of our revenues were fee-based and recurring in nature. We have established a national footprint across the United States and expanded our international presence into Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom.
Sources of Revenue
Our partner firms provide comprehensive wealth management services through a largely recurring, fee-based model. We derive a substantial majority of our revenue from wealth management fees, which are comprised of fees earned from wealth management services, including investment advice, financial and tax planning, consulting, tax return preparation, family office services and other services. Fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly or semiannual basis. In certain cases, such wealth management fees may be subject to minimum fee levels depending on the services performed. We also generate other revenues, which primarily include recordkeeping
and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services. The following table summarizes our sources of revenue:
During the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, our wealth management fees were impacted by the acquisitions of new partner firms and the growth of existing partner firms, which includes the acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our existing partner firms. In 2019, 2020 and 2021, we completed acquisitions of 6, 7 and 14 partner firms, respectively. In 2019, the new partner firms were Altman Greenfield & Selvaggi, Prime Quadrant, Foster Dykema & Cabot, Escala Partners, Sound View Wealth Advisors and Williams Jones. In 2020, the new partner firms were Nexus Investment Management, MEDIQ Financial Services, InterOcean Capital, Seasons of Advice, CornerStone Partners, Fairway Wealth Management and Kavar Capital Partners. In 2021, the new partner firms were Hill Investment Group, Prairie Capital Management, Rollins Financial, ARS Wealth Advisors, Badgley Phelps Wealth Managers, Ancora Holdings, Sonora Investment Management, Cardinal Point, Ullmann Wealth Partners, Mosaic Family Wealth, Alley Company, Cassaday & Company, Provident Financial Management and London & Co. The new partner firms Provident Financial Management and London & Co. combined their respective businesses in December 2021 and operate as Provident Financial Management.
In 2019, 2020 and 2021, our partner firms completed 28, 18 and 24 transactions, respectively, consisting of business acquisitions accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805: Business Combinations and asset acquisitions, including four and eight transactions completed by Connectus in 2020 and 2021, respectively.
See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our acquisitions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, in excess of 95% of our revenues were fee-based and recurring in nature. Although the substantial majority of our revenues are fee-based and recurring, our revenues can fluctuate due to macroeconomic factors and the overall state of the financial markets, particularly in the United States. Our partner firms’ wealth management fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly or semiannual basis. We estimate that approximately 22% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were not directly correlated to the financial markets. Of the 78% of our revenues that were directly correlated to the financial markets, primarily equities and fixed income, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we estimate that approximately 66% of such revenues were generated from advance billings. We estimate that approximately 23% of our revenues for the three months ended December 31, 2021 were not directly correlated to the financial markets. Of the 77% of our revenues that were directly correlated to the financial markets, primarily equities and fixed income, for the three months ended December 31, 2021, we estimate that approximately 64% of such revenues were generated from advance billings. These revenues are impacted by market movements as a result of contractual provisions with clients that entitle our partner firms to bill for their services either in advance or arrears based on the value of client assets at such time. Since approximately 64% of our market correlated revenues are set based on the market value of client assets in advance of the respective service period, this generally results in a one quarter lagged effect of any market movements on our revenues. Longer term trends in the financial markets may favorably or unfavorably impact our total revenues, but not in a linear relationship. For example, during 2019, 2020 and 2021, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index had a total return of 31.5%, 18.4% and 28.7%, respectively, and the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index had a total return for the same periods of 8.7%, 7.5% and (1.5)% respectively. By comparison, for the same periods our organic revenue growth was 15.1%, 7.0% and 24.0%, respectively. For additional information, please read “-How We Evaluate our Business.”
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenues continued to be negatively impacted by the effects of Covid-19 on a portion of our non-market correlated revenues derived from family office type services for clients in the entertainment industry and relate to live events. We anticipate that the cancellations of live events and other entertainment activities will persist in 2022. However, this revenue outlook is subject to material change because it is dependent on the continued impact of the Covid-19 pandemic which is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of compensation and related expenses, management fees, selling, general and administrative expenses, management contract buyout, intangible amortization, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration and depreciation and other amortization expense.
Compensation and Related Expenses
Compensation and related expenses include salaries and wages, including variable compensation, related employee benefits and taxes for employees at our partner firms and employees at the Focus LLC company level. Compensation and related expenses also include non-cash compensation expense, associated with both Focus Inc.’s and Focus LLC’s equity grants to employees and non-employees, including management company principals.
Management Fees
While we have to date, with limited exceptions, acquired substantially all of the assets of a target firm, following our acquisition of a new partner firm, the partner firm continues to be primarily managed by its principals through their 100% ownership of a management company formed by them concurrently with the acquisition. Our operating subsidiary, the management company and the principals enter into a management agreement that provides for the payment of ongoing management fees to the management company. The terms of the management agreements are generally six years subject to automatic renewals for consecutive one-year terms, unless earlier terminated by either the management company or us in certain limited situations. Under the management agreement, the management company is entitled to management fees typically consisting of all EBPC in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of EBPC in excess of Target Earnings.
We retain a preferred position in Base Earnings. To the extent earnings of an acquired business in any year are less than Base Earnings, in the following year we are entitled to receive Base Earnings together with the prior years’ shortfall before any management fees are earned by the management company.
The following table provides an illustrative example of our economics, including management fees earned by the management company, for periods of projected revenues, +10% growth in revenues and −10% growth in revenues. This example assumes (i) Target Earnings of $3.0 million; (ii) Base Earnings acquired of 60% of Target Earnings or $1.8 million; and (iii) a percentage of earnings in excess of Target Earnings retained by the management company of 40%.
As a result of our economic arrangements with the various management company entities, 100% of management fees are variable expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses include rent, insurance premiums, professional fees, travel and entertainment and other costs.
Management Contract Buyout
Management contract buyout represents cash consideration to buyout a management agreement with one of our retiring principals whereby the business operations of the relevant partner firm were transitioned to one of our other partner firms.
Intangible Amortization
Amortization of intangibles consists primarily of the amortization of intangibles we acquired through our various acquisitions of new partner firms and acquisitions by our partner firms.
Non-Cash Changes in Fair Value of Estimated Contingent Consideration
We have typically incorporated into our acquisition structure contingent consideration paid to the sellers upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds, and the purchase price for a typical acquisition is comprised of a base purchase price and the right to receive such contingent consideration in the form of earn out payments. The contingent
consideration for acquisitions of new partner firms is generally paid over a six-year period upon the satisfaction of specified growth thresholds, in years three and six. These growth thresholds are typically tied to the compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”) of the partner firm’s earnings. Such growth thresholds can be set annually or for different time frames as well, for example, annually over a six-year period. The contingent consideration for acquisitions made by our partner firms is paid upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds. These thresholds are generally tied to revenue as adjusted for certain criteria or other operating metrics based on the retention or growth of the business acquired. These arrangements may result in the payment of additional purchase price consideration to the sellers for periods following the closing of an acquisition. Contingent consideration payments are typically payable in cash and, in some cases, equity.
For business acquisitions, we recognize the fair value of estimated contingent consideration at the acquisition date as part of the consideration transferred in exchange for substantially all of the assets or equity of the wealth management firm. The contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Any changes in fair value are recognized each reporting period in non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration in our consolidated statements of operations.
Depreciation and Other Amortization
Depreciation and other amortization expense primarily represents the benefits we received from using long-lived assets such as computers and equipment, leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures. Those assets primarily consist of purchased fixed assets as well as fixed assets acquired through our acquisitions.
Business Acquisitions
We completed 31, 21 and 36 business acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively, consisting of both new partner firms and acquisitions by our partner firms. Such business acquisitions were accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations.
The purchase price is comprised of a base purchase price and a right to receive contingent consideration in the form of earn out payments. The base purchase price typically consists of an upfront cash payment and may include equity. The contingent consideration for acquisitions of new partner firms generally consists of earn outs over a six year period following the closing, with payment upon the satisfaction of specified growth thresholds in years three and six. The growth thresholds are typically tied to the CAGR of the partner firm’s earnings. Such growth thresholds can be set annually or for different time frames as well, for example, annually over a six-year period. The contingent consideration for acquisitions made by our partner firms generally is earned upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds. These thresholds are generally tied to revenue as adjusted for certain criteria or other operating metrics based on the retention or growth of the business acquired. The contingent consideration is typically payable in cash and, in some cases, equity.
The following table summarizes our business acquisitions for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021 (dollars in thousands):
In addition, we completed three, four and two acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively, that did not meet the definition of a business under ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations. These acquisitions primarily related to the acquisition of customer relationships.
Substantially all of our acquisitions have been paid for with a combination of cash on hand, cash generated by our operations, borrowings under the Credit Facility, Focus LLC common units or our Class A common stock.
How We Evaluate Our Business
We focus on several key financial metrics in evaluating the success of our business, the success of our partner firms and our resulting financial position and operating performance. Key metrics include the following:
* Not meaningful
(1) Represents period-over-period growth in our GAAP revenue.
(2) Organic revenue growth represents the period-over-period growth in revenue related to partner firms, including growth related to acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our partner firms, including Connectus, and partner firms that have merged, that for the entire periods presented, are included in our consolidated statements of operations for each of the entire periods presented. We believe these growth statistics are useful in that they present full-period revenue growth of partner firms on a “same store” basis exclusive of the effect of the partial results of partner firms that are acquired during the comparable periods.
(3) The terms of our management agreements entitle the management companies to management fees typically consisting of all EBPC in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of any EBPC in excess of Target Earnings. Management fees growth represents the period-over-period growth in GAAP management fees earned by management companies. While an expense, we believe that growth in management fees reflect the strength of the partnership.
(4) Organic management fees growth represents the period-over-period growth in management fees earned by management companies related to partner firms, including growth related to acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our partner firms and partner firms that have merged, that for the entire periods presented, are included in our consolidated statements of operations for each of the entire periods presented. We believe that these growth statistics are useful in that they present full-period growth of management fees on a “same store” basis exclusive of the effect of the partial period results of partner firms that are acquired during the comparable periods.
(5) In disclosures, including filings with the SEC, made prior to the quarter ended September 30, 2020, “Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments” and “Tax Adjustments” were presented together as “Adjusted Net Income.” Additionally, “Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share” and “Tax Adjustments Per Share” were presented together as “Adjusted Net Income Per Share.”
(6) For additional information regarding Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share, Tax Adjustments, Tax Adjustments Per Share and Adjusted Shares Outstanding, including a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, please read “-Adjusted EBITDA” and “-Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share.”
(7) Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis. As of December 31, 2021, estimated Tax Adjustments from intangible asset related income tax benefits from closed acquisitions based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate for the next 12 months is $58,330.
(8) Net Leverage Ratio represents the First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility), and means the ratio of amounts outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan and First Lien Revolver plus other outstanding debt obligations secured by a lien on the assets of Focus LLC (excluding letters of credit other than unpaid drawings thereunder) minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facility).
(9) The terms of our management agreements entitle the management companies to management fees typically consisting of all future EBPC of the acquired wealth management firm in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of any EBPC in excess of Target Earnings. Acquired Base Earnings is equal to our preferred position in Base Earnings. We are entitled to receive these earnings notwithstanding any earnings that we are entitled to receive in excess of Target Earnings. Base Earnings may change in future periods for various
business or contractual matters. For example, from time to time when a partner firm consummates an acquisition, the management agreement among the partner firm, the management company and the principals is amended to adjust Base Earnings and Target Earnings to reflect the projected post-acquisition earnings of the partner firm.
(10) Represents the number of partner firms on the last day of the period presented.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) excluding interest income, interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), amortization of debt financing costs, intangible amortization and impairments, if any, depreciation and other amortization, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, loss on extinguishment of borrowings, other expense, net, impairment of equity method investment, management contract buyout, other one-time transaction expenses and secondary offering expenses, if any. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, viewed in addition to and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provides additional useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including the following:
● non-cash equity grants made to employees or non-employees at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily reflect how our business is performing at any particular time; stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance;
● contingent consideration or earn outs can vary substantially from company to company and depending upon each company’s growth metrics and accounting assumption methods; the non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration is not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance; and
● amortization expenses can vary substantially from company to company and from period to period depending upon each company’s financing and accounting methods, the fair value and average expected life of acquired intangible assets and the method by which assets were acquired; the amortization of intangible assets obtained in acquisitions are not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance.
We use Adjusted EBITDA:
● as a measure of operating performance;
● for planning purposes, including the preparation of budgets and forecasts;
● to allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business;
● to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies; and
● as a consideration in determining compensation for certain employees.
Adjusted EBITDA does not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) or cash flows from operating activities. The term Adjusted EBITDA is not defined under GAAP, and Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of net income (loss), operating income or any other performance or liquidity measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; and
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
In addition, Adjusted EBITDA can differ significantly from company to company depending on strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We compensate for these limitations by also relying on the GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental information.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share
We analyze our performance using Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share. Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are non GAAP measures. We define Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments as net income (loss) excluding income tax expense (benefit), amortization of debt financing costs, intangible amortization and impairments, if any, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, loss on extinguishment of borrowings, management contract buyout, other one-time transaction expenses and secondary offering expenses, if any. The calculation of Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments also includes adjustments to reflect a pro forma 27% income tax rate reflecting the estimated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax rates applicable to corporations in the jurisdictions we conduct business.
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share is calculated by dividing Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments by the Adjusted Shares Outstanding. Adjusted Shares Outstanding includes: (i) the weighted average shares of Class A common stock outstanding during the periods, (ii) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to stock options outstanding during the periods, (iii) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to unvested Class A common stock outstanding during the periods, (iv) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to restricted stock units outstanding during the
periods, (v) the weighted average number of Focus LLC common units outstanding during the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC common units, including contingently issuable Focus LLC common units, if any, have been exchanged for Class A common stock), (vi) the weighted average number of Focus LLC restricted common units outstanding during the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC restricted common units have been exchanged for Class A common stock) and (vii) the weighted average number of common unit equivalents of Focus LLC vested and unvested incentive units outstanding during the periods based on the closing price of our Class A common stock on the last trading day of the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC common units have been exchanged for Class A common stock).
We believe that Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share, viewed in addition to and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provide additional useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including the following:
● non-cash equity grants made to employees or non-employees at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily reflect how our business is performing at any particular time; stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance;
● contingent consideration or earn outs can vary substantially from company to company and depending upon each company’s growth metrics and accounting assumption methods; the non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration is not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance; and
● amortization expenses can vary substantially from company to company and from period to period depending upon each company’s financing and accounting methods, the fair value and average expected life of acquired intangible assets and the method by which assets were acquired; the amortization of intangible assets obtained in acquisitions are not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance.
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) or cash flows from operating activities. The terms Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are not defined under GAAP, and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are not a measure of net income (loss), operating income or any other performance or liquidity measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share have limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; and
● Other companies in the financial services industry may calculate Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
In addition, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share can differ significantly from company to company depending on strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We compensate for these limitations by relying also on the GAAP results and use Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share as supplemental information.
Tax Adjustments and Tax Adjustments Per Share
Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis.
Tax Adjustments Per Share is calculated by dividing Tax Adjustments by the Adjusted Shares Outstanding.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share:
(1) In 2019, relates to one time expenses related to (a) Loring Ward severance cash compensation of $280 during the three months ended March 31, 2019, which were recorded in compensation and related expenses and (b) transaction expenses of $786 and $420, associated with the acquisition of Loring Ward, which were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses during the three months ended March 31, 2019 and June 30, 2019, respectively.
(2) Relates to offering expenses associated with the March 2021 and June 2021 secondary equity offerings.
(3) The pro forma income tax rate of 27% reflects the estimated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax rates applicable to corporations in the jurisdictions we conduct business.
(4) Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis. As of December 31, 2021, estimated Tax Adjustments from intangible asset related income tax benefits from closed acquisitions based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate for the next 12 months is $58,330.
(5) Represents our GAAP weighted average Class A common stock outstanding-basic.
(6) The incremental shares for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to stock options, unvested Class A common stock and restricted stock units as calculated using the treasury stock method were not included in the calculation of the GAAP weighted average shares of Class A common stock-diluted as the result would have been anti-dilutive.
(7) Assumes that 100% of Focus LLC common units, including contingently issuable Focus LLC common units, if any, were exchanged for Class A common stock.
(8) Assumes that 100% of Focus LLC restricted common units were exchanged for Class A common stock.
(9) Assumes that 100% of the vested and unvested Focus LLC incentive units were converted into Focus LLC common units based on the closing price of our Class A common stock at the end of the respective period and such Focus LLC common units were exchanged for Class A common stock.
Factors Affecting Comparability
Our future results of operations may not be comparable to our historical results of operations, principally for the following reasons:
Tax Treatment
As a flow-through entity, Focus LLC is generally not and has not been subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes at the entity level, although it has been subject to the New York City Unincorporated Business Tax. Instead, for U.S. federal and certain state income tax purposes, taxable income was and is passed through to its unitholders, including Focus Inc. Focus Inc. is subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes applicable to corporations.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
For a comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, see Part II. Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2021
The following discussion presents an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021. Where appropriate, we have identified specific events and changes that affect comparability or trends and, where possible and practical, have quantified the impact of such items.
* Not meaningful
Revenues
Wealth management fees increased $431.2 million, or 33.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. New partner firms added subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020 that are included in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 include Hill Investment Group, Prairie Capital Management, Rollins Financial, ARS Wealth Advisors, Badgley Phelps Wealth Managers, Ancora Holdings, Sonora Investment Management, Cardinal Point, Ullmann Wealth Partners, Mosaic Family Wealth, Alley Company, Cassaday & Company, Provident Financial Management and London & Co. The new partner firms Provident Financial
Management and London & Co. combined their respective businesses in December 2021 and operate as Provident Financial Management. Additionally, our partner firms completed 24 acquisitions subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020. The new partner firms contributed approximately $52.7 million in wealth management fees during the year ended December 31, 2021. The balance of the increase of $378.5 million was due to the revenue growth at our existing partner firms associated with wealth management services and partner firm-level acquisitions as well as a full period of revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 for partner firms that were acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other revenues increased $5.4 million, or 7.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $1.6 million. The balance of the increase of $3.8 million was due primarily to an increase in recordkeeping and administration fees.
Operating Expenses
Compensation and related expenses increased $114.9 million, or 24.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $12.3 million. Non-cash equity compensation increased $9.3 million primarily from Focus LLC incentive units and restricted common units granted in 2020. The balance of the increase of $93.3 million was due to an increase in salaries and related expense due to growth of our existing partner firms, partner firm-level acquisitions and a full period of expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 for partner firms acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management fees increased $142.0 million, or 40.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to the new partner firms was approximately $12.4 million. Management fees are variable and a function of earnings during the period. The balance of the increase of $129.6 million was due to partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2021 and the increase in earnings during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, in part the result of a full period of earnings recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 for partner firms acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $61.3 million, or 25.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. New partner firms added approximately $8.9 million. The balance of the increase of $52.4 million was due primarily to an increase in expenses related to professional fees, information technology, referral fees, travel and entertainment, and marketing and business development related to the growth of our existing partner firms, partner firm-level acquisitions and a full period of expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 for partner firms acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Intangible amortization increased $40.1 million, or 27.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $11.2 million. The balance of the increase of $28.9 million was due to partner firm-level acquisitions and in part to a full period of amortization during the year ended December 31, 2021 for partner firms acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration increased $93.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021 the probability that certain contingent consideration payments would be achieved increased resulting in an increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability.
Depreciation and other amortization expense increased $2.2 million, or 17.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to office build-outs at certain partner firms.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense increased $13.3 million, or 32.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to higher average outstanding borrowings, due to the incremental $800 million term loan during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, a loss on extinguishment of borrowings of $6.1 million was recognized in connection with the January 2020 Credit Facility amendment.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased $0.6 million, or 2.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a tax expense of approximately $20.1 million resulting in an annual effective tax rate of 45.1%. The annual effective tax rate is primarily related to federal, state and local income taxes imposed on Focus Inc.’s allocable portion of taxable income from Focus LLC.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we met our cash and liquidity needs primarily through cash on hand, cash generated by our operations, borrowings under our Credit Facility and an equity offering. Over the next twelve months, and in the longer term, we expect that our cash and liquidity needs will continue to be met by cash generated by our ongoing operations and our Credit Facility, as well as equity offerings, especially for acquisition activities. If our acquisition activity continues at an accelerated pace, or for larger acquisition opportunities, we may decide to issue equity either as consideration or in an offering. For information regarding the Credit Facility, please read “-Credit Facilities.”
Tax Receivable Agreements
Our Tax Receivable Agreements with the TRA holders generally provide for the payment by Focus Inc. to each TRA holder of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income and franchise tax that Focus Inc. actually realizes (computed using simplifying assumptions to address the impact of state and local taxes) or is deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain increases in tax basis and certain tax benefits attributable to imputed interest. Focus Inc. will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these cash savings.
The payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements are Focus Inc.’s obligations and not obligations of Focus LLC, and we expect that such payments required to be made under the Tax Receivable Agreements will be substantial. Estimating the amount and timing of payments that may become due under the Tax Receivable Agreements is by its nature imprecise. For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreements, cash savings in tax generally are calculated by comparing Focus Inc.’s actual tax liability (determined by using the actual applicable U.S. federal income tax rate and an assumed combined state and local income and franchise tax rate) to the amount Focus Inc. would have been required to pay had it not been able to utilize any of the tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we expect that future payments to the TRA holders will be $219.5 million, in aggregate. Future payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements in respect of subsequent exchanges will be in addition to this amount.
The actual increases in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of any exchange of units, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of each exchange, the extent to which such exchanges are taxable transactions, the amount of Focus LLC’s assets that consist of equity in entities taxed as corporations at the time of each exchange, the amount and timing of the taxable income we generate in the future, the U.S. federal income tax rates then applicable and the portion of the payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements that constitute imputed interest or give rise to depreciable or amortizable tax basis.
The foregoing amount of expected future payments to TRA holders is merely an estimate and the actual payments could differ materially. It is possible that future transactions or events could increase or decrease the actual tax benefits realized and the corresponding payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements as compared to the foregoing estimates. Moreover, there may be a negative impact on our liquidity if, as a result of timing discrepancies or otherwise, (i) the payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements exceed the actual benefits realized in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements and/or (ii) distributions to Focus Inc. by Focus LLC are not sufficient to permit Focus Inc. to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements after it has paid its taxes and other obligations.
The payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements will not be conditioned upon a TRA holder’s having a continued ownership interest in either Focus Inc. or Focus LLC.
We expect that future unitholders may become party to one or more Tax Receivable Agreements entered into in connection with future acquisitions by Focus LLC or issuances of units of Focus LLC to employees, partners and directors.
Cash Flows
The following table presents information regarding our cash flows and cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. For information regarding our cash flows and cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, see Part II. Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020:
* Not meaningful
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities includes net income (loss) adjusted for non-cash expenses such as intangible amortization, depreciation and other amortization, amortization of debt financing costs, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, other non-cash items and changes in cash resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Operating assets and liabilities include receivables from our clients, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses, deferred revenues and other assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $102.6 million, or 48.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to the increase in Adjusted EBITDA from the prior year, offset partially by the increase in cash paid for interest and to a lesser extent other working capital changes.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $634.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase of $630.4 million in cash paid for acquisitions and contingent consideration.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $777.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net borrowings under the Credit Facility of $664.6 million due to the amended and expanded First Lien Term Loan of which $800.0 million was borrowed during the year ended December 31, 2021 (see Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements) and proceeds from issuance of Class A common stock, net of payments in connection with Focus LLC unit redemptions, net of $161.9 (see Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements). The increase in the net cash provided by financing activities was offset in part by an increase in contingent consideration paid of $28.2 million, an increase in distributions for Focus LLC unitholders of $9.9 million, payments of debt financing costs of $7.6 million and payments in connection with Tax Receivable Agreements of $4.4 million.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow
To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use a non-GAAP liquidity measure on a trailing 4-quarter basis to analyze cash flows generated from our operations. We consider Adjusted Free Cash Flow to be a liquidity measure that provides useful information to investors about the amount of cash generated by the business and is one factor in evaluating the amount of cash available to pay contingent consideration, make strategic acquisitions and repay outstanding borrowings. Adjusted Free Cash Flow does not represent our residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures as it does not deduct our mandatory debt service requirements and other non-discretionary expenditures. We define Adjusted Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities, less purchase of fixed assets, distributions for Focus LLC unitholders and payments under Tax Receivable Agreements (if any). Adjusted Free Cash Flow is not defined under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net cash from operating, investing or financing activities. Adjusted free cash flow may not be calculated the same for us as for other companies. The table below reconciles net cash provided by operating activities, as reflected on our cash flow statement, to our adjusted free cash flow.
(1) A portion of contingent consideration paid is classified as operating cash outflows in accordance with GAAP, with the balance reflected in investing and financing cash flows. Contingent consideration paid classified as operating cash outflows for each quarter in the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2020 was $8.3 million, $16.4 million, $3.8 million and $2.4 million, respectively, totaling $30.9 million for the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2020. Contingent consideration paid classified as operating cash outflows for each quarter in the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2021 was $5.3 million, $11.6 million, $20.4 million and $16.4 million, respectively, totaling $53.7 million for the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2021. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2021, our Credit Facility consisted of a $2.4 billion First Lien Term Loan, consisting of a tranche A (“Tranche A”) and tranche B (“Tranche B”), and a $650.0 million First Lien Revolver.
Tranche A bears interest (at our option) at: (i) the LIBOR plus a margin of 2.00% or (ii) the lender’s Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Facility) plus a margin of 1.00%. In January 2021, we amended and expanded Tranche A by $500.0 million. The debt was issued at a discount of 0.125% or $0.6 million which is being amortized to interest expense over the remaining term of Tranche A. The required quarterly installment repayments of $2.9 million were increased to $4.2 million. Tranche A has a maturity date of July 2024.
In July 2021, we amended and expanded our First Lien Term Loan and added Tranche B of $800.0 million. Of this amount, $650.0 million was borrowed on the July 2021 closing date and $150.0 million was borrowed in December 2021 under a delayed draw feature. Tranche B bears interest at LIBOR plus a margin of 2.50% with a 0.50% LIBOR floor, and was issued at a discount of 0.75% or $6.0 million which will be amortized to interest expense over the term of Tranche B. The delayed draw feature had a ticking fee with respect to the undrawn commitments with (i) no margin from 0-30 days from the closing date, (ii) 1.25% margin from 31-60 days of the closing date and (iii) 2.50% margin after 60 days from the closing date. Tranche B requires quarterly installment repayments of $2.0 million and has a maturity date of June 2028.
The First Lien Revolver has a maturity date of July 2023. Up to $30.0 million of the First Lien Revolver is available for the issuance of letters of credit, subject to certain limitations. The First Lien Revolver bears interest at LIBOR plus a margin of 2.00% with step downs to 1.75%, 1.50% and 1.25% or the lender’s Base Rate plus a margin of 1.00% with step downs to 0.75%, 0.50% and 0.25%, based on achievement of a specified First Lien Leverage Ratio. The First Lien Revolver unused commitment fee is 0.50% with step downs to 0.375% and 0.25% based on achievement of a specified First Lien Leverage Ratio.
Our obligations under the Credit Facility are collateralized by the majority of our assets. The Credit Facility contains various customary covenants, including, but not limited to: (i) incurring additional indebtedness or guarantees, (ii) creating liens or other encumbrances on property or granting negative pledges, (iii) entering into a merger or similar transaction, (iv) selling or transferring certain property and (v) declaring dividends or making other restricted payments.
We are required to maintain a First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) of not more than 6.25:1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. At December 31, 2021, our First Lien Leverage Ratio was 3.85:1.00, which satisfied the maximum ratio of 6.25:1.00. First Lien Leverage Ratio means the ratio of amounts outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan and First Lien Revolver plus other outstanding debt obligations secured by a lien on the assets of Focus LLC (excluding letters of credit other than unpaid drawings thereunder) minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facility). Consolidated EBITDA for purposes of the Credit Facility was $544.8 million at December 31, 2021. Focus LLC is also subject on an annual basis to contingent principal payments based on an excess cash flow calculation (as defined in the Credit Facility) for any fiscal year if the First Lien Leverage Ratio exceeds 3.75:1.00. No contingent principal payments were required to be made in 2021. Based on the excess cash flow calculation for the year ended December 31, 2021, no contingent principal payments are required to be made in 2022.
At December 31, 2021, outstanding stated value borrowings under the Credit Facility were approximately $2.4 billion. The weighted-average interest rate for outstanding borrowings was approximately 3% for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the First Lien Revolver available unused commitment line was $642.1 million. At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding letters of credit in the amount of $7.9 million bearing interest at an annual rate of approximately 2%.
In March 2020, we entered into a 4 year floating to fixed interest rate swap with a notional amount of $400.0 million. The interest rate swap effectively fixes the variable interest rate applicable to $400.0 million of borrowings outstanding on the First Lien Term Loan. The terms of the interest rate swap provide that we pay interest to the
counterparty each month at a rate of 0.713% and receive interest from the counterparty each month at the 1 month USD LIBOR rate, subject to a 0% floor.
In April 2020, we entered into two additional 4 year floating to fixed interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts of $250.0 million and $200.0 million, respectively. These swaps effectively fix the variable interest rate applicable to $450.0 million of borrowings outstanding on the First Lien Term Loan. The terms of these swaps provide that we pay interest to the counterparties each month at a rate of 0.537% and 0.5315%, respectively, and receive interest from the counterparties each month at the 1 month USD LIBOR rate, subject to a 0% floor.
The interest rate swaps effectively fix the variable interest rate applicable to $850.0 million or approximately 35% of the First Lien Term Loan borrowings outstanding, resulting in a weighted average interest rate on these borrowings of approximately 2.62%, inclusive of the 2.0% Tranche A LIBOR spread.
Our outstanding variable rate indebtedness uses LIBOR as a benchmark for establishing the interest rate. 1-, 3-, 6- and 12-month LIBOR are expected to be replaced by the SOFR in 2023. While we expect SOFR to be a reasonable replacement for LIBOR, at this time we cannot predict the implications of the use of SOFR on the interest rates we pay.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our financial statements include the accounts of Focus Inc. and our subsidiaries. Intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated in consolidation. Critical accounting policies are those that are the most important to the preparation of our financial condition and results of operations and that require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the Note 2 to our financial statements, our most critical accounting policies are discussed below. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and the accompanying notes. Management believes that the estimates utilized in preparing the financial statements are reasonable and prudent. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Wealth Management Fees
We recognize revenue from wealth management fees, which are primarily comprised of fees earned for advising on the assets of clients, financial and tax planning fees, consulting fees, tax return preparation fees, fees for family office services, and fees for wealth management and operational support services provided to third-party wealth management firms. Client arrangements may contain one of the services or multiple services, resulting in either a single or multiple performance obligations within the same client arrangement, each of which are separately identifiable and priced, and accounted for as the related services are provided and consumed over time. Fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly, or semiannual basis. Revenue is recognized over the respective service period based on time elapsed or hours expended, as the case may be, which is deemed to be the most faithful depiction of the transfer of services as clients benefit from services over the respective period. Revenue for wealth management and operational support services provided to third party wealth management firms is presented net since these services are performed in an agent capacity. Client agreements typically do not have a specified term and may be terminated at any time by either party subject to the respective termination and notification provisions in each agreement.
A majority of our wealth management fees are correlated to the markets, and therefore are considered variable consideration. Our market-correlated fees are dependent on the market and, thus, are susceptible to factors outside our control. Therefore, at inception of the contractual service period for fees which are based on the market values at the end of the service period, we cannot conclude that it is probable that a reversal in the cumulative revenue recognized would
not occur if the estimate was included in the transaction price at that time. However, at each quarterly reporting date, we update our estimate of the transaction price as the market uncertainty is typically resolved. We can then reasonably conclude that a reversal of the variable consideration will not occur for those services already provided.
Wealth management fees are recorded when: (i) an arrangement with a client has been identified; (ii) the performance obligations have been identified; (iii) the fee or other transaction price has been determined; (iv) the fee or other transaction price has been allocated to each performance obligation based on standalone fee rates; and (v) we have satisfied the applicable performance obligation.
Other
Other revenue primarily includes recordkeeping and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services. Client arrangements may contain a single or multiple performance obligations, each of which are separately identifiable and accounted for as the related services are provided and consumed over time. Recordkeeping and administration and outsourced services revenue, in accordance with the same five criteria above, are recognized over the period in which services are provided. Commissions and distribution fees are recognized when earned.
Business Acquisitions
Business acquisitions are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations. Business acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the purchase price consideration to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The purchase price allocations are based upon preliminary valuations, and our estimates and assumptions are subject to change within the measurement period as valuations are finalized. Any change in the estimated fair value of the net assets, prior to the finalization of the more detailed analyses, but not to exceed one year from the dates of acquisition, will change the amount of the purchase price allocations. Goodwill is recognized as the excess of the purchase price consideration over the fair value of net assets of the business acquired. All transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
We have incorporated contingent consideration into the structure of our partner firm acquisitions. These arrangements may result in the payment of additional purchase price consideration to the sellers based on the growth of certain financial thresholds for periods following the closing of the respective acquisition. The additional purchase price consideration is payable in the form of cash and, in some cases, equity.
For business acquisitions, we recognize the fair value of estimated contingent consideration at the acquisition date as part of the consideration transferred in exchange for the acquired wealth management firm. The contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Any changes in fair value are recognized each reporting period in non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of operations.
The results of the acquired wealth management firms are included in our consolidated financial statements from the respective dates of acquisition.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill is deemed to have an indefinite useful life and is not amortized. Intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives. We have no indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of October 1, or more frequently if events and circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. We compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value of the net assets of the reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined using a market approach. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets of the reporting unit no further consideration is necessary. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value of
the reporting unit, we would record an impairment charge for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit.
Intangible assets and other long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired or that the estimated useful life should be changed prospectively. If impairment indicators are present, the recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset, which is determined using a discounted cash flow approach.
Income Taxes and Tax Receivable Agreements
Focus Inc. is a holding company whose most significant asset is a membership interest in Focus LLC. Focus Inc. is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes on Focus Inc.’s allocable portion of taxable income from Focus LLC. Focus LLC is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, Focus LLC is generally not and has not been subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes at the entity level, although it has been subject to the New York City Unincorporated Business Tax and certain of its subsidiaries have been subject to U.S. federal and certain state and local or foreign income taxes. Instead, for U.S. federal and certain state income tax purposes, the income, deductions, losses and credits of Focus LLC are passed through to its unitholders, including Focus Inc. Focus LLC makes tax distribution payments to the extent of available cash, in accordance with the Fourth Amended and Restated Focus LLC Agreement. Focus Inc. files income tax returns with the U.S. federal government as well as various state and local jurisdictions.
We apply the asset and liability method for deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances, if any, are recorded to reduce the deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We review and evaluate tax positions in our major tax jurisdictions and determine whether or not there are uncertain tax positions that require financial statement recognition. Based on this review, we have recorded no reserves for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021.
Focus Inc. entered into Tax Receivable Agreements with the TRA holders. The agreements generally provide for the payment by us to each TRA holder of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income and franchise tax that Focus Inc. actually realizes (computed using simplifying assumptions to address the impact of state and local taxes) or is deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain increases in tax bases and certain tax benefits attributable to imputed interest. Focus Inc. will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these cash savings.
As of December 31, 2021, Focus Inc. had a liability of $219.5 million relating to its obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements. The foregoing amount of expected future payments to TRA holders is merely an estimate and the actual payments could differ materially. It is possible that future transactions or events could increase or decrease the actual tax benefits realized and the corresponding payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements as compared to the foregoing estimates.
Consolidation Considerations
ASC Topic 810, Consolidation, requires an entity to perform a qualitative analysis to determine whether its variable interests give it a controlling financial interest in a variable interest entity (“VIE”). Under the standard, an enterprise has a controlling financial interest when it has (a) the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of the entity or the right to
receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE. An enterprise that holds a controlling financial interest is deemed to be the primary beneficiary and is required to consolidate the VIE.
Certain of our subsidiaries have management agreements with the respective management company, which causes these operating subsidiaries to be VIEs. We have assessed whether or not we are the primary beneficiary for these operating subsidiaries and have concluded that we are the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, the results of these subsidiaries have been consolidated.
Certain of our subsidiaries have variable interests in certain investment funds that are deemed voting interest entities. Due to substantive kick-out rights possessed by the limited partners of these funds, we do not consolidate the investment funds.
From time to time, we enter into option agreements with wealth management firms (each, an “Optionee”) and their owners. In exchange for payment of an option premium, the option agreement allows us, at our sole discretion, to acquire substantially all of the assets of the Optionee at a predetermined time and at a predetermined purchase price formula. If we choose to exercise our option, the acquisition and the corresponding management agreement would be executed in accordance with our typical acquisition structure. We have determined that the respective option agreements with the Optionees qualify the Optionees as VIEs. We have determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of the Optionees and do not consolidate the results of the Optionees.
Stock Based Compensation Costs
Compensation cost for Focus LLC incentive units and Focus Inc. stock option awards is measured based on the fair value of awards determined by the Black-Scholes option pricing model or the Monte Carlo Simulation Model on the date that the awards are granted or modified, and is adjusted for the estimated number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. Compensation cost for unvested Class A common stock and restricted stock units, as well as Focus LLC restricted common units, is measured based on the market value of the Class A common stock on the date that the awards are granted and is adjusted for the estimated number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Non-cash equity compensation expense, associated with employees and non-employees, including principals in the management companies, is included in compensation and related expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. We estimate forfeitures at the time of the respective grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ materially from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate forfeitures and record non-cash equity compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.