Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a global, patient-dedicated biotechnology company focused on discovering, developing, and delivering novel medicines for rare diseases. We have a portfolio of product opportunities including the first, oral monotherapy for Fabry disease that has achieved widespread global approval and a differentiated biologic for Pompe disease, that is under review with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") as well as the European Medicines Agency ("EMA"). We are committed to discovering and developing next generation therapies in Fabry and Pompe diseases.
The cornerstone of our portfolio is Galafold® (also referred to as "migalastat"), the first and only approved oral precision medicine for people living with Fabry disease who have amenable genetic variants. Migalastat is currently approved under the trade name Galafold® in the United States ("U.S."), European Union ("E.U."), United Kingdom ("U.K."), and Japan, with multiple additional approvals granted and applications pending in several geographies around the world.
The lead biologics program of our pipeline is Amicus Therapeutics GAA ("AT-GAA", also known as ATB200/AT2221, or cipaglucosidase alfa/miglustat), a novel, clinical-stage, potential best-in-class treatment for Pompe disease. In February 2019, the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation ("BTD") to AT-GAA for the treatment of late onset Pompe disease. In September 2021, the FDA set the Prescription Drug User Fee Act ("PDUFA") target action date of May 29, 2022 for the New Drug Application ("NDA") for miglustat and July 29, 2022 for the Biologics License Application ("BLA") for cipaglucosidase alfa. The EMA validated the Marketing Authorization Application (“MAA”) in the fourth quarter of 2021.
On February 24, 2022, we announced, with ARYA Sciences Acquisition Corp IV ("ARYA"), a special purpose acquisition company (or "SPAC"), sponsored by Perceptive Advisors, we have agreed to mutually terminate the previously announced definitive business combination agreement, originally executed in September 2021.
Additionally, in September 2021, we entered into securities purchase agreements with certain investors for the private placement of an aggregate of 11,296,660 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $10.18 per share, and pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 8,349,705 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $10.17 per pre-funded warrant. The net proceeds from these private placements were approximately $199.8 million. We expect to use the net proceeds to further fund initiatives in the global commercialization of Galafold® and the anticipated global launch of AT-GAA and to further support our discovery work on next generation therapies in Fabry and Pompe diseases.
Our operations have not been significantly impacted from the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic to date. However, we observed increased lag times between patient identification and Galafold® initiation due to the resurgence of COVID-19 in 2021. We have maintained operations in all geographies, secured our global supply chain for our commercial and clinical products, as well as maintained the operational integrity of our clinical trials, with minimum disruptions. Our ability to continue to operate without any significant disruptions will depend on the continued health of our employees, the ongoing demand for Galafold® and the continued operation of our global supply chain. We have continued to provide uninterrupted access to medicines for those in need of treatment, while prioritizing the health and safety of our global workforce. However, our results of operations in future periods may be negatively impacted by unknown future impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following section generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which comparisons are hereby incorporated by reference.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table provides selected financial information for the Company:
Net Product Sales. Net product sales increased $44.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to continued growth in the Europe, U.S. and Japan markets.
Research and Development Expense. The following table summarizes our principal product development programs for each product candidate in development, and the out-of-pocket, third-party expenses incurred with respect to each product candidate:
The $36.4 million decrease in research and development costs was primarily due to the decrease in gene therapy programs driven by timing of spend for manufacturing costs, a decrease in personnel costs primarily due to realignment with strategic priorities and the timing of clinical research and manufacturing costs associated with the advancement in the Pompe disease program.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense. Selling, general, and administrative expense increased $36.3 million, mainly driven by increased personnel costs and third-party professional fees.
Changes in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Payable. Changes in fair value of contingent consideration payable increased $3.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to achievement of two regulatory milestones during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $10.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was driven by the $400 million Senior Secured Loan due 2026 entered in July 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. In July of 2020, the Company voluntarily settled the principal amount, accrued interest, and early settlement premiums of the Senior Secured Term Loan with BioPharma Credit PLC. As a result of this early extinguishment, a loss on extinguishment of debt of $7.3 million was recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, compared to a loss of $0.3 million associated with the voluntary full settlement of the 2023 Convertible Debt in August 2021.
Income Tax Expense. The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.9 million. We are subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions. Our tax liabilities are largely dependent on the distributions of pre-tax earnings among the many jurisdictions in which we operate.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("U.S. GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the following discussion represents our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Our net product sales consist of sales of Galafold® for the treatment of Fabry disease. We have recorded revenue on sales where Galafold® is available either on a commercial basis or through a reimbursed early access program ("EAP"). Orders for Galafold® are generally received from distributors and pharmacies with the ultimate payor often a government authority.
We recognize revenue when our performance obligation with our customers have been satisfied, which occurs at a point in time when the pharmacies or distributors obtain control of Galafold®. The transaction price is determined based on fixed consideration in our customer contracts and is recorded net of estimates for variable consideration, which are third-party discounts and rebates. The identified variable consideration is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time revenue from sale of Galafold® is recognized. We recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period. These estimates may differ from actual consideration received. We evaluate these estimates each reporting period to reflect known changes.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to estimate and accrue our research and development expenses, including those related to clinical studies and drug manufacturing. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs.
Costs for preclinical studies, clinical studies and manufacturing activities are recognized based on an evaluation of our vendors’ progress towards completion of specific tasks, using data such as clinical site activations, clinical site maintenance, clinical site close out, patient out of pocket cost reimbursements, or information provided to us by our vendors regarding their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of individual contracts and payment timing may differ significantly from the period in which the services were performed. We determine accrual estimates through reports from and discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of studies, or the services completed. Our estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on the facts and circumstances known at the time. Costs that are paid in advance of performance are deferred as a prepaid expense and amortized over the service period as the services are provided.
Share-based Compensation
Stock Option Grants
In accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, we estimate the fair value of each equity award granted. We chose the "straight-line" attribution method for allocating compensation costs and recognized the fair value of each stock option on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the related awards.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model when estimating the grant date fair value for stock-based awards. Use of a valuation model requires management to make certain assumptions with respect to selected model inputs. Expected volatility was based on our historical volatility since our initial public offering in May 2007. We determine the average expected life using our actual historical data. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury, zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. Forfeitures are estimated based on historical analysis of actual option forfeitures.
Restricted Stock Units and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (collectively "RSUs")
RSUs awarded under the plan are generally subject to graded vesting and are contingent on an employee's continued service on such date. RSUs are generally subject to forfeiture if employment terminates prior to the release of vesting restrictions. We expense the cost of the RSUs, which is determined to be the fair market value of the shares of common stock underlying the RSUs at the date of grant, ratably over the period during which the vesting restrictions lapse. In addition, certain of our share-based awards are market- and performance-based and dependent upon achieving certain goals. The related share-based compensation expense is determined based on the estimated fair value of the underlying shares on the date of grant and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting term. With respect to performance-based awards, we estimate the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We record goodwill in a business combination when the total consideration exceeds the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Purchased in-process research and development ("IPR&D") is accounted for as an indefinite lived intangible asset until the underlying project is completed, at which point the intangible asset will be accounted for as a definite lived intangible asset, or abandoned, at which point the intangible asset will be written off or partially impaired. Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets are assessed annually for impairment on October 1 and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. A goodwill impairment loss, if any, is measured as the amount by which our single reporting unit's carrying value, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value. An IPR&D impairment loss, if any, is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration Payable
The consideration for the Company’s acquisitions may include future payments that are contingent upon the occurrence of a particular event. For example, milestone payments might be based on the achievement of various regulatory approvals or future sales milestones. Contingent consideration payments in asset acquisitions are recognized when the contingency is resolved, and the consideration is paid or becomes payable. Contingent consideration obligations in business acquisitions are rerecorded at fair value on the acquisition date.
The Company estimates the fair value of contingent consideration obligations through a probability weighted discounted cash flow valuation approach based on various assumptions and incorporating estimated success rates. Estimated payments are discounted using present value techniques to arrive at an estimated fair value at the balance sheet date. Each period we reassess the fair value of the contingent consideration payable and recognize changes within the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration payable can result from changes in estimated probability adjustments with respect to regulatory approval, changes in the assumed timing of when milestones are likely to be achieved and changes in assumed discount periods and rates. Significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of these assumptions each period. Accordingly, future business and economic conditions, as well as changes in any of the assumptions described in the accounting for business combinations above can materially impact the amount of contingent consideration expense that we record and, therefore, our results of operations in any given period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As a result of our significant research and development expenditures, as well as expenditures to build a commercial organization to support the launch of Galafold®, we have not been profitable and have generated operating losses since we were incorporated in 2002. We have historically funded our operations through stock offerings, Galafold® revenues, debt issuance, collaborations, and other financing arrangements.
Sources of Liquidity
In September 2021, we entered into securities purchase agreements with certain investors for the private placement of an aggregate of 11,296,660 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $10.18 per share, and pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 8,349,705 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $10.17 per pre-funded warrant. The net proceeds from these private placements were approximately $199.8 million. We expect to use the net proceeds to further fund initiatives in the global commercialization of Galafold® and the anticipated global launch of AT-GAA and to further support our discovery work on next generation therapies.
In July 2020, we entered into the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026. This transaction resulted in net proceeds of $385.9 million, after deducting fees and expenses. There were no warrants or equity conversion features associated with the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026. Additionally, we used $156.3 million of the proceeds to voluntarily settle the principal amount, accrued interest, and early settlement premiums of the Senior Secured Term Loan with BioPharma Credit PLC.
Cash Flow Discussion
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $482.5 million. We invest cash in excess of our immediate requirements in regard to liquidity and capital preservation in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including obligations of U.S. government agencies and money market accounts. Wherever possible, we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and degrees of risk. Although we maintain cash balances with financial institutions in excess of insured limits, we do not anticipate any losses with respect to such cash balances. For more details on the cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, refer to "- Note 4. Cash, Cash Equivalents, Marketable Securities, and Restricted Cash," in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $202.5 million. The components of net cash used in operations included the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $250.5 million and the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $28.9 million. The change in operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable by $8.2 million due to increased commercial sales of Galafold®, an increase in inventory of $7.8 million, and increase in prepaid and other current assets of $5.9 million to support commercial activities for Galafold®. The net cash used in operations was also impacted by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7.4 million, mainly related to program expenses and support for the commercial activities of Galafold®, decrease due to payment of contingent consideration of $10.4 million associated with meeting certain regulatory milestones during the year, and a decrease in deferred reimbursement of $1.5 million.
Net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $233.3 million. The components of net cash used in operations included the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $276.9 million, and the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $32.1 million. The change in operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable by $11.2 million due to increased commercial sales of Galafold®, an increase in inventory of $4.6 million, and increase in prepaid and other current assets of $8.8 million to support commercial activities for Galafold® launch. The net cash used in operations was also impacted by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $10.6 million, mainly related to program expenses and support for the commercial launch of Galafold®, and decrease in deferred reimbursement of $1.3 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $78.8 million. Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases, sales, and maturities of investments and capital expenditures. Net cash provided by investing activities reflects $424 million for the sale and redemption of marketable securities, partially offset by $341.4 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $3.9 million for capital expenditures.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.6 million. Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases, sales, and maturities of investments and capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities reflects $365.2 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $3.2 million for capital expenditures, partially offset by $354.8 million for the sale and redemption of marketable securities
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $212.1 million. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflects $199.8 million in net proceeds from the September 2021 private placement of securities, $19.2 million from the exercise of warrants and $10.2 million from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $15 million from payments of employee withholding taxes related to restricted stock unit vesting.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $262.9 million. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflects $385.9 million in proceeds from the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026, net of issuance costs, and $42.3 million from the exercise of stock options. This was partially offset by $155.2 million for the voluntary settlement of the Senior Secured Term Loan with BioPharma Credit PLC, and $10.0 million from the purchase of vested restricted stock units.
Funding Requirements
We expect to incur losses from operations for the foreseeable future primarily due to research and development expenses, including expenses related to conducting clinical trials. Our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of our clinical trials of our drug candidates;
•the cost of manufacturing drug supply for our commercial, clinical and preclinical studies, including the cost of manufacturing Pompe Enzyme Replacement Therapy ("ERT" or "ATB200" or "cipaglucosidase alfa");
•the future results of preclinical research and subsequent clinical trials for pipeline candidates we may identify from time to time, including our ability to obtain regulatory approvals and commercialize these therapies and obtain market acceptance for such therapies;
•the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates, including AT-GAA;
•any changes in regulatory standards relating to the review of our product candidates, including AT-GAA;
•the number and development requirements of other product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales, and distribution;
•the emergence of competing technologies and other adverse market developments;
•our ability to successfully commercialize Galafold® (also referred to as "migalastat HCl") and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•our ability to manufacture or supply sufficient clinical or commercial products, including Galafold® and AT-GAA;
•our ability to obtain reimbursement for Galafold® and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•our ability to satisfy post-marketing commitments or requirements for continued regulatory approval of Galafold®, and, if approved and applicable, AT-GAA;
•our ability to obtain market acceptance of Galafold® and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•the costs of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing, and defending intellectual property-related claims, including Hatch-Waxman litigation;
•the impact of litigation that has been or may be brought against us or of litigation that we are pursuing or may pursue against others;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products, and technologies;
•our ability to successfully integrate our acquired products and technologies into our business, or successfully divest or license existing products and technologies from our business, including the possibility that the expected benefits of the transactions will not be fully realized by us or may take longer to realize than expected;
•our ability to establish licensing agreements, collaborations, partnerships or other similar arrangements and to obtain milestone, royalty, or other payments from any such collaborators;
•the extent to which our business could be adversely impacted by the effects of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") outbreak, including due to actions by us, governments, our customers, our suppliers, or other third parties to control the spread of COVID-19, or by other health epidemics or pandemics;
•the costs associated with, and our ability to comply with, emerging environmental, social and governance standards;
•our ability to accurately forecast revenue, operating expenditures, or other metrics impacting profitability;
•fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; and
•changes in accounting standards.
While we continue to generate revenue from product sales, in the absence of additional funding, we expect our continuing operating losses to result in increases in our cash used in operations over the next several quarters and years. We may seek additional funding through public or private financings of debt or equity. Based on our current operating model, we believe that the current cash position, which includes expected revenues, and net proceeds from the September 2021 private placement of securities, is sufficient to fund our operations and ongoing research programs to achieve self-sustainability. Potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, business development collaborations, pipeline expansion, and investment in manufacturing capabilities could impact our future capital requirements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, remaining maturities, including interest, on our Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026 was $509.0 million. Refer to "- Note 11. Debt," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
We are lessees to various operating leases for facilities and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, our undiscounted cash liabilities for operating leases were $188.2 million, with maturities ranging up through fiscal 2044. Refer to “- Note 12. Leases,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
We have a number of binding minimum purchase and manufacturing commitments due to our third-party manufacturers. As of December 31, 2021, these purchase and manufacturing obligations totaled $49.4 million. Contracts for which our commitment is variable, based on volumes, with no fixed minimum quantities, and contracts that can be canceled without payment penalties have been excluded. These purchase obligations are in addition to amounts recorded on our December 31, 2021 consolidated balance sheet.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Milestone Payments / Royalties
Callidus - In connection with our acquisition of Callidus in 2013, we agreed to pay up to an additional $35 million in connection with the achievement of certain clinical milestones and up to $80 million in connection with the achievement of certain regulatory approval milestones. As of December 31, 2021, $20 million and $68 million remain outstanding, respectively. Refer to “- Note 10. Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Celenex - In connection with our acquisition of Celenex in 2018, we agreed to pay up to an additional $10 million in connection with the achievement of certain development milestones, $220 million in connection with the achievement of certain regulatory approval milestones across multiple programs and up to $75 million in tiered sales milestone payments.
Nationwide Children’s Hospital - Celenex has an exclusive license agreement with Nationwide Children's Hospital ("Nationwide Children’s"). Under this license agreement, Nationwide Children’s is eligible to receive development and sales-based milestones of up to $7.8 million from us for each product.
University of Pennsylvania: Under our collaboration agreement with the University of Pennsylvania ("Penn"), Penn is eligible to receive certain milestone, royalty, and discovery research payments with respect to licensed products for each indication. Milestone payments are payable following the achievement of certain development and commercial milestone events in each indication, up to an aggregate of $88.0 million per indication. Royalty payments are based on net sales of licensed products on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis. We provide $10.0 million each year during the five-year agreement to fund the discovery research program, of which two years of payments remain outstanding.
GlaxoSmithKline - In July 2012, as amended in November 2013, we entered into an agreement with GlaxoSmithKline ("GSK"), pursuant to which Amicus obtained global rights to develop and commercialize Galafold® as a monotherapy and in combination with ERT for Fabry disease (“Collaboration Agreement”). Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, GSK is eligible to receive post-approval and sales-based milestones up to $40 million, as well as tiered royalties in the mid-teens in eight major markets outside the U.S.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to "- Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.