Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Statement for Forward-Looking Information
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
See “Item 1. Business - Overview - Evolution” with respect to the scope of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to which this disclosure relates.
Overview
The Company was initially incorporated in Delaware on October 15, 2020 as a wholly owned subsidiary of Medical Outcomes Research Analytics, LLC (“MOR”), which was founded in Delaware on May 6, 2019, in connection with the Business Combination described below. On October 16, 2020, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with Helix Technologies, Inc. (“Helix”) and MOR, pursuant to which DNA Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), merged with and into Helix, with Helix surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). On March 2, 2021, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with the equity holders of MOR, pursuant to which the equity holders of MOR contributed their interests in MOR to the Company in exchange for shares of Company common stock (the “Contribution” and together with the Merger, the “Business Combination”). Following consummation of the Business Combination on March 2, 2021, the Company became the parent company of both Helix and MOR. Helix provides traceability and point of sale technology, analytics solutions and other products to customers within each vertical of the cannabis industry to help them improve the performance of their business.
The Company provides innovative software solutions, proprietary data and predictive analytics to optimize the operational and financial performance of our customers. Given the prior experience of our management team, our initial focus is on stakeholders within the healthcare and cannabis industries. However, we believe that extending the application of our offerings across other verticals is equally compelling.
The Company represents the unique convergence of proprietary healthcare, consumer and cannabis data, SaaS analytics, innovative data management capabilities and intelligent data science with a leading cannabis technology platform yielding the combined power to drive innovation and transparency across the industries we serve. In MOR, there was early recognition of the opportunity to bring the sophistication of proven data science technology and analytics solutions to a prominent cannabis technology platform provider, creating innovation in both the applications that are key to supporting customer success within the cannabis industry and to the data science powered insights that drive healthcare and other mature regulated growth industries. In Helix, there was realization that the capability set of a technology solutions provider within more evolved sectors together with the track record of the MOR management team offered a unique opportunity to enhance the value that Helix brings to its cannabis customers and to the industry generally.
The Company’s mission is to provide our customers with the best-in-class critical technology services through a single integrated Forian platform that enables our customers within the healthcare and cannabis industries to operate their businesses more safely, efficiently and profitably and to serve our customers and our customers’ stakeholders and constituencies more comprehensively.
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in December 2019, and subsequently declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Our business has largely operated in a work-from-home environment since the inception of the pandemic and, as a result, has experienced limited business disruption to date. Our management team continues to focus on the highest level of safety measures to protect our employees. We have not experienced a material impact to our financial results to date, however, COVID-19 continues to present significant uncertainty in the future economic outlook for our customers and the markets we serve.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Revenues
Revenues are derived from Information and Software Products, Services and Other Products. Information and Software revenues are generated from licensing fees for our proprietary information and software products. The Company recognizes revenues from Information and Software products as performance obligations under customer contracts are satisfied. Services revenues are primarily from fixed price contracts with government agencies and revenue is recognized as the Company satisfies our performance obligations under the contract. Other revenues are primarily from security monitoring services offerings and the provision of web marketing services. Contracts for these services have a stated transaction price for monthly services and are recognized as the services are provided.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is generated from direct costs associated with the delivery of our products and services to our customers. The cost of revenues relates primarily to labor costs, hosting and infrastructure costs and client service team costs. We record the cost of direct fulfillment as cost of revenues. Infrastructure and licensed data costs, which are shared across all projects or groups of projects, are not charged to cost of revenues.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, subcontractor and third-party consulting fees, data fees, and hosted infrastructure costs. We continue to focus our research and development efforts on adding new features and applications to our product offerings. We capitalize certain application development costs related to the development of our product platforms as internal use software and expense costs outside of the application development stage as incurred.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense is primarily salaries and related expenses, including commissions, for our sales, marketing and product management staff. Marketing program costs are also recorded as sales and marketing expense including advertising, market research, and events (such as trade shows, corporate communications, brand building, etc.). The Company plans to continue to invest in marketing and sales by expanding our selling and marketing staff, building brand awareness, attracting new clients and sponsoring additional marketing events. The timing of these marketing events will affect our marketing costs in any particular quarter.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include salaries and benefits and other costs of departments serving administrative functions, such as executives, finance and accounting and human resources. In addition, general and administrative expense includes non-personnel costs, such as professional fees, legal fees, insurance, accounting and finance advisory fees and other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to cost of revenues, product and development or sales and marketing.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization relate to long lived assets used in our business. Depreciation expense relates primarily to furniture and equipment, computers and vehicles. Amortization expense relates primarily to identifiable intangibles of acquired companies.
Transaction Related Expenses
Transaction related expenses relate to the acquisition of Helix on March 2, 2021, and include professional, legal, accounting and finance advisory fees and other direct expenses.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $16,879,715, which represented an increase of $16,334,844 compared to total revenue of $544,871 for the year ended December 31, 2020. These revenues were primarily from Information and Software products. The increase is due to the inclusion of revenues from the Helix acquisition since March 2, 2021, which contributed 60% of the increase, and higher revenues from the Company’s Healthcare Information products, which contributed 40% of the increase. Revenues from the Company’s Information products increased $6,594,036 or 1210% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $4,678,882 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $38,293 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to direct costs related to the delivery of revenues. The increase is due to the inclusion of the Helix acquisition since March 2, 2021, which contributed 90% of the increase, and higher cost of revenues from the Company’s Information products, which contributed 10% of the increase.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $8,975,745, which represented an increase of $6,466,079 compared to total research and development expenses of $2,509,666 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to higher personnel, subcontracted labor, data licensing and processing expenses related to scaling the Company’s products, which contributed 83% of the increase, and the inclusion of the Helix acquisition since March 2, 2021, which contributed 15% of the increase.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $4,142,190, which represented an increase of $3,568,339 compared to total sales and marketing expenses of $573,851 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to higher salary, commission and consulting expenses related to scaling the Company’s products, which contributed 56% of the increase, stock-based compensation expenses related to equity awards granted to Company employees after we became a public company on March 2, 2021, which contributed approximately 13% of the increase, and the inclusion of the Helix acquisition since March 2, 2021, which contributed 31% of the increase.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $23,464,267, which represented an increase of $21,929,413 compared to general and administrative expenses of $1,534,854 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to higher expenses related to scaling the Company’s management organization, which contributed 41% of the increase, stock-based compensation expenses related to equity awards granted to key Helix employees and new Company hires after we became a public company on March 2, 2021, which contributed approximately 40% of the increase, and the inclusion of the Helix acquisition since March 2, 2021, which contributed 19% of the increase.
Transaction Related Expenses
Transaction related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,210,279, which represented an increase of $346,870 compared to transaction related expenses of $863,409 for the year ended December 31, 2020. These expenses related to the acquisition of Helix, which was completed on March 2, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K we have provided a non-GAAP measure, which we define as financial information that has not been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measure provided herein is earnings before interest, taxes, non-cash and other items (“Adjusted EBITDA”) presented on both a historical basis and a “pro forma” basis reflecting the acquisition of Helix in March 2021 as of the beginning of the periods presented. Adjusted EBITDA should be viewed as supplemental to, and not as an alternative for, net income or loss calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP (referred to below as “Net loss”).
Adjusted EBITDA is used by our management as an additional measure of our Company’s performance for purposes of business decision-making, including developing budgets, managing expenditures and evaluating potential acquisitions or divestitures. Period-to-period comparisons of Adjusted EBITDA help our management identify additional trends in our Company’s financial results that may not be shown solely by period-to-period comparisons of net income. In addition, we may use Adjusted EBITDA in the incentive compensation programs applicable to some of our employees in order to evaluate our Company’s performance. Our management recognizes that Adjusted EBITDA has inherent limitations because of the excluded items, particularly those items that are recurring in nature. In order to compensate for those limitations, management also reviews the specific items that are excluded from Adjusted EBITDA, but included in net income, as well as trends in those items contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in their analysis of our results for reasons similar to the reasons why our management finds it useful and because it helps facilitate investor understanding of decisions made by management in light of the performance metrics used in making those decisions. In addition, as more fully described below, we believe that providing Adjusted EBITDA, together with a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, helps investors make comparisons between our Company and other companies that may have different capital structures, different effective income tax rates and tax attributes, different capitalized asset values and/or different forms of employee compensation. However, Adjusted EBITDA is not intended as a substitute for comparisons based on net loss. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measures and the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures provided by each company under applicable SEC rules.
The following is an explanation of the items excluded by us from Adjusted EBITDA but included in net loss:
•
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense is a non-cash expense relating to capital expenditures and intangible assets arising from acquisitions that are expensed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related assets. We exclude depreciation and amortization expense from Adjusted EBITDA because we believe that (i) the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and (ii) such expenses can vary significantly between periods as a result of new acquisitions and full amortization of previously acquired tangible and intangible assets. Accordingly, we believe that this exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance. Investors should note that the use of tangible and intangible assets contributed to revenue in the periods presented and will contribute to future revenue generation and should also note that such expense will recur in future periods.
•
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. Stock-based compensation expense is a non-cash expense arising from the grant of stock-based awards to employees. We believe that excluding the effect of stock-based compensation from Adjusted EBITDA assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons in our Company’s operating performance because (i) the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and (ii) such expenses can vary significantly between periods as a result of the timing of grants of new stock-based awards, including grants in connection with acquisitions. Additionally, we believe that excluding stock-based compensation from Adjusted EBITDA assists management and investors in making meaningful comparisons between our Company’s operating performance and the operating performance of other companies that may use different forms of employee compensation or different valuation methodologies for their stock-based compensation. Investors should note that stock-based compensation is a key incentive offered to employees whose efforts contributed to the operating results in the periods presented and are expected to contribute to operating results in future periods. Investors should also note that such expenses will recur in the future.
•
Interest Expense. Interest expense is associated with the Notes entered into on September 1, 2021 in the amount of $24,000,000. The Notes are due on September 1, 2025 and accrue interest at an annual rate of 3.5%. We exclude interest expense from Adjusted EBITDA (i) because it is not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, its exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different capital structures. Investors should note that interest expense associated with the Notes will recur in future periods.
•
Investment Income. Investment income is associated with the level of marketable debt securities and other interest-bearing accounts in which we invest. Interest and investment income can vary over time due to a variety of financing transactions, changes in interest rates, cash used to fund operations and capital expenditures and acquisitions that we have entered into or may enter into in the future. We exclude interest and investment income from Adjusted EBITDA (i) because these items are not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, their exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different capital structures. Investors should note that interest income will recur in future periods.
•
Foreign Currency Related Gains (Losses). Foreign currency related gains (losses) result from foreign currency transactions and translation gains and losses related Engeni, S.A., a subsidiary of the Company acquired as part of the acquisition of Helix. We exclude foreign currency related gains (losses) from Adjusted EBITDA (i) because these items are not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, their exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different capital structures. Investors should note that interest income will recur in future periods.
•
Other Items. We engage in other activities and transactions that can impact our net loss. In the periods being reported, these other items included (i) change in fair value of warrant liability which related to warrants assumed in the acquisition of Helix; (ii) transaction related expenses which consist of professional fees and other expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition of Helix; (iii) other income which consists of profits on marketable security investments; and (iv) loss on impairment of goodwill. We exclude these other items from Adjusted EBITDA because we believe these activities or transactions are not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, their exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance. Investors should note that some of these other items may recur in future periods.
•
Income tax expense. MOR was organized as a limited liability company until the completion of the Helix acquisition. As a result, we were treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes through March 2, 2021, and our taxable income and losses are reported by our members on their individual tax returns for such period. Therefore, we did not record any income tax expense or benefit through March 2, 2021. We incurred a net loss for financial reporting and income tax reporting purposes for this year. Accordingly, any benefit for federal and state income taxes benefit has been entirely offset by a valuation allowance against the related deferred tax net assets. We exclude the income tax expense from Adjusted EBITDA (i) because we believe that the income tax expense is not directly attributable to the underlying performance of our business operations and, accordingly, its exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different tax attributes.
Limitations on the use of non-GAAP financial measures
There are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures because non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures provided by other companies.
The non-GAAP financial measures are limited in value because they exclude certain items that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. In addition, they are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgments by management about which items are adjusted to calculate our non-GAAP financial measures. We compensate for these limitations by analyzing current and future results on a U.S. GAAP basis as well as a non-GAAP basis and also by providing U.S. GAAP measures in our public disclosures.
Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business and to view our non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures.
The following tables reconciles the specific items excluded from U.S. GAAP metrics in the calculation of non-GAAP metrics for the periods shown below:
Year ended December 31, 2021 (Historical)
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $(15,119,219)compared to a loss of $(4,083,464) for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11,035,755. The increase is primarily due to investments in product development, customer service, infrastructure, and human capital and the inclusion of Helix.
Year ended December 31, 2021 (Pro Forma)
Revenues
Pro forma revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $18,889,025, which represented an increase of $6,565,692 compared to total revenue of $12,323,333 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in the number of customers utilizing Healthcare Information products.
Adjusted EBITDA
Pro forma Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $(15,375,547) compared to a loss of $(3,259,000) for the Year Ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $12,116,547. The increase is primarily due to investments in product development, customer service, infrastructure and human capital.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since the Company’s inception in 2019, most of the Company’s resources have been devoted to scaling our research and development, sales and marketing, and management infrastructure. The Company’s operations have been financed primarily from the cash proceeds received from equity issuances and the issuance of convertible notes. The Company expects to continue to fund our operations and potential future acquisitions through a combination of cash flow generated from operating activities, debt financing, and/or additional equity issuances. To date, the Company has not generated sufficient revenues from the licensing of information products and software products to fund all of our operating expenses and as a result the Company has incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception. On April 12, 2021 the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain accredited investors and certain of the Company’s directors, pursuant to which the Company issued 1,191,743 shares of common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $12,000,000. On September 1, 2021, the Company raised proceeds of $24 million through the sale of 3.5% convertible promissory notes maturing on September 1, 2025. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s principal source of liquidity was aggregate cash and marketable securities of $31,063,166.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes selected information about our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the year presented:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $13,006,812 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily the result of increased operating expense related to the scaling up the Company’s operations from the initial start-up phase as well as a result of the Helix acquisition and its operations.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $10,374,842 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This is the result of an increase in additions to property and equipment of $1,391,548, a net decrease in cash invested in marketable securities of $10,455,413 and cash acquired of $1,310,977 as part of the Business Combination.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $19,965,343 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to the cash proceeds received from the Company’s equity issuance in April 2021 and the convertible notes issuance in September 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates - which also would have been reasonable - could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition. We recognize revenue in accordance with Topic 606. For a full description of our revenue recognition accounting policy, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We generate revenues from license fees, subscriptions, and services.
Business combinations. We allocate the fair value of the consideration transferred to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including trademarks, customer relationships, and acquired software and technology, based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The purchase price allocation requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, with respect to intangible assets and deferred revenue obligations.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates used in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•
future expected cash flows from sales, maintenance agreements, and acquired developed technologies;
•
the acquired company’s trade name and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and customer relationships will continue to be used in our product portfolio;
•
expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable software and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; and
•
discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and, if such events occur, we may be required to recognize a loss in the consolidated statement of operations due to an overestimation of the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.
Goodwill and other intangible assets. Intangible assets arise from acquisitions and principally consist of goodwill, trademarks, customer relationships, and acquired software and technology. Intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which range from two to eight years.
Goodwill consists of the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations. Goodwill is not amortized. Instead, it is tested annually for impairment, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce its fair value below its carrying amount. We operate as a single reporting unit.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we may first qualitatively assess whether it is more likely than not (a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that a goodwill impairment exists. If it is determined that a quantitative assessment is required, we will recognize goodwill impairment as the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, but not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill within the reporting unit. Based upon our most recent annual impairment assessment completed as of October 1, 2021, there were no indicators of impairment, and no impairment losses were recorded. There was no impairment of goodwill as a result of our annual impairment assessment conducted for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have relationships with other organizations or process any transactions that would constitute off balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”). The update removes separation models for (i) convertible debt with a cash conversion feature and (ii) convertible instruments with a beneficial conversion feature. Under ASU 2020-06, these features will be combined with the host contract. ASU 2020-06 does not impact the accounting treatment for conversion features that are accounted for as a derivative under Topic 815. The update also requires the application of the if-converted method to be used for convertible instruments and the effect of potential share settlement be included in the diluted earnings per share calculation when an instrument may be settled in cash or shares. The amendments in this update are effective for public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The amendment is to be adopted through either a fully retrospective or modified retrospective method of transition, only at the beginning of an entity’s fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. The Company has elected to early adopt the standard as of January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method of transition. The Company evaluated the terms of our debt and concluded that the instrument does not require separation and that there were no other derivatives that required separation. As a result, there is no equity component and the Company recorded the convertible note as a single liability within long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet. The Company applies the if-converted method for calculation of diluted earnings per share for our convertible debt instruments.
In October 2021, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2021-08, Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers (“ASU
2021-08). The FASB issued ASU 2021-08 to improve the accounting for acquired revenue contracts with customers in a business combination by addressing diversity in practice and inconsistency related to recognition of an acquired contract liability and payment terms and their effect on subsequent revenue recognized by the acquirer. The amendment is effective for financial statements for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
The Company has considered all other recently issued accounting pronouncements and does not believe the adoption of such pronouncements will have a material impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” As an “emerging growth company,” the Company is electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” the Company is not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the business combination or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.