Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the sections titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are referred to herein as 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have omitted the financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our final prospectus filed with the SEC on September 17, 2021, which discussion is hereby incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
Our vision is a world where you never log in again.
We help make the digital economy possible. ForgeRock supports billions of identities to help people simply and safely access the connected world-from shopping and banking to accessing company networks to get their work done. We make this possible through a unified and extensive identity platform to enable enterprises to provide exceptional digital user experiences without compromising security and privacy. This allows enterprises to deepen their relationships with customers and increase the productivity of their workforce and partners, while at the same time providing better security and regulatory compliance.
Our platform is purpose-built for the enterprise and provides mission-critical capabilities, including performance and scale, rich identity functionality, deployment flexibility, and extensive integration and interoperability. Our platform includes a full suite of identity functionality across CIAM, AM, and IGA and a differentiated identity object modeling approach that supports all identity types. We enable enterprises to rapidly integrate and secure thousands of applications across types, deployments, and operating environments such as SaaS, mobile, microservices, web, and legacy, running in public and private cloud, and on-premise. Together, these deep capabilities enable us to provide enterprises with a single view of all their identities in one unified platform and position us as a leader in digital identity for the enterprise market.
We Generate Substantially All of Our Revenue From Subscriptions
Our revenue includes recurring revenue from term licenses, SaaS, and maintenance and support which we refer to as our subscription revenue. We now generate substantially all of our revenue from the sale of subscriptions, which accounted for 97% , 96% and 88% of our total revenue in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have significantly reduced our percentage of revenue from perpetual licenses from 1% to 1% and 8% in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The remainder of our revenue is from professional services, which represented 3%, 3%, and 5% of our revenue in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We enable our customers to choose how they want to deploy our software in their heterogeneous environments, including self-managed environments such as public and private cloud environments, and through our Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) offering, ForgeRock Identity Cloud, or a combination of both. Our subscription contracts are typically non-cancelable and non-refundable, and are largely billed annually upfront. Our weighted average new subscription term in 2021 was 26 months. Our pricing is based on the deployment method (SaaS or self-managed), products purchased, identity type (consumer, workforce, or IoT and services), and number of identities managed.
We Focus on Global Enterprises and Large Organizations, Who are Prioritizing Investments in Identity
Our go-to-market strategy is primarily focused on selling to large global enterprises, who are consistently investing in identity as a top priority. We focus our sales efforts on decision makers with a purview across the enterprise such as Chief Information Officers, or CIOs, Chief Information Security Officers, or CISOs, Chief Digital Officers, or CDOs, and Chief Technology Officers, or CTOs. We are also increasing our focus on line-of-business owners and developers as core stakeholders. We have been operating globally since our founding and 47% of our revenue in 2021 was generated from customers located in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, or EMEA, and the Asia-Pacific, or APAC, region, demonstrating the global demand for our offerings. Our customers are based in more than 50 countries and across a diverse set of industries such as financial services, public sector, technology, telecom and media, medical, services, retail, and manufacturing. Many of our customers are recognized as leaders in their respective industries or public sectors.
Our Go-to-Market Strategy is Driven by Close Collaboration Between Our Sales and Marketing Organizations and Our Partners
We primarily sell subscriptions through our direct sales teams located in geographic regions near our customers. Our sales and marketing organizations work closely to attract and drive awareness and engagement with prospective customers to help them understand our leadership in identity and our product differentiation, and to convert prospects into customers. Our marketing organization engages with prospective customers across physical and digital channels and provides them with solution guides, whitepapers, webinars, presentations, and other content to accelerate their understanding of our platform and drive greater adoption. We are highly focused on embracing and supporting our customers with the implementation of and utilization of our platform through dedicated customer success managers.
We also have a strong network of strategic global channel partners that both source and influence opportunities for us -providing leverage and execution capabilities across the globe. These strategic global channel partnerships not only provide us with a significant source of lead generation but also a global network of certified and trained implementation professionals. Our alliances, including global strategic consulting firms and global systems integrators, or GSIs, such as Accenture, Deloitte, and PwC, often promote our platform as part of large-scale digital transformation projects they drive by identifying opportunities in which our platform can help accelerate business initiatives and improve user experience. We also partner with leading regional consulting firms and implementation partners. These highly-skilled regional partners not only provide subject-matter expertise in the implementation of specific use cases, but they also act as an extension of our direct sales force by identifying and referring opportunities to us.
Our Customer Base Includes Many of the World’s Leading Brands
Our global customer base includes direct and indirect customers, of which direct customers are those we contract with directly (whether sourced by us or through a partner or reseller), and indirect customers include customers that receive the benefit of using components of our software by contracting with certain third parties, such as resellers, system integrators, managed service providers, or other channel partners, as well as with original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs.
We focus on the number of large customers because it represents our ability to land-and-expand with large enterprises and the number of large customers is a key indicator of our ability to grow our business and revenue in future periods. We define a large customer as a customer with $100,000 or greater ARR as of a measurement date. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had 394, 327 and 275 large customers with $100,000 of ARR or greater, respectively, representing 90%, 86% and 81% of our total ARR as of such dates. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total revenue or 3% of our total ARR in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
We Have a Robust Land & Expand Model Enabled in Part by Our Flexible Purchasing Options
The breadth of our platform enables many entry points for new customers, and we enable them to purchase one or more product modules for their initial deployment and expand into new modules for additional functionality over time. We believe there is a significant opportunity for revenue expansion across our customer base as our customers increase the number of identities managed through our platform, expand across consumer, workforce and IoT and services use cases, subscribe to additional product offerings, and expand into additional deployments, such as our SaaS offering.
Our Business Has Experienced Strong Growth
We have experienced strong growth from a combination of internal drivers and external drivers. Internal drivers include the continuous innovation of our platform, resulting in new technology, products and deployment offerings, a loyal customer base that continues to increase their spend with us over time, and the acquisition of new customers. For example, we have developed and released our SaaS offering (ForgeRock Identity Cloud), Autonomous Identity and Governance in the past two years and both new and existing customers have adopted these offerings. Our effective go-to-market model has also been a driver of our growth, aided by recent leadership recognition by industry analysts. We believe external drivers such as the increasing importance of identity to enterprises, identity being a key enabler of digital transformation, the growing cyber threat landscape and constantly evolving regulatory and compliance requirements are also driving our growth.
In 2021 and 2020 our ARR was $183.1 million and $135.9 million, respectively, representing a year-over-year growth rate of 35%. We generate substantially all of our revenue from subscriptions, with 97% of our total revenue coming from subscriptions in both 2021 and 2020. In 2021 and 2020 our total revenue was $176.9 million and $127.6 million, respectively, representing a year-over-year growth rate of 39%. In the same periods, we incurred net losses of $47.8 million and $41.8 million, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate its impact have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods and services worldwide, including in the geographic areas in which we conduct our business operations and from which we generate our revenue. It has also caused societal and economic disruption and financial market volatility, resulting in business shutdowns and reduced business activity. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a modest negative impact on our business, financial condition, and results of operations, primarily as a result of:
•for certain enterprises, delaying or pausing digital transformation and expansion projects and negatively impacting IT spending, which has caused some potential customers to delay or forgo purchases of subscriptions for our platform and services and some existing customers to fail to renew subscriptions, reduce their usage or fail to expand their usage of our platform due to the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on their business;
•restricting our sales operations and marketing efforts, reducing the effectiveness of such efforts in some cases and delaying or lengthening our sales cycles; and
•delaying the delivery of professional services and training to our customers.
The COVID-19 pandemic may cause us to continue to experience the foregoing challenges in our business in the future and could have other effects on our business, including disrupting our ability to develop new offerings and enhance existing offerings, market and sell our products and conduct business activities generally.
In the longer term, we expect some positive impacts on our business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the trend of enterprises pursuing digital transformation initiatives in order to remain competitive, with identity being a key enabler of such transformation. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a rapid expansion of digital identities, as more consumer transactions are being undertaken over the internet and more employees are working remotely. We believe that these impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic will benefit our business in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also driven some temporary cost savings to our business. We have experienced slower growth in certain operating expenses due to reduced business-related travel, deferred hiring for some positions and the cancellation of in-person customer and employee events. We do not yet have visibility into the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future business or results of operations, particularly if the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time. Given the uncertainty, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact on our future financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. See the Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for more information regarding risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
Acquiring New Customers
Our results of operations and growth depends in part on our ability to attract new customers and we believe there is a significant opportunity to grow our customer base. To date, we have primarily relied on our marketing efforts, direct sales, channel partners and alliances, industry recognition and referrals to attract new customers. While we believe we have a significant market opportunity and an effective go-to-market strategy to win new customers, we will need to continue to invest in partner and alliance leverage, digital marketing, and expand into new markets and new customer segments to maintain or accelerate our customer growth.
Expanding Usage by Existing Customers
Our business depends, in part, on the degree to which our land-and-expand strategy is successful. Our customers often initially adopt our platform for a specific use case, such as consumer identity, and subsequently increase their adoption as they realize the benefits and flexibility of our platform. We have been successful in expanding our existing customers’ adoption of our platform as demonstrated by our dollar-based net retention rate, which we consider an indicator of our ability to retain and expand revenue from existing customers over time. We continue to invest in our customer success efforts to help our customers realize the full potential of our platform and expand their usage of our platform over time.
Innovating and Advancing Our Platform
We intend to continue to invest in our research and development to extend the capabilities of our digital identity platform. Our investments in research and development drive core technology innovation and bring new products to market. We intend to continue to enhance our platform by developing new products and expanding the functionality of existing products to maintain our technology leadership. For example, since the beginning of 2019, we released ForgeRock Identity Governance, ForgeRock Identity Cloud, and Autonomous Identity. We have also strengthened our Trust Network of ecosystem partners that bring leading-edge authentication, biometrics, digital identity proofing, risk management, and other complementary technologies.
Expanding Strategic Partnerships and Alliances
Our growth depends in part on our ability to expand our strategic partnerships. We have four types of strategic alliances and partners: (1) GSIs and implementation partners, (2) OEM partners or customers who utilize components of our platform to deliver services, (3) strategic partners such as Google Cloud where ForgeRock is a premier partner for digital identity, and (4) Trust Network partners who provide complementary technologies that plug into our platform. Our partners help source and support relationships with new and existing customers, as well as provide technology and go-to-market benefits. We believe we have a meaningful opportunity to increase our revenue through strategic partners and our growth depends in part on the strength of these partnerships.
Mix of Multi-Year Subscription Licenses and SaaS, and Seasonality
Subscription term licenses are often deployed by our customers in public cloud environments such as AWS, GCP, or Azure. Under ASC 606, for self-managed term-based subscription licenses, we recognize approximately half of the total contract value of the portion upfront as license revenue, with the remainder attributable to maintenance and support that is recognized ratably over the license term. If the total contract value of our subscription term licenses increases as a percentage of total contract value of all our subscriptions, more revenue would be recognized upfront.
For our SaaS offering, the ForgeRock Identity Cloud, 100% of revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term. If the total contract value of our SaaS subscriptions increases as a percentage of total contract value of all our subscriptions, less revenue would be recognized upfront.
For the reasons stated above, our revenue is affected by the overall growth in our business and changes in our revenue mix of self-managed subscriptions and SaaS subscriptions. As a result, our year-over-year growth rates for total revenue may not be comparable due to changes in revenue mix.
We also experience seasonality in our business which could continue to affect our financial results.
Key Business Metrics
Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR)
We believe that ARR is a key metric to measure our business performance because it is driven by our ability to acquire new customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing customers. We define ARR as the annualized value of all contractual subscription agreements as of the end of the period. To the extent that we are negotiating a renewal with a customer after the expiration of the subscription, we continue to include that revenue in ARR if we are actively in discussion with such an organization for a new subscription or renewal, or until such organization notifies us that it is not renewing its subscription. We perform this calculation on an individual customer basis by dividing the total dollar amount of the customer’s contract by the total contract term stated in months and multiplying this amount by 12 to annualize. Calculated ARR for each individual customer is then aggregated to arrive at total ARR.
ARR does not have a standardized meaning and therefore may not be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and remaining performance obligations computed and/or disclosed in accordance with GAAP and is not intended to be combined with or to replace any of those items. Specifically, ARR, as calculated under the definition herein, does not adjust for the timing impact of revenue recognition for specific performance obligations identified within a contract. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the date used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended by our customers.
The following chart sets forth our ARR as of the end of our last two years:
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
Our ability to drive growth and generate incremental revenue depends, in part, on our ability to maintain and grow our relationships with customers. An important way in which we track our performance in this area is by measuring the dollar-based net retention rate. We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate by first identifying customers, or the Base Customers, in a particular quarter, or the Base Quarter. We then divide the ARR in the same quarter of the subsequent year attributable to the Base Customers, or the Comparison Quarter, by the ARR attributable to those Base Customers in the Base Quarter. Our dollar-based net retention rate captures any increase or decrease in ARR from the Base Customers from the Base Quarter to the Comparison Quarter. We expand our relationships with customers as they purchase more identities, add more use cases across consumer, workforce, and IoT and services, subscribe to additional product offerings, and add additional deployment options such as our SaaS offering. Our ARR for new customers in 2021 on average exceeded $200,000.
The following table sets forth our dollar-based net retention rate as of the end of our last two years:
Number of Large Customers
We focus on the number of large customers because it represents our ability to land-and-expand with large enterprises and the number of large customers is a key indicator of our ability to grow our business and revenue in future periods. We define a large customer as a customer with $100,000 or greater ARR as of a measurement date. We believe that our ability to increase the number of large customers on our platform is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business, and our potential future business opportunities. Over time, large customers have constituted a greater share of our revenue, which has contributed to an increase in average revenue per customer. We define a customer as a separate and distinct buying entity, such as a company, an educational or government institution, or a distinct business unit of a large company that has an active contract with us or one of our partners to access our platform.
The following table sets forth our large customers as of the end of our last two years:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance and liquidity. We use non-GAAP financial measures to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare our annual budget, to monitor and assess our liquidity, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that the non-GAAP financial measures we review are each a useful measure to us and to our investors because they provide consistency and comparability with our past performance and between periods, as these metrics generally eliminate the effects of the variability of certain charges and expenses that may not reflect our overall operating performance and liquidity. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures,
when taken collectively with GAAP financial information, can be helpful to us and to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results.
The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. The principal limitation of these non-GAAP financial measures is that they exclude expenses that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our consolidated financial statements. In addition, they are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgment by our management about which expenses are excluded or included in determining these non-GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Margin
Gross profit is defined as GAAP revenue less cost of revenue and gross margin is GAAP gross profit as a percentage of total revenue. We define non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin as GAAP gross profit and GAAP gross margin, adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP gross profit to GAAP gross profit, and non-GAAP gross margin to GAAP gross margin, is as follows:
Non-GAAP Operating Loss and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin as GAAP operating loss and GAAP operating margin, adjusted for stock-based compensation expense and restructuring and impairment charges.
A reconciliation of non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin to GAAP operating loss and GAAP operating margin, the most directly comparable GAAP measures, is as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as operating loss before tax, adjusted for depreciation, stock-based compensation expense and restructuring and impairment charges.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to operating loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less/(plus) cash used for purchases of property and equipment.
A reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash used in operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from subscriptions and, to a lesser extent, professional services and perpetual licenses.
Subscriptions and perpetual licenses. Subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue consist of the following:
Subscriptions consist of:
Subscription term licenses. We sell subscriptions for our solutions that are self-managed by our customer within our customer’s IT infrastructure or cloud infrastructure. These subscriptions include licenses and technical support and access to new software updates on a when-and-if available basis. We recognize the license portion, which is approximately half of the total contract value, upon the later of the delivery of the software and commencement of the subscription term. The remainder is recognized ratably over the subscription term as support & maintenance revenue. We typically invoice our customers annually in advance.
Subscription SaaS, support & maintenance. We sell SaaS subscriptions for access to ForgeRock Identity Cloud, our SaaS offering. We sell support and maintenance bundled with license in the self-managed software subscription offering, or as a standalone for the perpetual license support & maintenance renewal. For our SaaS offering, we recognize revenue ratably over the period beginning on the later of the commencement of the subscription term or the provisioning of the
SaaS service, to the end of the subscription term. For support and maintenance, we recognize revenue ratably over the period beginning on the later of the commencement of the subscription term or the delivery of the software to the end of the subscription term.
Perpetual licenses. We also sell perpetual licenses to our self-managed solutions. Revenue from our perpetual licenses is recognized when the software is delivered or made available to the customer. Perpetual license revenue increased by $0.5 million, or 38%, in 2021 compared to 2020. In both 2021 and 2020, revenue from perpetual licenses represented 1% of our total revenue. We do not expect perpetual license revenue to be material in future periods.
Subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue represented 97% of our total revenue in both 2021 and 2020. Subscriptions revenue represented 99% of our subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue in both 2021 and 2020. We expect that substantially all our revenue will be generated from subscriptions for the foreseeable future. Our subscriptions revenue may fluctuate due to the timing and relative mix between revenue from subscription term licenses and subscription SaaS, support & maintenance. Over time, we expect a greater percentage of our subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue will come from our ForgeRock Identity Cloud offering. This will have a negative impact on our near-term revenue growth as SaaS subscription revenue is recognized ratably.
Professional services. Professional services consist primarily of fees from professional services provided to our customers and partners to configure and optimize the use of our solutions, as well as training services related to the configuration and operation of our solutions. Our professional services are generally priced on a time and materials or fixed package basis, which is generally invoiced upfront. Revenue from professional services is recognized as the service hours are used or milestones are achieved. Revenue from our training services is recognized on the date the services are complete.
Revenue from professional services represented 3% of our total revenue in both 2021 and 2020. We expect our professional services revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our business continues to grow, but we expect professional services revenue to fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Overhead Allocation and Employee Compensation Costs
We allocate shared costs, such as facilities costs (including rent, utilities and depreciation on assets shared by all departments) and certain information technology costs to all departments based on headcount. As such, allocated shared costs are reflected in each cost of revenue and operating expense category. Employee compensation costs include salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for each cost of revenue and operating expense category, sales commissions for sales and marketing and any compensation related taxes.
Cost of Revenue
Subscriptions and perpetual licenses. Subscriptions and perpetual licenses cost of revenue consists of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, and benefits, as well as stock-based compensation, for employees associated with our subscription offerings and customer support, allocated overhead costs, and third-party costs, including cloud infrastructure costs and other expenses directly associated with our customer support. We expect our subscriptions and perpetual licenses cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars to the extent our subscriptions revenue increases. As a percentage of revenue, we expect subscriptions and perpetual licenses cost of revenue to increase as a percentage of total revenue in the near term as we grow our SaaS subscription business, but to decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the long term as our SaaS subscription revenue grows.
Professional services. Professional services cost of revenue consists of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits, as well as stock-based compensation, for employees associated with our professional services and training services, allocated overhead costs, and third-party costs, including other costs directly associated with our professional services and training services. We expect our professional services cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our business continues to grow. As a percentage of revenue, we expect professional services cost of revenue to fluctuate over time as we continue to invest in our growth. The cost of providing professional services has historically been higher than the associated revenue we generate, as we use professional services to help drive customer success and increased subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit (revenue less cost of revenue) and gross margin (gross profit as a percentage of total revenue) have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing of our acquisition of new customers and the renewal of and
expansion of sales to existing customers, the mix between revenue from subscription term licenses and subscription SaaS, support & maintenance, the costs associated with operating our platform, the extent to which we expand our customer support team, and the extent to which we can increase the efficiency of our technology and infrastructure through technological improvements. We expect our gross profit to increase in absolute dollars as total revenue increases but our gross margin to decrease as we invest further in our cloud-based infrastructure to support our subscription SaaS offering. We expect subscriptions and perpetual licenses cost of revenue to increase consistently with the growth in our subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue, although our gross margin could fluctuate from period-to-period.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation expense and, with regard to sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, outside consultants, and overhead. We focus our research and development efforts on developing new solutions, core technologies, and to further enhance the functionality, reliability, performance and flexibility of existing solutions. We expect our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows. However, we expect our research and development expenses will decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period-to-period depending on the timing of expenses.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, travel-related expenses, and overhead. Certain sales commissions earned by our sales force on subscription contracts are deferred and amortized over the period of benefit, which is generally four to five years. We expect to continue to invest in our sales force domestically and internationally, as well as in our channel relationships. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars and continue to be our largest operating expense category for the foreseeable future. However, we expect our sales and marketing expenses will decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period-to-period depending on the timing of expenses.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs associated with our executive, human resource, legal, facilities, accounting and finance, information security, and information technology departments. In addition, general and administrative expenses include third-party professional fees and overhead.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows. We also expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, including regarding internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services. However, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period-to-period depending on the timing of expenses.
Interest and other expense, net
Interest expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments, accrual of end of term balloon payment on our outstanding borrowings under our A&R Loan Agreement and the amortization of associated deferred financing costs. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net primarily consists of gains and losses from foreign currency transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency, fair value changes on a preferred stock tranche option and warrants, and interest income. We expect our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currencies to continue as we expand our business internationally.
Provision For (Benefit From) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented as a percentage of our total revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total revenue increased by $49.3 million, or 39%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Subscriptions and perpetual licenses revenue increased by $48.4 million, or 39%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Subscription term licenses revenue increased by $20.3 million or 32% in 2021 compared to 2020. Subscription SaaS, support & maintenance revenue increased by $27.6 million or 48% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increases in subscription term licenses and subscription SaaS, support & maintenance revenue were driven by the addition of new customers as well as an increase in identities, use cases, product modules, and deployments from existing customers. Support and maintenance increased due to the steady growth of the installment base. SaaS, support and maintenance revenue increased due to the steady growth of the installment base, as well as the increased adoption of our SaaS offerings.
Professional services revenue increased by $0.9 million, or 22%, in 2021 compared to 2020. There was an increase in the service activity for cloud onboarding and self-managed software in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $11.6 million, or 54%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Subscriptions and perpetual licenses cost of revenue increased by $5.3 million, or 43%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $4.0 million increase in headcount and related personnel costs to support the growth of our offerings, ongoing maintenance for our expanding customer base and our investment in cloud infrastructure costs for our ForgeRock Identity Cloud offering and a $0.5 million increase in royalty expenses. Professional services cost of revenue increased by $6.3 million, or 70%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase of $5.9 million of contractor costs and allocated overhead costs as we invest further for anticipated growth.
Gross margin for subscriptions and perpetual licenses was 90% in both 2021 and 2020. While our gross margins for subscription and perpetual licenses revenue may fluctuate in the near-term as we invest in our growth, we expect our subscription revenue gross margin to improve over the long-term as we achieve additional economies of scale. Gross margin for professional services decreased to (196)% in 2021 from (113)% in 2020. The decrease in gross margin for professional services was due to investments to increase our professional services capacity to support the anticipated growth in new customers.
Research and development. Research and development expenses increased $7.6 million, or 21%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $5.8 million in personnel costs related to higher headcount to support our continued research and development efforts in enhancing our offerings. Other increases include a $1.3 million increase in IT outsourcing costs, including AWS and Google, related to our cloud strategy, and a $1.5 million increase in professional fees, partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in facility costs.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased $12.9 million, or 17%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $11.0 million in personnel costs related to the expansion of our sales force and our marketing department. Personnel costs also increased due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense with the introduction of Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) and restricted stock units (RSUs) in the last quarter of 2021. Additionally, there was also a $1.6 million increase in marketing costs such as Google advertising and sales demonstrations as we increase awareness campaigns. Advertising costs were $6.7 million and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased $13.6 million, or 51%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $7.5 million in personnel costs due to a higher headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense with the introduction of ESPP and RSUs in the last quarter of 2021. There was also a $4.8 million increase in third-party professional fees, insurance and related costs of becoming a public company and a $0.9 million increase in software costs.
Interest and other expense, net
Interest and other expense, net, increased $9.3 million, or 102%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
We recorded a net foreign currency loss of $3.8 million in 2021 compared to a net foreign currency gain of $3.1 million in 2020, primarily due to fluctuations in foreign currency remeasurement on intercompany balances denominated in Norwegian krone, Euros and the British pound. On September, 30, 2021, we reclassified certain intercompany balances considered long-term in nature. Accordingly, foreign currency remeasurement gains and losses related to these balances are being reported in the accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders’ equity (deficit) on the consolidated balance sheet effective October 1, 2021.
In 2021, we recorded fair value mark-to-market adjustments of $4.2 million, compared to $6.1 million in 2020 relating to a preferred stock tranche option to purchase Series E-1 preferred shares held by one of our Series E preferred stock investors totaling $20.0 million. The option was exercised in April 2021. In addition, the outstanding preferred stock warrants fair value increased by $5.9 million in 2021, compared to $1.2 million in 2020 due to mark-to-market adjustments on these instruments reflecting the increase in the value of ForgeRock. The warrants were subsequently exercised in September 2021.
Interest expense remained relatively flat in 2021 by comparison to 2020 driven by the impact of recognizing a full year of interest expense in 2021 on additional borrowings of $10.0 million made in April 2020 offset by lower interest rates on the debt when the agreement was amended, effective October 1, 2021.
Provision For Income Taxes
In 2021, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $0.9 million. In 2020, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $0.6 million. In 2021 and 2020, the federal statutory income tax rate of 21% differs from the effective tax rate primarily due to the valuation allowance against related deferred taxes. Our valuation allowance was $65.4 million and $47.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $369.8 million, which were held for working capital purposes. In September 2021 and April 2021, we received $295.7 million and $20.0 million, respectively, of net cash proceeds from the IPO and exercise of a preferred stock tranche option that was exercised by one of our investors. Our cash equivalents were comprised primarily of money market funds and our short-term investments were comprised of marketable securities. We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit and consolidated statements of cash flows. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
Prior to the IPO, we had funded our operations and capital expenditures primarily through equity issuances, debt instruments and cash generated from our operations. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash provided by sales of our products and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months following the date of this report. We use our cash for a variety of needs, including but not limited to ongoing investments in our business, strategic acquisitions, capital expenditures, investment in our infrastructure, including non-cancellable purchase commitments, and debt repayment obligations. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our licenses growth rate, licenses renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending required to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced product offerings, the continuing market adoption of our platform and further investment in general and administrative functions to meet the compliance requirements of being a public company. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
In September 2021, we executed an amendment to the Amended Restated Plain English Growth Capital Loan and Security Agreement with TriplePoint Venture Growth BDC Corp. and TriplePoint Capital LLC, or the amended “A&R Loan Agreement”. The amended A&R Loan Agreement became effective once the registration statement in connection with the initial public offering was declared effective on September 16, 2021. The key provisions of the amendment include: (1) a covenant requiring the maintenance of a $20.0 million cash balance, (2) change in the interest rate for outstanding term loan to be eight percent (8.00%) per annum on the existing loans, (3) extension of the maturity dates by twenty-four months, (4) change in the prepayment penalties and (5) and a change in the prepayment premium. The principal will be due at the end of the term of the respective advance. As of December 31, 2021, the balance outstanding under our term loan facility was $40.0 million and is included in long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet.
All of our obligations under our term loan facility are guaranteed by ForgeRock US, Inc. and ForgeRock Limited and, subject to certain exceptions, secured by a security interest in substantially all of our assets, excluding intellectual property, which is subject to a negative pledge.
A significant majority of our customers pay in advance for their subscriptions. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from our deferred revenue, which is included on our consolidated balance sheet as a liability. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $75.4 million, of which $67.2 million is recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
In the ordinary course of business, the Company enters into various purchase commitments primarily related to third-party cloud hosting and data services, information technology operations and marketing events. Total noncancelable purchase commitments as of December 31, 2021 were approximately $60.3 million for the years through December 31, 2024.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers for subscription, support and maintenance services. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, marketing expenses and third-party hosting costs. Historically, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities and term loans.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 cash used in operating activities was $36.8 million primarily due to our net loss of $47.8 million and net cash outflows of $31.3 million used in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of amortization of deferred commissions of $14.0 million driven by the timing of revenue recognition, and stock-based compensation of $10.7 million. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to a change in deferred commissions of $23.3 million driven by the timing of commission payments, a $10.5 million change in contract and other non-current assets due to the issuance of invoices and timing of revenue recognition, a $20.7 million change in accounts receivable and a $10.9 million change in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to the timing of cash disbursements.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $29.6 million primarily due to our net loss of $41.8 million, adjusted for net cash outflows of $13.7 million used in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of a foreign currency remeasurement loss of $3.1 million, amortization of deferred commissions of $13.4 million and stock- based compensation of $6.2 million. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to a change in deferred revenue of $5.3 million due to the timing of collection of payment from our customers, partially offset by a change in deferred commissions of $18.0 million driven by the timing of commission payments.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $244.4 million was primarily attributable to purchases of short term investments of $277.1 million, purchases of property and equipment of $1.1 million, and partially offset by sales and maturities of short term investments of $1.9 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 of $0.8 million was attributable to the purchase of available for sale securities of $3.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.9 million, offset by sales of available for sale securities of $3.0 million.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $310.5 million primarily as a result of proceeds consisting of $295.7 million of aggregate net proceeds from our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs paid, the issuance of Series E-1 convertible preferred stock of $20.0 million and proceeds from
the exercise of employee stock options of $4.9 million partially offset by $3.9 million employee payroll taxes paid for net shares settlement of restricted stock units on IPO.
Cash provided by financing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $101.2 million, primarily as a result of proceeds from the issuance of Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock of $93.5 million, proceeds from the issuance of debt of $9.9 million and partially offset by repurchases of common stock from employees of $2.3 million.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company pursuant to the provisions of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we choose to affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies. See “Risk Factors” - We are an ‘emerging growth company’ and we expect to elect to comply with reduced public company reporting requirements, which could make our common stock less attractive to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information regarding our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under ASC 606. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expected to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods or services. We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information regarding our significant accounting policies.
We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of our product or service to a customer. We identify performance obligations in a contract based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer. Those goods or services must (i) be capable of being distinct, so the customer can benefit from a good or service either on its own or together with readily available resources (either from third parties or from us) and (ii) be distinct in the context of the contract, where the transfer of control is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. Our performance obligations are and can include the following deliverables: licenses, SaaS, support & maintenance, and
professional services. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price, or SSP.
The SSP is determined based on the prices at which we separately sell our products and services, assuming the majority of these separate transactions fall within a pricing range. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the software license or the maintenance and support separately, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs that can require significant judgment. We have determined that our pricing for subscription term licenses and SaaS is highly variable and therefore allocates the transaction price to those performance obligations using the residual approach. Estimates of SSP could change over time based on changes in our pricing practices or other factors. The evaluation is made annually with any changes made prospectively by maximizing all observable inputs.
Revenue from our subscription term licenses is recognized when the software is delivered or made available to the customer. Subscription SaaS, support & maintenance revenue is recognized over the contract term as services are delivered. The changes in our pricing or the market conditions considered in determining SSP of our performance obligations between point-in-time license and over-time maintenance performance obligations could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
Deferred Revenue and Sales Commissions
Deferred revenue consists of customer billings in advance of revenue being recognized. Amounts anticipated to be recognized within one year of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred revenue, current; the remaining portion is recorded as deferred revenue, noncurrent in the consolidated balance sheets.
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new revenue contracts and additional sales to existing customers are deferred and recorded in deferred commissions, current and noncurrent in the consolidated balance sheets. Deferred commissions are amortized consistent with the pattern of revenue recognition for each performance obligation for contracts for which the commissions paid were earned. Commissions paid for the ratable performance obligation in the initial acquisition of a contract are amortized over the estimated period of benefit.
We had total deferred commissions on our balance sheet of $24.1 million and $14.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We amortized deferred commissions of $14.0 million and $13.4 million in our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. If we were to change the period in which we amortize deferred commissions such change could have a significant impact to both our consolidated statements of operations and consolidated balance sheets.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for the measurement and recognition of stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to employees, nonemployees and directors to be measured and recognized based on the grant date fair value of the awards. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Stock-based compensation expense for service-based awards is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is typically the vesting term of the award. Stock-based compensation expense for awards subject to performance conditions are determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a graded vesting basis over the term of the award once it is probable that the performance conditions will be met.
Following the IPO, the Company grants equity awards under the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan four times each year, on February 20th, May 20th, August 20th and November 20th, or prior business day. The February 20, 2022 RSU grant, which includes awards to our executives, translates to an added stock-based compensation expense of approximately $23.0 million to be recognized over four years. In future periods, we expect our stock-based compensation expense to increase as a result of our
existing, unrecognized share-based compensation that will be recognized as the awards vest, and as we grant additional stock-based awards to attract and retain employees.
Stock Options
The fair value of each time-based option grant is estimated on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The model requires certain subjective assumptions as inputs, including the following:
1.Volatility: Since our common stock did not have a trading history, expected volatility was estimated based on the average of the historical volatilities of the common stock of publicly-traded entities in our peer group within our industry and with characteristics similar to us.
2.Fair value of common stock: Prior to our IPO in September 2021 when our common stock was not yet publicly traded, we estimated the fair value of our common stock. Our board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each meeting in which awards were approved. After the IPO, we use the market closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant for the fair value to be used in the Black-Scholes pricing model.
After our IPO and as we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimates of expected volatility which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our Class A common stock, we may have refinements to the estimates of our expected volatility and expected terms, which could materially impact our future share-based compensation expense.
Restricted Stock Units
The fair value of RSUs is estimated based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. Prior to our IPO we issued 240,000 and 111,111 RSUs in 2016 and 2018, respectively. The fair value of the RSUs that are subject to vesting is recognized as a compensation expense over the requisite service or performance period, using the accelerated attribution method, once the liquidity event-related vesting condition becomes probable of being achieved. Our RSUs vest upon the satisfaction of (i) either a performance-based vesting condition or a service-based vesting condition and/or a (ii) liquidity event-related vesting condition. The service-based vesting condition is satisfied by the award holder providing services to us over a specific period. For some of our RSUs awards, the performance-based vesting condition is satisfied by our achievement of certain contracted ARR targets. On IPO we recorded a cumulative stock-based compensation expense of $0.9 million for those RSUs for which the performance-based and service-based vesting conditions had been satisfied. There were no RSU grants in 2019 and 2020.
After the IPO, we primarily grant RSUs to our employees and it is our practice to convey the grant in the form of a dollar value to the employee. To translate that dollar value to quantity of shares granted, we use the 30 day average market closing price of our Class A common stock ending on the date of grant to calculate the quantity of RSUs to be awarded. The RSU quantity granted is then multiplied by the grant date closing price of our Class A common stock to estimate the fair value. Stock-based compensation expense for the service-based awards is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is typically the vesting term of the award.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
The purchase rights issued under our 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “2021 ESPP”) is based on the fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We use the market closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant for the fair value to be used in the Black-Scholes pricing model. This cost is recognized as an expense following the straight-line attribution method over the offering period for the purchase rights issued under the 2021 ESPP. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of the purchase rights issued under the 2021 ESPP.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences that exist between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and tax attributes such as net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards on a taxing jurisdiction basis. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that will apply in the years in which we expect the temporary differences to be recovered or settled. The accounting standard for income taxes requires a reduction of the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not (defined by the accounting standard as a likelihood of more than 50%) that such assets will not be realized.
A tax benefit from an uncertain income tax position may be recognized in the financial statements only if it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable, based solely on its technical merits and consideration of the relevant taxing authorities’ widely understood administrative practices and precedents. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within income tax expense (benefit) in the consolidated statements of operations.
The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment in assessing the likely future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of those future tax consequences. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider both positive and negative evidence related to the likelihood of realization of the deferred tax assets. If, based on the weight of that available evidence, it is more likely than not the deferred tax assets will not be realized, we record a valuation allowance. The weight given to the positive and negative evidence is commensurate with the extent to which the evidence may be objectively verified. This assessment, which is completed on a taxing jurisdiction basis, takes into account a number of types of evidence, including the following: 1) the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative financial reporting losses, 2) sources of future taxable income, 3) taxable income in prior carryback years, if carryback is permitted under the tax law and 4) tax planning strategies.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves assessing uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in multiple tax jurisdictions. We may be periodically reviewed by domestic and foreign tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These reviews may include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among the various tax jurisdictions that we operate within. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, we record estimated reserves when it is more-likely-than-not that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority.
In assessing the tax benefit from an uncertain income tax position, the tax position that meets the more-likely-than not recognition threshold is initially and subsequently measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than a 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. In the past, we have estimated the value of certain intercompany transactions using a discounted cashflow approach. Significant assumptions used to estimate the fair market value include projected revenue growth and projected operating margins.
Common Stock Valuation
Prior to IPO
Given our common stock was not yet publicly traded, our board of directors established the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our stock options. These estimates were based in part upon valuations provided by third-party valuation firms.
As there was no public market for our common stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the AICPA Guide. The factors considered by our board of directors in estimating the fair value of our common stock included the following:
•contemporaneous valuations performed regularly by unrelated third-party specialists;
•rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•our historical operating and financial performance;
•relevant precedent transactions involving our capital stock;
•likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as the consummation of an initial public offering or the sale of our company given prevailing market conditions and the nature and history of our business;
•forecasted exit prices assuming IPO event;
•market multiples of comparable companies in our industry;
•stage of development;
•industry information such as market size and growth;
•the lack of marketability of our securities because we are a private company; and
•general macroeconomic conditions.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the value using both the income and the market approach valuation methods. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate based on our weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”). To derive our WACC, a cost of equity was developed using the Capital Asset Pricing Model and comparable company betas, and a cost of debt was determined based on our estimated cost of borrowing. The costs of debt and equity were then weighted based on our actual capital structure. The market approach estimates value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market multiple was determined and subsequently applied to our financial results to estimate our enterprise value.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, including those regarding our future expected revenue, expenses, cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions impacted our valuations at each valuation date and could have had a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Prior to May 2020, the equity valuation was based on both the income and the market approach valuation methods and the Option Pricing Method, or OPM, was selected as the principal equity allocation method. Both these methods were consistent with prior valuations. For options granted starting after December 15, 2020, we have used a hybrid method to determine the fair value of our common stock. Under the hybrid method, multiple valuation approaches were used and then combined into a single probability weighted valuation. Our approaches included the use of initial public offering scenarios and a scenario assuming continued operations as a private entity.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions could have impacted our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock, warrants and preferred stock tranche option.
Post IPO
Following our IPO, we used the publicly quoted price as the fair value of our Class A common stock.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.