Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Delwinds Insurance Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Restatement
In the SEC Staff Statement, the SEC Staff expressed its view that certain terms and conditions common to SPAC warrants may require the warrants to be classified as liabilities on the SPAC’s balance sheet as opposed to equity. Since their issuance on December 15, 2020, our warrants were accounted for as equity within our balance sheet, and after discussion and evaluation, including with our independent auditors, we have concluded that our warrants should be presented as liabilities with subsequent fair value remeasurement.
Historically, the warrants were reflected as a component of equity as opposed to liabilities on the balance sheets and the statements of operations did not include the subsequent non-cash changes in estimated fair value of the warrants, based on our application of FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). The views expressed in the SEC Staff Statement were not consistent with the Company’s historical interpretation of the specific provisions within its warrant agreement and the Company’s application of ASC 815-40 to the warrant agreement. We reassessed our accounting for warrants issued on December 15, 2020, in light of the SEC Staff’s published views. Based on this reassessment, we determined that the warrants should be classified as liabilities measured at fair value upon issuance, with subsequent changes in fair value reported in our statement of operations each reporting period. We and our Audit Committee have concluded that our previously issued financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 should be restated because of the foregoing change and should no longer be relied upon.
Accordingly, the 2020 10-K Amendment restates our financial statements as of, and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on April 27, 2020 and formed for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. While our efforts to identify a target business may span many industries and regions worldwide, we have focused our search for prospects within the insurance industry. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to banks or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the initial public offering, which dilution would if increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of shares of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our units, Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $638,228 and $1,417,540 in cash outside of the trust account. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 23, 2022, we issued the Promissory Note to our sponsor in the principal amount of up to $2,000,000. The Promissory Note was issued in connection with advances our sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to us for working capital expenses. As of March 7, 2022, we have drawn down $0 under the Promissory Note. On February 24, 2022, we entered into the FOXO Transaction Agreement with FOXO and certain other parties. Pursuant to the FOXO Transaction Agreement, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, a Delaware subsidiary of our Company will merge with and into FOXO, with FOXO surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of our Company. In connection with the FOXO Transaction, we also entered into (i) the Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which, the Combined Company (as defined therein) after the closing of the FOXO Transaction Agreement has the right from time to time to sell to Cantor up to $40 million in shares of its Class A common stock subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth therein and (ii) the Backstop Subscription Agreements with the Backstop Investors, pursuant to which, in the event that, at the Closing (as defined in the FOXO Transaction Agreement), we have cash or cash equivalents of less than $10,000,000, the Backstop Investors will subscribe for up to 1,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth therein.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity through December 15, 2020, consisted of formation and preparation for our initial public offering. Since the initial public offering, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of business combination candidates, and we have not and will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest on marketable securities held in the trust account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combinations. In addition, we recognize non-cash losses related to the changes in recurring fair value measurement of our warrant liability at each reporting period.
For the three months and year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $1,140,928 and $4,647,886, which consists of change in fair value of warrant liability of $1,660,600 and $5,922,213, operating costs of $523,924 and $1,302,715 offset by interest income of $4,252 and $27,338, and an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $0 and $1,050.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,784,919, which consists of changes in fair value of warrant liability of $637,111, expenses related to the issuance of public warrants of $1,114,995, operating costs of $38,246 offset by interest income of $1,585, and an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our trust account of $1,050.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of founder shares for $25,000 by our sponsor, and a total of $141,134 of loans from our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note. As of December 31, 2020, the amounts borrowed under the promissory note have been repaid in full.
On December 15, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering in which we sold 20,125,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds of $201,250,000 before underwriting fees and expenses. The sponsor purchased 632,500 placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit, generating gross proceeds of $6,325,000 in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the initial public offering.
In connection with the initial public offering, we incurred offering costs of $11,494,785 (including an underwriting fee of $4,025,000 and deferred underwriting commissions of $7,043,750). Other incurred offering costs consisted principally of preparation fees related to the initial public offering. A total of $201,250,000 of the net proceeds from the initial public offering and the private placement were deposited in the trust account established for the benefit of our public stockholders.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had available to us $638,228 and $1,417,540 of cash on our balance sheet. We will use these funds primarily to evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. As of December 31, 2021, we also had $28,924 in interest income available from our investments in our trust account to pay for our tax obligations. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not withdraw funds from the trust account to pay its tax obligations.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the placement units. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
In December 2020, the Company entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which it pays its Sponsor, an affiliate of our Executive Chairman and our Chief Executive Officer, a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial support. Upon completion of our initial business combination or liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any capital lease obligations or operating lease obligations.
The underwriters in our initial public offering were paid a cash underwriting fee of 2% of gross proceeds of the initial public offering or $4,025,000. In addition, the underwriters entitled to aggregate deferred underwriting commissions of $7,043,750 consisting of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on December 10, 2020, holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and units (including securities contained therein) that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the placement warrants and any shares of Class A common stock and warrants (and underlying Class A common stock) that may be issued upon conversion of units issued as part of the working capital loans and Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares, are entitled to registration rights, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering the Company’s securities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”). Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Loss Per Common Share
Basic loss per common share is computed by dividing net income applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Consistent with ASC 480, common stock subject to possible redemption, as well as their pro rata share of undistributed trust earnings consistent with the two-class method, have been excluded from the calculation of loss per common share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of trust earnings. Diluted loss per share includes the incremental number of shares of common stock to be issued to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury method. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent on the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted loss per common share is the same as basic loss per common share for the period presented.
Warrant Liability
We account for our outstanding public warrants and private placement warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As both the public and private placement warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815, they are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 820 “Fair Value Measurement”, with any subsequent changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.