ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITIONS AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “FoxWayne Enterprises Acquisition Corp.,” “FoxWayne,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to FoxWayne Enterprises Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on September 17, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is FoxWayne Enterprises Acquisition Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. On January 22, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 5,750,000 units, including 750,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $57.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $4.2 million, of which approximately $2.0 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 2,800,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $2.8 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, approximately $58.1 million ($10.10 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in the Trust Account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as Trustee, and invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $58.1 million in the Trust Account.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a business combination successfully. We must complete one or more Initial Business Combinations having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable) at the time of the agreement to enter into the Initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a business combination if the post-business combination company owns or acquires 50% or more of the voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 12 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or April 22, 2022, (or up to 18 months from the consummation of the initial public offering, or July 22, 2022, if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination) (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (less up to $50,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Recent Developments
Loans from Our Chief Executive Officer
Effective as of January 14, 2022, our Board of Directors approved an extension of the time to consummate a business combination by an additional three month period from January 22, 2022 to April 22, 2022, and a loan in the amount of $310,000 to us from Robb Knie, our Chief Executive Officer. A portion ($143,750) of such loan was used to fund a cash contribution to the Trust Account, in an amount equal to $0.025 for each share Unit issued in our Initial Public Offering, for the three month extension of the time to consummate a business combination. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note which is non-interest bearing, non-convertible, and payable upon the consummation of our initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. If an initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination is not consummated, the note will not be repaid by us and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account.
On January 19, 2022, our Chief Executive Officer, loaned an additional $310,000 to us. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note which is non-interest bearing, non-convertible, and payable upon the consummation of the our initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. If an initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination is not consummated, the note will not be repaid by us and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account.
On January 25, 2022, Robb Knie, our Chief Executive Officer, loaned $150,000 to us. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note which is non-interest bearing, non-convertible, and payable upon the consummation of the our initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. If an initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination is not consummated, the note will not be repaid by us and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account.
On February 28, 2022, Robb Knie, our Chief Executive Officer, loaned an additional $170,000 to us. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note which is non-interest bearing, non-convertible, and payable upon the consummation of the our initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. If an initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination is not consummated, the note will not be repaid by us and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account.
Subsequent Events
On March 4, 2022, by mutual agreement, the Company and all parties to the certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of December 7, 2021 (“Merger Agreement”), by and among the Company, Gotham Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of FoxWayne, Aerami Therapeutics Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and the stockholders’ representative, entered into a letter agreement to terminate the Merger Agreement. Except as otherwise set forth in the Merger Agreement, none of the parties shall have any further liability thereunder. The Merger Agreement and related agreements were previously filed with the SEC on December 7, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $42,000 in cash and working capital deficit of approximately $1.3 million.
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase 1,437,500 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”), and loan proceeds from the Robb Knie, our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and a director of the Company, pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). We repaid $1,615 of the outstanding Note balance on December 31, 2020, and repaid the remaining amount of $40,510 in full on January 26, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account and promissory notes from our Chief Executive Officer. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
On September 21, 2021, Robb Knie, our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and director loaned $100,000 to us. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note (“Promissory Note”) which is non-interest bearing, non-convertible, and payable upon the consummation of our initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. If an initial merger, share exchange, asset acquisition or other similar business combination is not consummated, the Promissory Note will not be repaid by us, and all amounts owed thereunder by us will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to pay it outside of our Trust Account. As of December 31, 2021, there was $100,000 outstanding under the Promissory Note.
Although management intends to diligently work towards identifying a target to consummate a business combination within the Combination Period, no assurance can be provided that management will be successful in identifying a target and/or consummating a business combination within the Combination Period. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a Business Combination. Management cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. Further, management’s plans to raise capital and to consummate its initial business combination may not be successful. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined it may be probable the Company is unable to meet its obligations as they become due within one year raising substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. In addition, management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after April 22, 2022.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021, has been in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the Initial Public Offering, our search for a prospective target for a Business Combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until, at the earliest, the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $1.0 million, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of approximately $1.6 million, general and administrative expenses to related party of $0.1 million, franchise tax expense of approximately $0.2 million, financing costs to derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $0.2 million, partially offset by change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $1.1 million and income from investment held in the Trust Account of approximately $5,000.
For the period from September 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a loss of approximately $6,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans or Extension Loans, if any, (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on January 22, 2021.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or approximately $1.2 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $2.0 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We issued EF Hutton (formerly Kingswood Capital Markets), division of Benchmark Investments, Inc. (“EF Hutton”), the Representative of the underwriters (the “Representative”), and/or its designees, 50,000 shares of Class A common stock (the “Representative’s Shares”) upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. EF Hutton agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any such shares until the completion of the initial Business Combination. In addition, EF Hutton agreed (i) to waive its redemption rights with respect to such shares in connection with the completion of the initial Business Combination and (ii) to waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such shares if we fail to complete our initial Business Combination within the Combination Period. We recorded the fair value of the 50,000 Representative Shares, $500,000, charged as an offering cost to the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption.
Risks and Uncertainties
In February 2022, the Russian Federation and Belarus commenced a military action with the country of Ukraine. As a result of this action, various nations, including the United States, have instituted economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and Belarus. Further, the impact of this action and related sanctions on the world economy is not determinable as of the date of these financial statements, and the specific impact on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows is also not determinable as of the date of these financial statements.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants was initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model, and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants has been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering has subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 5,750,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity (deficit) section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 8,550,000 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common shares and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.