Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All references to our business operations refer to FlexShopper, LLC and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.
Overview
Since December 2013, we have developed a business that focuses on improving the quality of life of our customers by providing them the opportunity to obtain ownership of high-quality durable products, such as consumer electronics, home appliances, computers (including tablets and wearables), smartphones, tires, jewelry and furniture (including accessories), under affordable payment lease-to-own (“LTO”) purchase agreements with no long-term obligation, including through an extensive online experience. Our customers can acquire well-known brands such as Samsung, Frigidaire, Hewlett-Packard, LG, Whirlpool, Simmons, Philips, Ashley, Apple and more. We believe that the introduction of FlexShopper’s LTO programs support broad untapped expansion opportunities within the U.S. consumer e-commerce and retail marketplaces. We have successfully developed and are currently processing LTO transactions using our “LTO Engine,” FlexShopper’s proprietary technology that automates the process of consumers receiving spending limits and entering into leases for durable goods to within seconds. The LTO Engine is the basis for FlexShopper’s primary sales channels, which include business to consumer (“B2C”) and business to business (“B2B”) channels, as described in further detail below. Concurrently, e-tailers and retailers that work with FlexShopper may increase their sales by utilizing FlexShopper’s online channels to connect with consumers that want to acquire products on an LTO basis. FlexShopper’s sales channels include (1) selling directly to consumers via the online FlexShopper.com LTO Marketplace featuring thousands of durable goods, (2) utilizing our LTO payment method at check-out on our partners’ e-commerce sites and (3) facilitating LTO transactions with retailers in their physical locations both through their in store terminals and FlexShopper applications accessed via the Internet.
In 2021, we began a test to market an unsecured, consumer loan product for our bank partner that would augment our LTO solution in retailer sales channels. In 2022, based upon the success of this testing, we expect the marketing of our bank partner’s loans to become a strategic solution that we offer to many of our current customers and through our retailer partners.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to credit provisions, intangible assets, contingencies, litigation and income taxes. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience as well as various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes the following critical accounting policies, among others, reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts - FlexShopper seeks to collect amounts owed under its leases from each customer on a weekly basis by charging their bank accounts or credit cards. Accounts receivable are principally comprised of lease payments currently owed to FlexShopper which are past due, as FlexShopper has been unable to successfully collect in the aforementioned manner and therefore the Company has an in-house and near-shore team to collect on the past due amounts FlexShopper maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts, under which FlexShopper’s policy is to record an allowance for estimated uncollectible charges, primarily based on historical collection experience that considers both the aging of the lease and the origination channel. Other qualitative factors are considered in estimating the allowance, such as seasonality, underwriting changes and other business trends. We believe our allowance is adequate to absorb all expected losses. The accounts receivable balances consisted of the following as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
The allowance for doubtful accounts is a significant percentage of the balance because FlexShopper does not charge off any customer account until it has exhausted all collection efforts with respect to each account, including attempts to repossess items. In addition, while collections are pursued, the same delinquent customers will continue to accrue weekly charges until all collection efforts are exhausted. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, $34,924,803 and $19,769,114 of accounts receivable balances, respectively, were charged off against the allowance.
Lease Merchandise - Until all payment obligations for ownership are satisfied under the lease agreement, the Company maintains ownership of the lease merchandise. Lease merchandise consists primarily of residential furniture, consumer electronics, computers, appliances and household accessories and is recorded at cost net of accumulated depreciation. The Company depreciates leased merchandise using the straight-line method over the applicable agreement period for a consumer to acquire ownership, generally twelve months with no salvage value. Upon transfer of ownership of merchandise to customers resulting from satisfaction of their lease obligations, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are eliminated from lease merchandise. For lease merchandise returned or anticipated to be returned either voluntarily or through repossession, the Company provides an impairment reserve for the undepreciated balance of the merchandise net of any estimated salvage value with a corresponding charge to cost of lease revenue. The cost, accumulated depreciation and impairment reserve related to such merchandise are written off upon determination that no salvage value is obtainable.
The net leased merchandise balances consisted of the following as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Cost of lease merchandise sold represents the undepreciated cost of rental merchandise at the time of sale.
Stock Based Compensation - The fair value of transactions in which the Company exchanges its equity instruments for employee services (share-based payment transactions) is recognized as an expense in the financial statements as services are performed. Compensation expense is determined by reference to the fair value of an award on the date of grant and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. We have elected to use the Black Scholes pricing model (BSM) to determine the fair value of all stock option awards.
Key Performance Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. Key performance metrics for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
We refer to Gross Profit and Adjusted EBITDA in the above tables as we use these measures to evaluate our operating performance and make strategic decisions about the Company. Management believes that Gross Profit and Adjusted EBITDA provide relevant and useful information which is widely used by analysts, investors and competitors in our industry in assessing performance.
Gross Profit represents GAAP revenue less the provision for doubtful accounts and cost of leased inventory and inventory sold as a percentage of cost of these revenues. Gross Profit provides us with an understanding of the results from the primary operations of our business. We use Gross Profit to evaluate our period-over-period operating performance. This measure may be useful to an investor in evaluating the underlying operating performance of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of FlexShopper’s performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as substitutes for GAAP metrics such as operating income/ (loss), net income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA represents net income before interest, stock-based compensation, taxes, depreciation (other than depreciation of leased inventory), amortization and one-time or non-recurring items. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides us with an understanding of one aspect of earnings before the impact of investing and financing charges and income taxes. Adjusted EBITDA may be useful to an investor in evaluating our operating performance and liquidity because this measure:
● is widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items excluded from the calculation of such measure, which can vary substantially from company to company.
● is a financial measurement that is used by rating agencies, lenders and other parties to evaluate our credit worthiness; and
● is used by our management for various purposes, including as a measure of performance and as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting.
Results of Operations
The following table details operating results for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
FlexShopper originated 159,217 gross leases less same day modifications and cancellations with an average origination value per lease of $524 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to 188,468 gross leases less same day modifications and cancellations with an average origination value of $468 per lease for the comparable period last year. Total lease revenues for the twelve months ended December 30, 2021 were $118,355,184 compared to $96,939,767 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $21,415,417 or 22.1%. In 2020, government stimulus programs had a significant impact on our customers. Despite originating a greater number of gross leases and gross lease dollars in 2020, the unprecedented amount of government stimulus in 2020 resulted in a larger portion of our customer base paying off leases early thereby reducing lease revenue. In 2021, as a result of enhancements to our website and marketing programs, the Company has been increasing the average origination value per lease. Coupled with the return to pre-stimulus early payoff behavior, 2021 resulted in greater lease revenue compared to 2020. The provision for doubtful accounts relative to gross lease billings and fees are similar for both years at approximately 25%.
Cost of lease revenue and merchandise sold for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $79,177,886 compared to $66,733,090 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $12,444,796 or 18.6%. Cost of lease revenue and merchandise sold for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 is comprised of depreciation expense and impairment of lease merchandise of $73,616,293 and the net book value of merchandise sold of $5,561,593. Cost of lease revenue and merchandise sold for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 is comprised of depreciation expense and impairment of lease merchandise of $63,308,210 and the net book value of merchandise sold of $3,424,880. As the Company’s lease portfolio and revenues increase, the depreciation and related costs associated with the larger portfolio also increase. The mix of early paid off leases and returned merchandise will alter the average depreciable term of the leases within the portfolio and result in increases or decreases in cost of lease revenue and merchandise sold relative to lease revenue.
Marketing expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $9,129,062 compared to $5,880,063 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3,248,999 or 55.3%. The Company strategically increased marketing expenditures, which are primarily related to increasing new lease consumers to grow the lease portfolio. The primary source of new consumers is through digital marketing channels directing potential consumers to FlexShopper.com. The focus on digital marketing allows the Company to have enhanced reporting on the effectiveness of marketing spending to ensure that it is acquiring customers at its targeted acquisition cost. A smaller portion of marketing expense is related to commissions related to retail partnerships as well as remarketing efforts to drive repeat consumer activity.
Salaries and benefits in the twelve months ended December 30, 2021 were $11,489,208 compared to $10,440,693 in the twelve months ended December 30, 2020, an increase of $1,048,515 or 10.0%. Generally, the salary and benefits expense should directionally move with the change in lease originations and the overall size of the lease portfolio albeit at a slower rate. During the second quarter of 2021, there were some management positions filled in operational roles to increase efficiencies in the call center and other operational departments. The company also expanded its sales team to support the growth with the retail partners.
Other operating expenses for the years ended December 30, 2021 and 2020 included the following:
Computer and internet expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $3,329,532 compared to $1,849,641 in the twelve months ended December 30, 2020, representing an increase of $1,479,891 or 80.0%. A significant portion of computer and internet expense is related to scaling both the consumer facing website and the Company’s back-end billing and collection systems. As the lease portfolio grows, the back-office systems will need to scale also but at a much lower rate. In the last two quarters of 2021, there were some additional costs related to the creation and optimization of new operational processes.
Legal and professional fees expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $3,221,667 compared to $1,932,287 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $1,289,380 or 66.7%. During the second quarter of 2021, the Company onboarded two off-shore servicing and collections options to improve flexibility around seasonal call center traffic and improve operational metrics. Also, the expense recorded for warrants granted as part of the consulting agreement with XLR8 Capital Partner increased in the twelve month period ended December 31, 2021 as the weighted average valuation per warrant was $1.63 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.85 per warrant for the same period in 2020.
Merchant bank fees expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $2,472,489 compared to $1,879,978 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $592,511 or 31.5%. Merchant bank fee expense represents the ACH and card processing fees related to billing consumers and therefore an increase in revenue is the main driver for the increase in merchant bank fees.
Customer verification expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $1,991,111 compared to $2,791,114 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an decrease of $800,003 or 28.7%. Customer verification expense is primarily the cost of data used for underwriting new lease applicants. The number of new lease applicants for which customer verification checks are run and expenses incurred, is directly correlated with changes in marketing expense. During the third quarter of 2021, several changes remarked by the implementation of a more discipline process around data procurement and storage, were made by the Company. Those improvements triggered a change in the estimate of the probability to provide future economic benefit of some data cost. As a result of this change in the estimate regarding the portion of data costs incurred that are not directly used in underwriting decisions and that are probable of providing future economic benefit, the Company capitalized $884,160 of data costs in the year ended December 31, 2021. Also, the reduction in the volume of leases for the year ended December 31, 2021 contributed to the decrease of customer verification expenses. The underwriting and data science team continues to optimize the costs related to underwriting lease applications.
Telephone and office expenses in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $918,374 compared to $462,740 in the twelve months ended December 30, 2020, representing an increase of $455,634 or 98.5%. The improvement to operations includes a revamping of our telephone system which increased the volume of outbound calls and created more efficiencies in handling inbound calls.
Operations
We promote our FlexShopper products and services across all sales channels through strategic partnerships, direct response marketing, and affiliate and internet marketing, all of which are designed to increase our lease transactions and name recognition. Our advertisements emphasize such features as instant spending limits, and affordable weekly payments. We believe that as the FlexShopper name gains familiarity and national recognition through our advertising efforts, we will continue to educate our customers and potential customers about the LTO payment alternative as well as solidify our reputation as a leading provider of high-quality branded merchandise and services.
For each of our sales channels, FlexShopper has a multichannel, analytics-powered marketing strategy that includes the following:
The Company believes it has a competitive advantage over competitors in the LTO industry by providing all three channels as a bundled package to retailers and e-tailers. Management is anticipating a rapid development of the FlexShopper business as we are able to penetrate each of our sales channels. To support our anticipated growth, FlexShopper will need the availability of substantial capital resources. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $5,094,642 compared to $8,541,232 as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had accounts receivables of $57,602,269 net of an allowance for doubtful accounts of $27,703,278 totaling $29,898,991. Accounts receivables are principally comprised of lease payments owed to the Company. An allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based upon historical collection and delinquency percentages.
Credit Agreement
On March 6, 2015, FlexShopper, through a wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Borrower”), entered into a credit agreement (as amended from time to time and including the Fee Letter (as defined therein), the “Credit Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as paying agent, various lenders from time to time party thereto and WE 2014-1, LLC, an affiliate of Waterfall Asset Management, LLC, as administrative agent and lender (the “Lender”). The Borrower is permitted to borrow funds under the Credit Agreement based on FlexShopper’s recently collected payments and the Amortized Order Value of its Eligible Leases (as such terms are defined in the Credit Agreement) less certain deductions described in the Credit Agreement. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, the Borrower may currently borrow up to $57,500,000 from the Lender until the Commitment Termination Date and must repay all borrowed amounts one year thereafter, on the date that is 12 months following the Commitment Termination Date (unless such amounts become due or payable on an earlier date pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement). On January 29, 2021, pursuant to an amendment to the Credit Agreement, the Commitment Termination Date was extended to April 1, 2024, the Lender was granted a security interest in certain leases as collateral under the Credit Agreement and the interest rate charged on amounts borrowed was set at LIBOR plus 11% per annum.
The Credit Agreement provides that FlexShopper may not incur additional indebtedness (other than expressly permitted indebtedness) without the permission of the Lender and also prohibits dividends on common stock. Additionally, the Credit Agreement includes covenants requiring FlexShopper to maintain a minimum amount of Equity Book Value, maintain a minimum amount of cash and liquidity and maintain a certain ratio of Consolidated Total Debt to Equity Book Value (each capitalized term, as defined in the Credit Agreement). Upon a Permitted Change of Control (as defined in the Credit Agreement), FlexShopper may refinance the debt under the Credit Agreement, subject to the payment of an early termination fee.
In addition, the Lender and its affiliates have a right of first refusal on certain FlexShopper transactions involving leases or other financial products. The Credit Agreement includes customary events of default, including, among others, failures to make payment of principal and interest, breaches or defaults under the terms of the Credit Agreement and related agreements entered into with the Lender, breaches of representations, warranties or certifications made by or on behalf of the Borrower in the Credit Agreement and related documents (including certain financial and expense covenants), deficiencies in the borrowing base, certain judgments against the Borrower and bankruptcy events.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $5,300,000 available under the Credit Agreement.
On March 5, 2021, the applicable regulators announced that LIBOR will cease to be provided and will no longer be representative (i) immediately after December 31, 2021 for all sterling, euro, Swiss franc and Japanese yen settings, and the one-week and two-month U.S. dollar settings and (ii) immediately after June 30,2023 for the remaining U.S. dollar settings. The Company’s debt bears interest based on the one-month LIBOR rate. If there is a LIBOR Disruption Event as defined in the Credit Agreement, LIBOR will be replaced with the Prime Rate.
Financing Activity
On January 25, 2019, FlexShopper, LLC (the “Borrower”) entered into a subordinated debt financing letter agreement with 122 Partners, LLC, as lender, pursuant to which FlexShopper, LLC issued a subordinated promissory note to 122 Partners, LLC (the “122 Partners Note”) in the principal amount of $1,000,000. H. Russell Heiser, Jr., FlexShopper’s Chief Financial Officer, is a member of 122 Partners, LLC. Payment of the principal amount and accrued interest under the 122 Partners Note was due and payable by the borrower on April 30, 2020 and the borrower can prepay principal and interest at any time without penalty. Amounts outstanding under the 122 Partners Note bear interest at a rate equal to 5.00% per annum in excess of the non-default rate of interest from time to time in effect under the Credit Agreement. Obligations under the 122 Partners Note are subordinated to obligations under the Credit Agreement. The 122 Partners Note is subject to customary representations and warranties and events of default. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the Borrower may be required to repay all amounts outstanding under the 122 Partners Note. Obligations under the 122 Partners Note are secured by substantially all of the Borrower’s assets, subject to the senior rights of the lenders under the Credit Agreement. On April 30, 2020, pursuant to an amendment to the subordinated debt financing letter agreement, the Borrower and 122 Partners, LLC agreed to extend the maturity date of the 122 Partners Note to April 30, 2021. On March 22, 2021, FlexShopper, LLC executed an amendment to the 122 Partners Note such that the maturity date of the 122 Partners Note was extended to April 1, 2022. No other changes were made to such Note. As of December 30, 2021, $1,011,439 of principal and accrued and unpaid interest was outstanding on the 122 Partners Note.
The Borrower previously entered into letter agreements with NRNS Capital Holdings LLC (“NRNS”), the manager of which is the Chairman of the Company’s Board of Directors, pursuant to which the Borrower issued subordinated promissory notes to NRNS (the “NRNS Note”) in the total principal amount of $3,750,000. Payment of principal and accrued interest under the NRNS Note was due and payable by the Borrower on June 30, 2021 and FlexShopper, LLC can prepay principal and interest at any time without penalty. Amounts outstanding under the NRNS Note bear interest at a rate equal to 5.00% per annum in excess of the non-default rate of interest from time to time in effect under the Credit Agreement. Obligations under the NRNS Note are subordinated to obligations under the Credit Agreement. The NRNS Note is subject to customary representations and warranties and events of default. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the Borrower may be required to repay all amounts outstanding under the NRNS Note. Obligations under the NRNS Note is secured by substantially all of the Borrower’s assets, subject to rights of the lenders under the Credit Agreement. On March 22, 2021, FlexShopper, LLC executed an amendment to the NRNS Note such that the maturity date was extended to April 1, 2022. On February 2, 2022, FlexShopper LLC executed other amendment to the NRNS Note. This last amendment extended the maturity date from April 1, 2022 to July 1, 2024 and increased the credit commitment from $3,750,000 to $11,000,000. No other changes were made to such Note. As of December 30, 2021, $3,792,923 of principal and accrued and unpaid interest was outstanding on the NRNS Note.
The Company applied for and received a loan (the “Loan”) on May 4, 2020, from Customers Bank (the “PPP Lender”) in the principal amount of $1,914,100, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which was enacted March 27, 2020, and administered through the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”).
The Loan was evidenced by a promissory note (the “Note”), dated April 30, 2020, issued by the Borrower to the PPP Lender. The Note matured on April 30, 2022 and bore interest at the rate of 1.00% per annum, payable monthly commencing the later of on November 30, 2020 or the SBA review of the forgiveness application. The Note might be prepaid by the Borrower at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalty. Proceeds from the Loan were available to the Borrower to fund designated expenses, including certain payroll costs, group health care benefits and other permitted expenses, in accordance with the PPP. Under the terms of the PPP, up to the entire sum of the principal amount and accrued interest might be forgiven to the extent the Loan proceeds were used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and applicable implementing guidance issued by the U.S. Small Business Administration under the PPP.
On June 21, 2021 we were notified that effective April 7, 2021, the U.S. Small Business Administration confirmed the waiver of FlexShopper’s repayment of a $1,914,000 Paycheck Protection Program promissory note issued to the Company on May 4, 2020. As a result of the PPP promissory note forgiveness, the Company recognized a gain from the extinguishment of the loan, including accrued interest, of $1,931,825.
Cash Flow Summary
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $11,256,031 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily due to the purchases of leased merchandise and the change in accounts receivable, partially offset by the add back of provision for doubtful accounts and the add back of depreciation and impairment on leased merchandise.
Net cash used in operating activities was $5,207,547 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to the purchases of leased merchandise and the change in accounts receivable, partially offset by the add back of provision for doubtful accounts and the add back of depreciation and impairment on leased merchandise.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $4,949,544 comprised of $1,248,445 for the purchase of property and equipment and $3,701,099 for capitalized software costs and data costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $3,098,194 comprised of $732,582 for the purchase of property and equipment and $2,365,612 for capitalized software costs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12,758,985 for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the funds drawn on the Credit Agreement of $19,850,000, offset by repayments of amounts borrowed under the Credit Agreement of $6,575,000.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $9,978,501 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the funds drawn on the Credit Agreement of $15,033,000 and $1,914,100 of proceeds received under the Paycheck Protection Program, offset by repayments of amounts borrowed under the Credit Agreement of $7,023,250.
Capital Resources and Financial Condition
To date, funds derived from the sale of FlexShopper’s common stock, warrants, Series 1 Convertible Preferred Stock and Series 2 Convertible Preferred Stock and the Company’s ability to borrow funds against the lease portfolio have provided the liquidity and capital resources necessary to fund its operations.
Management believes that liquidity needs for future growth through at least the next 12 months can be met by cash flow from operations generated by the existing portfolio and/or additional borrowings against the Credit Agreement (see Note 6) and against the related parties promissory notes (NRNS Note, see Note 5).
Financial Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 Pandemic and the related stimulus programs had, and may continue to have, an impact on the Company. The immediate impact early in the second quarter of 2020 was a transition to a significant percentage of the Company’s employees working remotely. Fortunately, our South Florida location requires a thorough Hurricane Impact plan enabling all our employees to work remotely, if necessary. All employees, via specially configured laptops, are able to access the same data and have the same functionality as if they were in the office. Throughout the pandemic, FlexShopper rotated select groups of employees into the office in order to adjust to the other business impacts on the business. As of the end of December 2021, approximately 15% of our employees are working remotely.
The other impacts to the business can be broken into three categories. The first is the decrease in the availability of our lease financing product. Pre-COVID-19, approximately 40% of new customers were obtained through brick and mortar or B2B retailers. The pandemic-related closing and limited operations of retailers, as well as shelter in place orders, limited our new customers from this channel substantially over the second quarter and third quarter of 2020. Through the first half of the second quarter of 2021 there was diminished demand from our B2B retailers resulting from pandemic related issues. Moreover, since the crisis began, a number of our brick and mortar rollouts and pilots have been delayed or put on hold as our retailer partners attempt to return to a more stable operational environment. Fortunately, by the end of 2021, the percentage of new customers obtained from brick and mortar locations exceeded pre-pandemic levels.
The second impact was a Company reaction in the second quarter of 2020 to the uniqueness of the pandemic. Not knowing what the potential impact to consumer payment patterns would be, the Company significantly tightened approval rates. It was not until the end of the third quarter of 2020, that approval rates returned to the pre-pandemic levels. This decreased approval rate, both online and in third party stores, coupled with the retailer closures mentioned above, significantly reduced new lease originations. In 2021, the uniqueness of the pandemic had resulted in significant growth in BNPL (buy now pay later) options that were offered to our consumer segment. Despite a return to near pre-pandemic approval rates, the Company still experienced reduced demand for its product in 2021.
The third impact was on consumer behavior and payment patterns. The combination of stimulus payments and enhanced unemployment benefits measures provided by the Federal and/ or State Government throughout 2020 and early 2021 were especially impactful to our typical customer. As a result of enhanced income, the demand for our products was reduced, the likelihood of consumers choosing early payoff options increased substantially and, on a positive note, the asset level performance of our full-term customer, relative to their expected performance, increased substantially. The first sign of the return to more normal payment patterns was a reduction in the elevated amount of early pay offs experienced by the Company which occurred in the middle of 2021.
Despite the availability of COVID-19 vaccines in 2021, the number of COVID-19 cases had increased at various times throughout 2021 as the result of the appearance of new variants.
As of the end of 2021, the reduced demand was evident in our digital marketing channels through the conversion rate of new applicants. However, the enhanced payment performance, versus our expected performance, began to wane which would seem to be a potential initial indicator of a return to the Pre-COVID-19 environment.
Finally, throughout the pandemic, the Company has been able to grow the overall size of the lease portfolio, net of early payoffs, despite the items mentioned previously. At no point, have there been liquidity concerns or covenant complications. In fact, our credit facility was upsized, our product breadth increased and our covenants reduced in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.