Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Motive Capital Corp” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Motive Capital Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on September 28, 2020 under the name of MCF2 Acquisition Corp. On November 5, 2020 our name was changed to Motive Capital Corp. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). We are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination. We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 10, 2020. On December 15, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 41,400,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”) which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 5,400,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $414,000,000.Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-third of one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”). Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,386,667 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to Motive Capital Funds Sponsor, LLC (our “Sponsor”), generating gross proceeds of $11,080,000. Transaction costs amounted to approximately $23,700,000, consisting of approximately $8,300,000 of underwriting fees, $14,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees and approximately $880,000 of other offering costs.
In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, we entered into a forward purchase agreement with fund vehicles managed by an affiliate of Motive Partners (collectively the “Motive Fund Vehicles”), pursuant to which the Motive Fund Vehicles committed that they intend to purchase from us 14,000,000 forward purchase units, with each forward purchase unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share, or a forward purchase share, and one-third of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share, or a forward purchase warrant, for $10.00 per unit, or an aggregate amount of $140,000,000, in a private placement that will close concurrently with the closing of our initial Business Combination (the “Forward Purchase Agreement”). The proceeds from the sale of these forward purchase units, together with the amounts available to us from the Trust Account (after giving effect to any redemptions of public shares) and any other equity or debt financing obtained by us in connection with the Business Combination, will be used to satisfy the cash requirements of the Business Combination, including funding the purchase price and paying expenses and retaining specified amounts to be used by the post-business combination company for working capital or other purposes. The Motive Fund Vehicles may purchase less than 14,000,000 forward purchase units in accordance with the terms of the Forward Purchase Agreement. In addition, the Motive Fund Vehicles commitment under the Forward Purchase Agreement will be subject to approval, prior to our entering into a definitive agreement for our initial business combination, of their investment committees and sufficiency of capital to purchase. The forward purchase shares will be identical to the Class A ordinary shares included in the units being sold in this offering, except that they will be subject to transfer restrictions and registration rights, as described herein. The forward purchase warrants will have the same terms as the Public Warrants.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on December 15, 2020, an amount of $414,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earliest of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to our shareholders, as described below.
We will have until December 15, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we have not completed a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned and not previously released to us to pay our taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the rights of the Public Shareholders as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining Public Shareholders and our Board of Directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
On September 13, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Merger Agreement”), by and among us, FGI Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and our direct wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), and Forge Global, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Forge”). The Merger Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions: (i) we will change its jurisdiction of incorporation by transferring by way of continuation from the Cayman Islands and domesticating as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”), and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) each of our outstanding Class A ordinary share will convert automatically into one share of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Domesticated Company Common Stock”), (B) each of our outstanding Class B ordinary shares will convert automatically into one share of Domesticated Company Common Stock, (C) each outstanding warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 that was included in the Units sold as part of our initial public offering (a “Public Warrant”) will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a warrant to acquire one share of Domesticated Company Common Stock (“Domesticated Company Public Warrant”), (D) each outstanding Private Placement Warrant issued to our Sponsor will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a warrant to acquire one share of Domesticated Company Common Stock and (E) each outstanding of our Units, to the extent not already split by the holder thereof, convert automatically, into one share of Domesticated Company Common Stock and one-third of one Domesticated Company Public Warrant; and (ii) immediately following the Domestication, Merger Sub will merge with and into Forge, with Forge surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”).
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, in consideration of the Merger, each outstanding share of Forge’s capital stock (excluding shares owned by the Company or by Forge as treasury stock or dissenting shares) (i) if vested, will be canceled and converted into the right to receive either cash or Domesticated Company Common Stock, or a combination thereof, equal to the Per-Share Merger Consideration, which mix of cash and stock shall correspond to that elected by each of holder of Forge vested shares; provided, that in no event shall a holder of Forge vested shares be permitted to elect greater than fifteen percent (15%) cash and in no event will the aggregate amount of cash payable to all holders of vested Forge shares exceed $100 million and (ii) if unvested, will be canceled and converted into the right to receive a number of shares of unvested Domesticated Company Common Stock (subject to the same terms and conditions, including with respect to vesting, as the unvested share of Forge’s capital stock) equal to (A) the Securities Merger Consideration multiplied by (B) the Exchange Ratio. The total consideration paid to holders of Forge’s outstanding equity securities will include shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock and options and warrants to acquire shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock, having an aggregate value equal to $1.5 billion, less the amount of any cash consideration payable to holders of vested Forge shares, consisting of (assuming the maximum amount of cash consideration) an aggregate of 140 million newly issued shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock and options and warrants to acquire shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock, in each case, with a deemed value of $10.00 per share solely for purposes of determining the aggregate number of shares payable to holders of Forge capital stock. As a result, at the closing of the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement (the “Closing”), (i) each outstanding option to purchase Forge capital stock, whether vested or unvested, will be assumed and converted into an option with respect to a number of shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock in the manner set forth in the Merger Agreement and (ii) each outstanding warrant to purchase Forge capital stock, whether or not exercisable, will be assumed and converted into a warrant with respect to a number of shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock in the manner set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into that certain Sponsor Support Agreement (the “Sponsor Agreement”) with Forge, our Sponsor and other holders of Company’s Class B ordinary shares pursuant to which our Sponsor and such holders of Class B ordinary shares have agreed to (i) vote all Class A ordinary shares they own in favor of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (ii) waive certain anti-dilution rights with respect to their Class B ordinary shares, and (iii)
agree to certain lock-up provisions. Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into that certain Stockholder Support Agreement (the “Stockholder Support Agreement”) with Forge and certain Forge shareholders (the “Supporting Shareholders”) pursuant to which the Supporting Shareholders agreed to vote in favor of the Merger and the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we amended and restated that certain Forward Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 24, 2020, by and between the Company, the Sponsor and certain affiliates of the Sponsor (the “Purchasers”; and such agreement the “A&R Forward Purchase Agreement”). Pursuant to the A&R Forward Purchase Agreement, subject to the fulfillment of certain conditions, the Purchasers will collectively purchase concurrently with the Closing, at a per-unit price of $10.00, 5,000,000 Forward Purchase Units, each composed of one share of Domesticated Company Common Stock and one-third of one Domesticated Company Public Warrant (a “Forward Purchase Unit”), and up to an additional 9,000,000 Forward Purchase Units to the extent of redemptions on a dollar-for-dollar basis by our shareholders of all or a portion of their Class A ordinary shares. For the avoidance of doubt, regardless of the extent of such redemptions, the Purchasers will in no event be required to purchase more than an aggregate amount of 14,000,000 Forward Purchase Units.
The Merger Agreement contemplates that, at the Closing, the Company, our Sponsor, and certain Company and Forge stockholders will enter into a registration rights agreement pursuant to which, among other things, we will agree to undertake certain customary registration obligations in accordance with the Securities Act and certain subsequent related transactions and obligations. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, we will agree that, within 30 calendar days after the Closing, we will file with the SEC a registration statement registering the resale of certain securities held by or issuable to the stockholders party thereto, and use its reasonable best efforts to have such registration statement declared effective by the SEC as soon as practicable thereafter.
Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (each, a “Subscription Agreement”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”) pursuant to which, among other things, the PIPE Investors have agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and we have agreed to issue and sell to the PIPE Investors an aggregate of 6.85 million shares of Domesticated Company Common Stock, at a per share price of $10.00 for an aggregate purchase price of $68,500,000, concurrent with the Closing, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth therein (the “PIPE Financing”). The Subscription Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the Company, on the one hand, and each PIPE Investor, on the other hand, and customary conditions to closing, including the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement. Each Subscription Agreement provides that we will grant the PIPE Investors certain customary registration rights.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the Initial Public Offering and, since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, a search for a business combination candidate and activities in connection with the proposed Merger. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $9.4 million, which consisted of a non-operating gain of approximately $16.1 million resulting from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities, and approximately $91,000 of gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest on investments held in Trust Account, partially offset by an approximate $6.8 million in general and administrative expenses.
For the period from September 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $11.8 million, which consisted of approximately $10.7 million loss from change in fair value of derivative liabilities, approximately $1.1 million transaction costs on derivative liabilities, and approximately $35,000 in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by approximately $21,000 in gains on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $255,000 in our operating bank accounts, a working capital deficit of approximately $4.9 million and approximately $91,000 of interest income available in the Trust Account to pay for our tax obligations, if any.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we will repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us.
Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” we have until December 15, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after December 15, 2022. However, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Based on the foregoing, including the ability of the Company to draw upon the Working Capital Loans, Management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the consummation of the Business Combination, which the Company intends to complete by December 15, 2022.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 2, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of our offering and formation costs in consideration for 11,500,000 Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”). On November 24, 2020, our Sponsor surrendered 2,875,000 Founder Shares, which we canceled. On November 24 and December 8, 2020, our Sponsor transferred 30,000 founder shares to each of the independent directors. On December 10, 2020, we issued a dividend of 1,725,000 Class B ordinary shares, resulting in 10,350,000 Founder Shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share cancellation.
The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 1,350,000 shares that are subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriters’ over-allotment option is exercised, so that the number of Founder Shares will equal, on an as-converted basis, approximately 20% of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares after the Proposed Public Offering. As a result of the underwriters’ election to fully exercise their over-allotment option, 1,350,000 Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
Our Sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earliest of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination and (B) subsequent to a Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, rights issuances, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Units
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 7,386,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, for an aggregate purchase price of $11,080,000, in a private placement. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants were added to the proceeds from the Initial Public
Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Promissory Note - Related Party
On October 1, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) to our Sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000. The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) December 31, 2020 and (ii) the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed an aggregate of approximately $130,000 under the Promissory Note. The Promissory Note matured on the closing date of the Initial Public Offering and the outstanding balance under the Promissory Note of $130,492 was repaid in full on December 16, 2020. Subsequent to the repayment, the facility was no longer available to us.
Administrative Support Agreement
We entered into an agreement, commencing on December 15, 2020 the effective date of the Initial Public Offering through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, to pay our Sponsor or its affiliate a monthly fee of up to $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative services. Our Sponsor has waived such fees and such fees will not be payable until the Sponsor determines that such fees should be paid.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration and Shareholders’ Rights
Pursuant to a registration and shareholders rights agreement entered into on December 10, 2020, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of our securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 5,400,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less underwriting discounts and commissions. The over-allotment option was fully exercised upon closing the Initial Public Offering.
The underwriters were entitled to underwriting discounts of $0.35 per unit, or $14,490,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward Purchase Agreement
Concurrent with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company entered into the A&R Forward Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the A&R Forward Purchase Agreement, subject to the fulfillment of certain conditions, the Purchasers will collectively purchase concurrently with the Closing, at a per-unit price of $10.00, 5,000,000 Forward Purchase Units, and up to an additional 9,000,000 Forward Purchase Units to the extent of redemptions on a dollar-for-dollar basis by Company shareholders of all or a portion of their Class A ordinary shares. For the avoidance of doubt, regardless of the extent of such redemptions, the Purchasers will in no event be required to purchase more than an aggregate amount of 14,000,000 Forward Purchase Units.
The forward purchase shares included in the Forward Purchase Units will be identical to the Class A ordinary share included in the Units being sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that they will be subject to transfer restrictions and registration rights. The forward purchase warrants included in the Forward Purchase Units will have the same terms as the public warrants.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary Deficit. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ deficit. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events, Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, 41,400,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity.
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares: Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 21,186,667, of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from September 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The remeasurement of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 13,800,000 Private Warrants, 7,386,667 Private Placement Warrants and a Forward Purchase Agreement to purchase up to 14,000,000 of forward purchase units. All of our outstanding warrants and the Forward Purchase Agreement are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering were estimated using a binomial lattice model in a risk-neutral framework. The fair value of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on the value of the Public Warrants given the low likelihood of the Company’s ordinary share price exceeding $18.00 by the start of the exercise period. The fair value of the forward purchase agreement is based on the fair value of the Company’s publicly traded Units on each valuation date, less the present value of the contractually stipulated forward price of $10.00. The determination of the fair value of derivative liabilities may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.