ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of financial condition and results of operations ("MD&A") is written to help the reader understand our company. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Any reference to restaurants refers to company-owned restaurants unless otherwise indicated.
We use a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to December 31. The fiscal years ended January 2, 2022 and December 29, 2019 each contained 52 weeks. The fiscal year ended January 3, 2021 contained 53 weeks. The next fiscal year to contain 53 weeks will be the fiscal year ending January 3, 2027.
Company Overview
We own, operate and franchise the restaurant brand Pollo Tropical®, which has over 30 years of operating history and a loyal customer base. Our Pollo Tropical restaurants feature fire-grilled and crispy citrus marinated chicken and other freshly prepared menu items. We believe the brand offers a distinct and unique flavor with broad appeal at a compelling value, which differentiates it in the competitive fast-casual and quick-service restaurant segments. All but one of our restaurants offer the convenience of drive-thru windows. As of January 2, 2022, we had 138 Company-owned Pollo Tropical restaurants, all of which are located in Florida.
We franchise our Pollo Tropical restaurants primarily in international markets, and as of January 2, 2022, we had 24 franchised Pollo Tropical restaurants located in Puerto Rico, Panama, Guyana, Ecuador, the Bahamas and the U.S Virgin Islands, five on college campuses in Florida and locations at a hospital and a sports and entertainment stadium in Florida. We have agreements for the continued development of franchised Pollo Tropical restaurants in certain of our existing franchised markets.
Events Affecting Our Results of Operations
Sale of Taco Cabana
On July 1, 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement for the sale of all outstanding capital stock of Taco Cabana, Inc., the parent company of the Taco Cabana business, for a cash purchase price of $85.0 million, subject to reduction for (i) closing adjustments of approximately $4.6 million related to maintenance and repair work at the Taco Cabana restaurants and landscaping replacement as a result of Winter Storm Uri, and (ii) certain other working capital adjustments as set forth in the stock purchase agreement (the "Taco Cabana Divestiture"). The transaction was completed August 16, 2021, and the Company recognized a gain on the sale of Taco Cabana of $25.0 million during the year ended January 2, 2022, which is included within income from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the consolidated statements of operations. Additionally, we filed an insurance claim for winter storm damages in Texas that occurred in the first quarter of 2021 and retained the right to receive the insurance claim proceeds. We recognized $0.9 million of insurance proceeds within income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the fourth quarter of 2021 based on a partial settlement reached with certain insurers. We expect to recognize additional proceeds when the claim is ultimately resolved. See Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Proceeds from the sale were used to fully repay Fiesta's approximately $74.6 million of outstanding term loan borrowings under our new senior credit facility and to pay divestiture transaction fees and a loan prepayment premium totaling approximately $4.2 million, comprised of a loan prepayment fee of 3.0% of the principal repaid of $2.2 million and divestiture transaction fees of approximately $2.0 million.
All revenues, costs and expenses and income taxes attributable to Taco Cabana, together with the gain on the sale of Taco Cabana and certain costs related to the transaction, have been aggregated within income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the consolidated statements of operations for all periods presented. No amounts for shared general and administrative operating support expense were allocated to discontinued operations. Interest expenses, the amortization of premiums and debt issuance costs of our new and former senior credit facilities and the loss on extinguishment of debt under our new and former senior credit facilities are included within income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax. The results from discontinued operations are presented separately from the results from continuing operations within MD&A. Unless otherwise noted, amounts and disclosures throughout the MD&A relate to the Company's continuing operations.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has affected and is continuing to affect the restaurant industry and the economy. In response to COVID-19 and in compliance with governmental restrictions, we closed the dining room seating areas in all restaurants, limiting service to take-out, drive-thru, and delivery operations beginning in mid-March 2020. We re-opened certain dining rooms with limited capacity and hours during certain times in the second half of 2020. In 2021, we re-opened substantially all remaining dining rooms with limited hours by the end of February.
Based on current conditions, we do not expect sales trends to significantly deteriorate further as a direct result of COVID-19. However, labor shortages may negatively impact sales trends and there can be no assurance that sales trends will not deteriorate further. We have implemented measures to control costs to mitigate any negative impact from the COVID-19 pandemic and labor shortages.
Labor Challenges
Hours of operations were limited in 2021 due to labor shortages which are affecting our brand and the restaurant industry. We estimate that operating hours were reduced by approximately 2.8% as a result of labor shortages in the second half of 2021. Additionally, in 2021 we experienced increased overtime due to training and staffing shortages. In response to these labor shortages and competition for labor, we implemented special incentive pay for our hourly restaurant employees from May 2021 through August 2021, provided sign-on and referral bonuses, and made permanent increases to hourly wage rates in late August 2021. We implemented a phased approach to price increases aimed at mitigating these additional labor costs with a 3.7% increase in late August 2021 and a 5.2% increase in mid-December 2021. As a result of this phased approach to price increases, Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA margin improvement, which is trailing the wage rate increases, is expected to result in improved Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA margins in future quarters compared to 2021. In addition, we believe that approximately $1.7 million of the labor cost increases in the second half of 2021 for overtime and staffing-related incentives are short term in nature. We have intensified our focus on accelerating labor optimization efforts to improve staffing efficiency, which we believe will increase both staff availability and margins.
Executive Summary-Consolidated Operating Performance for the Year Ended January 2, 2022
Our fiscal year 2021 results include the following:
•We recognized net income of $10.4 million, or $0.40 per diluted share, in 2021 compared to a net loss of $(10.2) million, or $(0.40) per diluted share in 2020, due primarily to the impact of income from discontinued operations of $18.5 million in 2021 compared to a loss from discontinued operations of $(6.8) million in 2020 due primarily to the gain on the sale of Taco Cabana in 2021. Higher Pollo Tropical labor costs, advertising costs, general and administrative expenses, repair and maintenance costs and delivery fees in 2021 were partially offset by increased comparable restaurant sales at Pollo Tropical. The impact of income from discontinued operations was also partially offset by an increase in unallocated general and administrative costs and the impact of the extra week in 2020.
•We recognized a loss from continuing operations of $(8.1) million, or $(0.31) per diluted share, in 2021 compared to a loss from continuing operations of $(3.4) million, or $(0.13) per diluted share, in 2020 primarily as a result of the foregoing.
•Total revenues increased 13.3% in 2021 to $357.3 million from $315.4 million in 2020, driven primarily by an increase in comparable restaurant sales at Pollo Tropical due in part to lapping the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Comparable restaurant sales increased 16.0% for our Pollo Tropical restaurants resulting from an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 11.8% and an increase in comparable restaurant transactions of 4.2%.
•Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA decreased $1.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2022 to $25.0 million compared to $26.0 million for the year ended January 3, 2021, driven primarily by higher labor costs, advertising costs, general and administrative expenses, repair and maintenance costs and delivery fees, as well as the impact of the extra week in 2020, partially offset by higher restaurant sales. Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. For a discussion of our use of Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, see "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
•Within discontinued operations, the impact of the gain on the sale of Taco Cabana, the impact of classifying Taco Cabana as held for sale-including the absence of depreciation and amortization related to property and equipment and lease ROU assets-in the third quarter of 2021, and higher Taco Cabana restaurant sales were partially offset by a loss on extinguishment of the outstanding term loan borrowings under our senior credit facility, higher interest costs and additional costs related to the sale of Taco Cabana.
Results of Operations
Unless otherwise noted, this discussion of operating results relates to our continuing operations.
The following table summarizes the changes in the number and mix of Pollo Tropical Company-owned and franchised restaurants in each fiscal year:
The following table sets forth, for the years ended January 2, 2022, January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019, selected consolidated operating results as a percentage of restaurant sales:
Revenues. Revenues include restaurant sales and franchise royalty revenues and fees. Restaurant sales consist of food and beverage sales, net of discounts, at our restaurants. Franchise royalty revenues and fees represent ongoing royalty payments that are determined based on a percentage of franchisee sales and the amortization of initial franchise fees and area development fees associated with the opening of new franchised restaurants. Restaurant sales are influenced by new restaurant openings, closures of restaurants and changes in comparable restaurant sales.
Total revenues increased 13.3% to $357.3 million in 2021 from $315.4 million in 2020, while the 2020 total revenues represent a decrease of 13.2% from $363.5 million in 2019. Restaurant sales increased 13.2% to $355.5 million in 2021 from $314.1 million in 2020, while 2020 restaurant sales represent a decrease of 13.2% from $361.7 million in 2019.
The following table presents the primary drivers of the increase or decrease in restaurant sales for Pollo Tropical (in millions):
Restaurants are included in comparable restaurant sales after they have been open for 18 months. Restaurants are excluded from comparable restaurant sales for any fiscal month in which the restaurant was closed for more than five days. Comparable restaurant sales are compared to the same period in the prior year. For comparative purposes, the calculation of the changes in comparable restaurant sales is based on a 52-week fiscal year. Restaurant sales for the extra week in the fiscal year ended January 3, 2021 have been excluded for purposes of calculating the change in comparable company-owned restaurant sales. Comparable restaurant sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by governmental restrictions, closed dining rooms, reductions in operating hours and reduced staffing as a result of COVID-19. We believe our significant mix of dine-in sales prior to the pandemic had a negative impact on comparable restaurant sales.
Comparable restaurant sales increased 16.0% for Pollo Tropical restaurants in 2021. Increases or decreases in comparable restaurant sales result primarily from an increase or decrease in comparable restaurant transactions and in average check. Changes in average check are primarily driven by changes in sales channel and sales mix, and to a lesser extent, menu price increases net of discounts and promotions.
An increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 11.8% was coupled with an increase in comparable restaurant transactions of 4.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in product/channel mix and pricing was driven primarily by increases in delivery and drive-thru average check and sales channel penetration, and menu price increases of 4.6%. Comparable restaurant sales in 2021 decreased 1.1% compared to 2019. We believe restaurant sales were negatively impacted by staffing challenges and reduced operating hours and sales channels due to labor shortages in 2021. Comparable restaurant sales in adequately staffed markets increased 18.7% in 2021 compared to 2020. Hurricane Dorian negatively impacted comparable restaurant sales in 2019.
Comparable restaurant sales decreased 14.7% for Pollo Tropical in 2020. A decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 22.1% was partially offset by an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 7.4% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in product/channel mix and pricing was driven primarily by increases in delivery and drive-thru average check and sales channel penetration, and menu price increases of 0.4%.
Franchise revenues increased $0.5 million to $1.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher sales at franchised restaurants in 2021 primarily as a result of the impact of COVID-19 in 2020. Franchise revenues decreased $0.5 million to $1.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower sales at franchised restaurants as a result of the impact of COVID-19 in 2020.
Operating costs and expenses. Operating costs and expenses include cost of sales, restaurant wages and related expenses, other restaurant expenses and advertising expenses. Cost of sales consists of food, paper and beverage costs including packaging costs, less rebates and purchase discounts. Cost of sales is generally influenced by changes in commodity costs, the sales mix of items sold and the effectiveness of our restaurant-level controls to manage food and paper costs. Key commodities, including chicken, are generally purchased under contracts for future periods of up to one year. While we have not experienced significant disruptions in our supply chain or food costs during 2021, costs for certain commodities are expected to increase in 2022.
Restaurant wages and related expenses include all restaurant management and hourly productive labor costs, employer payroll taxes, restaurant-level bonuses and related benefits. Payroll and related taxes and benefits are subject to inflation, including from factors such as labor supply and changing market conditions, as well as minimum wage increases and changes in costs for health insurance, workers' compensation insurance and state unemployment insurance.
Other restaurant operating expenses include all other restaurant-level operating costs, the major components of which are utilities, repairs and maintenance, general liability insurance, sanitation, supplies and credit card and delivery fees.
Advertising expense includes all promotional expenses including television, radio, billboards and other sponsorships and promotional activities and agency fees.
Pre-opening costs include costs incurred prior to opening a restaurant, including restaurant employee wages and related expenses, travel expenditures, recruiting, training, promotional costs associated with the restaurant opening and rent, including any non-cash rent expense recognized during the construction period. Pre-opening costs are generally incurred beginning four to six months prior to a restaurant opening.
The following table presents the primary drivers of the changes in the components of restaurant operating margins for Pollo Tropical. All percentages are stated as a percentage of restaurant sales.
(1) Other consists of any other driver with an impact of less than 20 basis points.
(2) Higher wage rates and overtime pay due in part to labor shortages in 2021. Lower labor costs in 2020 compared to 2019 resulted from labor efficiencies in 2020.
(3) Change in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily includes the impact of COVID-19 related special incentive pay and quarantine pay, which is partially offset (0.1%) by lower incentive bonus resulting from the special incentive pay.
(4) Primarily due to guaranteed bonus payments due to staffing challenges. Guaranteed bonus payments, which were lower in 2020, are included in other labor costs in 2020.
Restaurant Rent Expense. Restaurant rent expense includes base rent, contingent rent and common area maintenance and property taxes related to our leases characterized as operating leases. Restaurant rent expense, as a percentage of total restaurant sales, decreased to 6.6% in 2021 from 7.2% in 2020, due primarily to the impact of higher comparable restaurant sales which were partially offset by higher rental costs related to sale-leasebacks and lease renewals. Restaurant rent expense, as a percentage of total restaurant sales, was 7.2% in 2020 compared to 6.1% in 2019, due primarily to the impact of lower comparable restaurant sales.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses are comprised primarily of (1) salaries and expenses associated with the development and support of our Company and brand and the management oversight of the operation of our restaurants; and (2) legal, auditing and other professional fees, corporate system costs, and stock-based compensation expense.
General and administrative expenses increased to $45.5 million in 2021 from $39.8 million in 2020, and as a percentage of total revenues, were 12.7% in 2021 and 12.6% in 2020 due primarily to higher digital and brand repositioning costs, higher continuing mobile app development and maintenance costs and higher incentive and other support center costs including additional costs related to the sale of Taco Cabana, partially offset by higher total revenues. General and administrative expenses include corporate overhead costs allocated to Taco Cabana that are not included in discontinued operations. General and administrative expenses in 2021 also included $3.3 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs. General and administrative expense in 2020 included $0.7 million related to severance costs associated with positions eliminated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, $0.4 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs, and $0.1 million related to search fees for senior executive positions.
General and administrative expenses decreased to $39.8 million in 2020 from $41.9 million in 2019, and as a percentage of total revenues, were 12.6% in 2020 and 11.5% in 2019 due primarily to the impact of lower total revenues partially offset by lower management support costs primarily as a result of headcount reductions in the second quarter of 2020, reduced travel and other cost savings initiatives. General and administrative expense in 2019 included $0.9 million related to restructuring costs due to eliminated or relocated positions, $0.2 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs and $0.5 million related to search fees for senior executive positions.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary measure of segment profit or loss used by our chief operating decision maker for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance and is defined as earnings before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment and other lease charges, goodwill impairment, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, stock-based compensation expense, other expense (income), net, and certain significant items that management believes are related to strategic changes and/or are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants.
Adjusted EBITDA may not necessarily be comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to differences in methods of calculation. Adjusted EBITDA includes an allocation of certain general and administrative expenses associated with administrative support for executive management, information systems and certain finance, legal, supply chain, human resources, development, and other administrative functions. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. For a discussion of our use of Adjusted EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, see the heading titled "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical restaurants increased to $36.8 million, or 10.3% of total revenues, in 2021 from $36.5 million, or 11.6% of total revenues, in 2020 due primarily to the impact of higher restaurant sales and improved cost of sales margins, partially offset by higher labor costs, delivery fees, repair and maintenance costs, advertising and general and administrative costs, and the impact of the extra week in 2020. Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, decreased to $25.0 million in 2021 from $26.0 million in 2020. For a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, see the heading titled "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical restaurants decreased to $36.5 million, or 11.6% of total revenues, in 2020 from $50.6 million (which includes the estimated negative impact of Hurricane Dorian of $0.6 million), or 13.9% of total revenues, in 2019 due primarily to the impact of lower restaurant sales, including the impact of COVID-19, higher delivery fee expense, and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by lower advertising expense, labor costs as a percentage of restaurant sales due to labor efficiencies, certain other operating expenses, and general and administrative expenses. In addition, we estimate the additional week of sales in our fiscal 2020 had a $1.7 million favorable impact on Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical in 2020.
Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA. We also use Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance and profitability of our restaurants in the aggregate, which is defined as Adjusted EBITDA excluding franchise royalty revenues and fees, pre-opening costs and general and administrative expenses (including corporate-level general and administrative expenses).
Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical was $63.1 million (17.7% of restaurant sales), $61.3 million (19.5% of restaurant sales) and $77.6 million (which includes the estimated negative impact of Hurricane Dorian of $0.6 million) (21.4% of restaurant sales) in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The changes in Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA were primarily due to the foregoing. In addition, we estimate the additional week of sales in our fiscal 2020 had a $2.0 million favorable impact on Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical in 2020 compared to 2019 and an unfavorable impact in 2021 compared to 2020. For a reconciliation from Adjusted EBITDA to Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, see the heading titled "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $20.6 million in 2021 from $22.0 million in 2020 due primarily to decreased depreciation as a result of entering into sale-leaseback transactions for several owned restaurant locations and impairing closed restaurant assets, partially offset by an increase in depreciation related to ongoing reinvestment and enhancements to our restaurants. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $22.0 million in 2020 from $22.2 million in 2019 due primarily to decreased depreciation as a result of impairing closed restaurant assets, partially offset by an increase in depreciation related to new restaurant openings and ongoing reinvestment and enhancements to our restaurants.
Impairment and Other Lease Charges. Impairment and other lease charges decreased to $1.5 million in 2021 from $8.0 million in 2020.
Impairment and other lease charges in 2021 include impairment charges of $2.1 million related primarily to the impairment of assets from five underperforming Pollo Tropical restaurants and impairment of equipment from previously closed restaurants, partially offset by net gains from lease terminations of $(0.6) million.
Impairment and other lease charges increased to $8.0 million in 2020 from less than $0.1 million in 2019. Impairment and other lease charges in 2020 include impairment charges of $7.3 million related primarily to the impairment of assets from three underperforming Pollo Tropical restaurants, two of which we closed in the third quarter of 2020, the write-down of saucing islands and self-service soda machines that are being removed from dining rooms as a result of COVID-19 and the write-down of assets held for sale to their fair value less costs to sell, and lease termination charges of $0.9 million for restaurant locations we decided not to develop, net of a gain from lease terminations of $(0.2) million.
Impairment and other lease charges in 2019 consisted of impairment charges of $0.8 million and net lease charge recoveries of $(0.8) million. Impairment charges in 2019 also included right-of-use assets and were related primarily to previously closed Pollo Tropical restaurants, while the net lease charge recoveries were related primarily to lease terminations for previously closed restaurants.
Each quarter we assess the potential impairment of any long-lived assets that have experienced a triggering event, including restaurants for which the related trailing twelve-month cash flows are below a certain threshold. We determine if there is impairment at the restaurant level by comparing undiscounted future cash flows from the related long-lived assets, exclusive of operating lease payments, to their respective carrying values, excluding operating lease liabilities. In determining future cash flows, significant estimates are made by us with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over its remaining lease term, including sales trends, labor rates, commodity costs and other operating cost assumptions. If assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment charge is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset group's carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process of assessing fair values requires the use of estimates and assumptions, including our ability to sell or reuse the related assets and market conditions, and for right-of-use lease assets, current market lease rent and discount rates, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets and these charges could be material. Due to the uncertainty associated with the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact it will continue to have on restaurant operations and future cash flows, it is reasonably possible that the estimates of future cash flows used in impairment assessments will change in the near term and the effect of the change could be material.
For seven Pollo Tropical restaurants with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $4.9 million, projected cash flows are not substantially in excess of their carrying values. If the performance of these restaurants does not improve as projected, an impairment charge could be recognized in future periods, and such charge could be material.
Closed Restaurant Rent Expense, Net of Sublease Income. Closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income was $3.0 million in 2021 and consisted of closed restaurant rent and ancillary lease costs of $9.1 million net of sublease income of $(6.1) million.
Closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income was $4.3 million in 2020 and consisted of closed restaurant rent and ancillary lease costs of $9.2 million net of sublease income of $(4.9) million.
Closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income was $3.3 million in 2019 and consisted of closed restaurant rent and ancillary lease costs of $6.8 million net of sublease income of $(3.4) million.
Other Expense (Income), Net. Other expense (income), net was $0.5 million in 2021 and primarily consisted of costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants. Other expense (income), net in 2020 primarily consisted of total gains of $(3.3) million on the sale-leaseback of five restaurant properties and the sale of three restaurant properties, partially offset by $0.5 million in costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants and other closed restaurant costs and $0.7 million for the write-off of site development costs. Other expense (income), net in 2019 primarily consisted of $0.7 million in costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants and $0.1 million for the write-off of site development costs.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $0.1 million to $0.4 million in 2021 from 2020. Interest expense remained flat at $0.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Interest charges related to our new senior credit facility and former amended senior credit facility are included in discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes. The effective tax rate was (15.5)% for the year ended January 2, 2022, and 67.5% for the year ended January 3, 2021. The provision for income taxes for 2021 includes changes in the valuation allowance as a result of originating temporary differences during the year and a reserve for unrecognized tax benefits.
The effective tax rate was 67.5% for 2020 and 120.3% for 2019. The benefit from income taxes for 2020 includes a benefit related to the carryback of net operating losses and reclassifying certain assets as qualified improvement property as permitted by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") and other changes to depreciation methods for certain assets made in conjunction with a cost segregation study conducted prior to filing our 2019 federal income tax return, as well as a decrease to the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets related to changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities. The provision for income taxes for 2019 included the effect of establishing a valuation allowance on our deferred income taxes.
The CARES Act, which was signed into law on March 27, 2020, includes provisions that allow net operating losses arising in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back for up to five years and includes technical amendments that are retroactive to 2018 which permit certain assets to be classified as qualified improvement property and expensed immediately.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax. All revenues, costs and expenses and income taxes attributable to Taco Cabana have been aggregated within income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the consolidated statements of operations for all periods presented. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $18.5 million in 2021 compared to a loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $(6.8) million and $(82.4) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Taco Cabana results of operations are included through August 15, 2021 for the year ended January 2, 2022 compared to a full year in 2020 due to the sale of Taco Cabana on August 16, 2021.
A gain of $25.0 million was recognized on the sale of Taco Cabana in 2021. See Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Income (Loss). As a result of the foregoing, we had net income of $10.4 million in 2021 compared to a net loss of $(10.2) million and $(84.4) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Unless otherwise noted, this discussion of liquidity and capital resources relates to our combined operations.
We do not have significant receivables or inventory and receive trade credit based upon negotiated terms in purchasing food products and other supplies. Although, as a result of our substantial cash balance, we did not have a working capital deficit at January 2, 2022, we have the ability to operate with a substantial working capital deficit (and we have historically operated with a working capital deficit) because:
•Restaurant operations are primarily conducted on a cash basis;
•Rapid turnover results in a limited investment in inventories; and
•Cash from sales is usually received before related liabilities for supplies and payroll become due.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $14.1 million, $40.3 million and $65.0 million, respectively. The $26.2 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was driven primarily by the timing of payments, including the impact of the timing of payments related to Taco Cabana and vendor and landlord payment term renegotiations in 2020, and a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA. The $24.8 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was driven primarily by a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA and the receipt of a tax refund in 2019, partially offset by the timing of payments. The impact of extended vendor payment terms in 2020 was partially offset by the payment of January 2021 rent in fiscal 2020 as a result of the 53rd week in fiscal 2020.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities in 2021 and 2020 was $59.8 million and $8.4 million, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities 2019 was $39.4 million. Capital expenditures are typically the largest component of our investing activities and include: (1) new restaurant development, which may include the purchase of real estate; (2) restaurant remodeling/reimaging, which includes the renovation or rebuilding of the interior and exterior of our existing restaurants; (3) other restaurant capital expenditures, which include capital maintenance expenditures for the ongoing reinvestment and enhancement of our restaurants; and (4) corporate and restaurant information systems.
The following table sets forth our capital expenditures from continuing operations for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
(1)Excludes restaurant repair and maintenance expenses included in other restaurant operating expenses in our consolidated financial statements. For the years ended January 2, 2022, January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019, total restaurant repair and maintenance expenses were approximately $12.5 million, $9.3 million, and $11.7 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth our capital expenditures from discontinued operations for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
(1)Excludes restaurant repair and maintenance expenses included in income (loss) from discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements. For the years ended January 2, 2022, January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019, total restaurant repair and maintenance expenses were approximately $5.5 million, $8.1 million, and $11.5 million, respectively.
Cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations in 2020 included net proceeds of $13.3 million from the sale-leaseback of five restaurant properties and $5.3 million from the sale of an additional three restaurant properties. In 2019, investing activities from continuing operations also included net proceeds of $1.8 million from the sale of one restaurant property.
Cash provided by investing activities from discontinued operations in 2021 included net proceeds of $74.9 million from the sale of Taco Cabana, $3.1 million from the sale-leaseback of two restaurant properties and $1.3 million from the sale of an additional restaurant property. Cash provided by investing activities from discontinued operations in 2020 included net proceeds of $4.0 million from the sale-leaseback of two restaurant properties and $4.3 million from the sale of an additional three restaurant properties.
Total capital expenditures in 2022 are expected to be between $25.0 million and $30.0 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 was $86.8 million and included term loan borrowing repayments under our new senior credit facility of $75.0 million, $9.4 million in payments to repurchase our common stock and a $2.2 million payment for a premium associated with extinguishment of the term loan under our new senior credit facility.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 included net revolving credit borrowing repayments under our former amended senior credit facility of $75.0 million, $3.0 million in payment of debt issuance costs associated with our former amended senior credit facility and new senior credit facility combined with $3.7 million in payments to repurchase our common stock, partially offset by proceeds of $73.5 million under our new senior credit facility.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 included $14.3 million in payments to repurchase our common stock combined with net revolving credit borrowing repayments under our former senior credit facility of $3.0 million.
New Senior Credit Facility. On November 23, 2020, we terminated our former amended senior secured revolving credit facility, referred to as the "former senior credit facility," and entered into a new senior secured credit facility, which is referred to as the "new senior credit facility." The new senior credit facility was comprised of a term loan facility (the "term loan facility") of $75.0 million and a revolving credit facility (the "revolving credit facility") of up to $10.0 million and matures on November 23, 2025. The new senior credit facility also provides for potential incremental term loan borrowing increases of up to $37.5 million in the aggregate, subject to, among other items, compliance with a minimum Total Leverage Ratio and other terms specified in the new senior credit facility. As required by the terms of the new senior credit facility, the proceeds from the sale of Taco Cabana were used to fully repay our outstanding term loan borrowings on August 16, 2021. The early repayment was subject to a 103% loan prepayment premium.
The new senior credit facility provides that we must maintain minimum Liquidity (as defined in the new senior credit facility) of $20.0 million (the "Liquidity Threshold") until January 3, 2022. The new senior credit facility also provides that we are not required to be in compliance with the Total Leverage Ratio under the new senior credit facility until the earlier of January 3, 2022, or the date in which Liquidity is less than the Liquidity Threshold. We will be permitted to exercise equity cure rights with respect to compliance with the Total Leverage Ratio subject to certain restrictions as set forth in the new senior credit facility.
Borrowings under the new senior credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum, at our option, equal to either (all terms as defined in the new senior credit facility):
1) the Base Rate plus the Applicable Margin of 6.75% with a minimum Base Rate of 2.00%, or
2) the LIBOR (or Benchmark Replacement) Rate plus the Applicable Margin of 7.75%, with a minimum LIBOR (or Benchmark Replacement) Rate of 1.00%.
In addition, the new senior credit facility requires us to pay a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum on the daily amount of the unused portion of the revolving credit facility.
The outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility are prepayable without penalty or premium (other than customary breakage costs). The outstanding borrowings under the term loan facility were voluntarily prepayable by us, and the term loan facility provided that each of the following required a mandatory prepayment of outstanding term loan borrowings by us as follows: (i) 100% of any cash Net Proceeds (as defined in the new senior credit facility) in excess of $2.0 million individually or in the aggregate over the term of the new senior credit facility in respect of any Casualty Event (as defined in the new senior credit facility) affecting collateral provided that we were permitted to reinvest such Net Proceeds in accordance with the new senior credit facility, (ii) 100% of any Net Proceeds of a Specified Equity Contribution (as defined in the new senior credit facility), (iii) 100% of any cash Net Proceeds from the issuance of debt issued by us or our subsidiaries other than Permitted Debt (as defined in the new senior credit facility), (iv) 100% of any Net Proceeds from the Disposition (as defined in the new senior credit facility) of certain assets individually, or in the aggregate, in excess of $2.0 million in any fiscal year provided that we were permitted to reinvest such Net Proceeds in accordance with the new senior credit facility and (v) beginning with the fiscal year ending January 2, 2022, an amount equal to the Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the new senior credit facility) in accordance with the new senior credit facility.
Our new senior credit facility contains customary default provisions, including without limitation, a cross default provision pursuant to which it is an event of default under this facility if there is a default under any of our indebtedness having an outstanding principal amount in excess of $5.0 million which results in the acceleration of such indebtedness prior to its stated maturity or is caused by a failure to pay principal when due.
The new senior credit facility contains certain covenants, including, without limitation, those limiting our ability to, among other things, incur indebtedness, incur liens, sell or acquire assets or businesses, change the character of our business in any material respects, engage in transactions with related parties, make certain investments, make certain restricted payments or pay dividends.
Our obligations under the new senior credit facility are secured by all of our and our subsidiaries' assets (including a pledge of all of the capital stock and equity interests of our subsidiaries).
Under the new senior credit facility, the lenders may terminate their obligation to advance and may declare the unpaid balance of borrowings, or any part thereof, immediately due and payable upon the occurrence and during the continuance of customary defaults which include, without limitation, payment default, covenant defaults, bankruptcy type defaults, defaults on other indebtedness, certain judgments or upon the occurrence of a change of control (as specified in the new senior credit facility).
As of January 2, 2022, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under our new senior credit facility. At January 2, 2022, $10.0 million was available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Former Senior Credit Facility and Former Amended Senior Credit Facility. On July 10, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment to Credit Agreement (as previously defined as the "former amended senior credit facility") among Fiesta and a syndicate of lenders that included adjustments to our covenants that were more reflective of current sales and profit trends. Pursuant to the former amended senior credit facility, the available revolving credit borrowings under the former amended senior credit facility were reduced from $150.0 million to $95.0 million in a phased reduction beginning with a $30.0 million permanent reduction that occurred on July 10, 2020. The former amended senior credit facility was terminated on November 23, 2020.
Share Repurchase Plan
In 2018, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program for up to 1.5 million shares of our common stock. In 2019, our board of directors approved increases to the share repurchase program of an additional 1.5 million shares of our common stock. Under the share repurchase program, shares may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions at prevailing market prices, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means in accordance with federal securities laws, including Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The number of shares repurchased and the timing of repurchases will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, stock price, trading volume, general market and economic conditions, and other corporate considerations. The share repurchase program has no time limit and may be modified, suspended, superseded or terminated at any time by our board of directors.
Cash Requirements
Our significant cash requirements within the next twelve months include working capital requirements, operating lease obligations and capital expenditures, as well as purchase obligations and insurance liabilities. We believe our cash reserves, cash generated from our operations, and availability of borrowings under our new senior credit facility will provide sufficient cash availability to cover our anticipated working capital needs and capital expenditures for the next twelve months. We used the net proceeds from the sale of Taco Cabana to repay all of the outstanding term loan borrowings under our new senior credit facility in the third quarter of 2021.
Our significant cash requirements under our various contractual obligations and commitments include:
• Operating Lease Obligations. See Note 8 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our operating and finance lease obligations and the amount and timing of future payments.
•Capital Expenditures. See Investing Activities subsection in this MD&A under the heading titled Liquidity and Capital Resources.
• Insurance Liabilities. Insurance liabilities include obligations associated with employee health care, workers' compensation claims and general liability claims, all of which have some inherent uncertainty as to the amount and timing of payments and were reflected on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of January 2, 2022. See Note 7 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about our insurance liabilities.
•Purchase Obligations. Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms. Our purchase obligations are primarily related to our Enterprise Resource planning systems for which an aggregate of $2.5 million is due in 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
The inflationary factors that have historically affected our results of operations include increases in food and paper costs, labor and other operating expenses and energy costs. Labor costs in our restaurants are impacted by a number of factors such as labor supply and changing market conditions, as well as changes in the federal and state hourly minimum wage rates as well as changes in payroll related taxes, including federal and state unemployment taxes. Labor supply across other industries also negatively impacts the costs of supplies, commodities, logistics, and utilities. We typically attempt to offset the effect of inflation, at least in part, through periodic menu price increases and various cost reduction programs. However, no assurance can be given that we will be able to fully offset such inflationary cost increases in the future.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1-Basis of Presentation in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management's most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. These estimates involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and are reasonably likely to have a material impact of the financial condition or results of operations.
Sales recognition at our restaurants is straightforward as customers pay for products at the time of sale and inventory turns over very quickly. Payments to vendors for products sold in the restaurants are generally settled within 60 days. The earnings reporting process is covered by our system of internal controls and generally does not require significant management estimates and judgments. However, critical accounting estimates and judgments, as noted below, are inherent in the assessment and recording of insurance liabilities, the valuation of goodwill for impairment, assessing impairment of long-lived assets, lease accounting matters and the valuation of deferred income tax assets. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions.
Insurance Liabilities. We are insured for workers' compensation, general liability and medical insurance claims under policies where we pay all claims, subject to annual stop-loss limitations both for individual claims and for general liability, medical insurance and certain workers' compensation claims in the aggregate. At January 2, 2022, we had $9.5 million accrued for these insurance claims. At January 3, 2021, we had $10.4 million accrued for these insurance claims. We record insurance liabilities based on historical and industry trends, which are continually monitored, with the assistance of actuaries, and adjust accruals as warranted by changing circumstances. Since there are estimates and assumptions inherent in recording these insurance liabilities, including the ability to estimate the future development of incurred claims based on historical trends or the severity of the claims, differences between actual future events and prior estimates and assumptions could result in adjustments to these liabilities and those adjustments could be material.
Evaluation of Goodwill. We must evaluate our recorded goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. We have elected to conduct our annual impairment review of goodwill assets as of the last day of our fiscal year. We may first qualitatively assess goodwill impairment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. This qualitative analysis is performed by examining key events and circumstances affecting fair value. If it is determined it is more likely than not that the reporting unit's fair value is not greater than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment. We adopted ASU No. 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment ("ASU 2017-04") in 2019, which eliminates the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount of the reporting unit. Instead, if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss will be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
In performing a quantitative assessment for impairment, we compare the net book value of our reporting unit to its estimated fair value. In determining the estimated fair value of the reporting unit, we employ a combination of a discounted cash flow analysis based on management's best estimates of future cash flows and one or two market-based approaches. The results of these analyses are corroborated with other value indicators where available, such as comparable company earnings multiples. This evaluation of goodwill requires us to make estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of our reporting unit including projections regarding future operating results, anticipated growth rates, the weighted average cost of capital used to discount projected cash flows, and market multiples.
We performed a qualitative assessment, which included examining key events and circumstances affecting fair value, for our annual impairment review as of January 2, 2022, and determined it was more likely than not that the Pollo Tropical reporting unit's fair value was greater than its carrying amount. As of January 2, 2022, our Pollo Tropical reporting unit goodwill has a carrying value of $56.3 million. See Note 5 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We estimate the fair value of the Pollo Tropical reporting unit significantly exceeds its carrying value as of January 2, 2022. The estimates and assumptions used to determine and assess fair value may differ from actual future events and if these estimates or related projections change significantly in the future, we may be required to record material impairment charges for goodwill assets.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We assess the potential impairment of long-lived assets, principally property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the restaurant asset group may not be recoverable. In addition to considering management's plans, known regulatory/governmental actions and damage due to acts of God (hurricanes, tornadoes, etc.), we consider an event indicating that the carrying value may not be recoverable to have occurred related to a specific restaurant if the restaurant's cash flows for the last twelve months are less than a minimum threshold or if consistent levels of cash flows for the remaining lease period are less than the carrying value of the restaurant's assets. We determine if there is impairment at the restaurant level by comparing undiscounted future cash flows from the related long-lived assets to their respective carrying values. We have elected to exclude operating lease payments and liabilities from future cash flows and carrying values, respectively, in the comparison. In determining future cash flows, significant estimates are made by us with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over its remaining lease term, including sales trends, labor rates, commodity costs and other operating cost assumptions. Our estimates of future cash flows are highly subjective judgments based on internal projections and knowledge of our operations, historical performance and current trends in sales and restaurant operating costs. If assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment charge is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process of assessing fair values requires the use of estimates and assumptions, including our ability to sell or reuse the related assets and market conditions and, for right-of-use lease assets, current market lease rent and discount rates, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these estimates or assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets and these charges could be material.
For seven Pollo Tropical restaurants with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $4.9 million, projected cash flows are not substantially in excess of their carrying values. If the performance of these restaurants does not improve as projected, an impairment charge could be recognized in future periods, and such charge could be material. See Note 6 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Lease Accounting. Judgments made by management for our lease obligations include the determination of our incremental borrowing rate, the determination of standalone selling prices used to allocate the consideration in the contract, and the length of the lease term, which includes the determination of renewal options that are reasonably assured. The lease term can affect the classification of a lease as finance or operating for accounting purposes, the amount of the lease liability and corresponding right-of-use lease asset recognized, the term over which related leasehold improvements for each restaurant are amortized and any rent holidays and/or changes in rental amounts for recognizing rent expense over the term of the lease. These judgments may produce materially different amounts of depreciation, amortization and rent expense than would be reported if different assumed lease terms were used.
We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease payments for purposes of determining lease classification and recording lease liabilities and lease assets on our consolidated balance sheet. Our incremental borrowing rate is determined based on a synthetic credit rating, determined using a valuation model, adjusted to reflect a secured credit rating and a developed spread curve, if applicable, applied to a risk-free rate yield curve. If the estimate of our incremental borrowing rate was changed, our operating lease assets and liabilities could differ materially. Changes in the determination of our incremental borrowing rate could also have an impact on the depreciation and interest expense recognized for finance leases. See Note 8 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation of Deferred Income Tax Assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities, which represent temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to the years in which those differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. A valuation allowance is established to reduce the carrying amount of deferred tax assets if we believe it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the tax benefit from these deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realization of a deferred tax asset is dependent on the generation of sufficient taxable income in future periods, and the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences in the applicable periods. In evaluating the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we perform an assessment of positive and negative evidence. The weight given to negative and positive evidence is commensurate only to the extent that such evidence can be objectively verified. Objective historical evidence is given greater weight than subjective evidence such as forecasts of future taxable income. We considered three years of cumulative operating income (loss) in evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide. Objective negative evidence limits our ability to consider other subjective evidence, such as our future earnings projections. Based on our evaluation of all available positive and negative evidence, and placing greater weight on the objective evidence, we determined that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be fully realized in future periods. We recorded a $9.3 million valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets in 2019, which increased our tax expense. Based on changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities in 2020, adjustments to our valuation allowance totaling $0.4 million were recorded in 2020 resulting in a valuation allowance of $9.7 million as of January 3, 2021. Based on changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities in 2021, adjustments to our valuation allowance totaling $0.2 million were recorded in 2021 resulting in a valuation
allowance of $9.9 million as of January 2, 2022. If we generate sufficient taxable income in the future to fully utilize the tax benefits of the deferred tax assets on which a valuation allowance was recorded, a portion or all of the valuation allowance could be reversed, which would decrease our tax expense in the period or periods in which the valuation allowance is reversed. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the positive and negative evidence considered in arriving at the above conclusion in order to assess whether such conclusion remains appropriate in future periods. Separate valuation allowances, not subject to the critical accounting estimates, for the income tax capital loss generated on the sale of Taco Cabana in 2021 and a foreign tax credit have been established as we do not expect to generate sufficient future taxable income related to those tax attributes. See Note 10 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (including Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and Continuing Operations Adjusted EBITDA) is a non-GAAP financial measure. We use Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in addition to net income and income from operations to assess our performance, and we believe it is important for investors to be able to evaluate us using the same measures used by management. We believe this measure is an important indicator of our operational strength and the performance of our business and it provides a view of operations absent non-cash activity and items that are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants or affect comparability period over period. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by us is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), earnings (loss) per share, cash flows from operating activities or other financial information determined under GAAP.
The primary measure of segment profit or loss used by the chief operating decision maker to assess performance and allocate resources is Adjusted EBITDA, which is defined as earnings before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment and other lease charges, goodwill impairment, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, stock-based compensation expense, other expense (income), net, and certain significant items that management believes are related to strategic changes and/or are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants as set forth in the reconciliation table below. Adjusted EBITDA includes an allocation of certain general and administrative expenses associated with administrative support for executive management, information systems and certain finance, legal, supply chain, human resources, construction and other administrative functions. See Note 12 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We also use Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance and profitability of our restaurants in the aggregate, which is defined as Adjusted EBITDA excluding franchise royalty revenues and fees, pre-opening costs, and general and administrative expenses (including corporate-level general and administrative expenses). Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA margin is derived by dividing Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA by restaurant sales. Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA is also a non-GAAP financial measure.
Management believes that Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with our results of operations calculated in accordance with GAAP and our reconciliation of net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA (i) provide useful information about our operating performance and period-over-period changes, (ii) provide additional information that is useful for evaluating the operating performance of our business and (iii) permit investors to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our ongoing earnings, from which capital investments are made and debt is serviced. However, such measures are not measures of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and, accordingly, should not be considered as alternatives to net income or cash flow from operating activities as indicators of operating performance or liquidity. Also, these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled captions of other companies.
All such financial measures have important limitations as analytical tools. These limitations include the following:
•Such financial information does not reflect our capital expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments to purchase capital equipment;
•Such financial information does not reflect interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service payments on our debt;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets that we currently depreciate and amortize will likely have to be replaced in the future, and such financial information does not reflect the cash required to fund such replacements; and
•Such financial information does not reflect the effect of earnings or charges resulting from matters that our management does not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operations. However, some of these charges and gains (such as impairment and other lease charges, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, other income and expense, and stock-based compensation expense) have recurred and may recur.
A reconciliation from consolidated net income (loss) to Continuing Operations Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA follows (in thousands). All amounts are from continuing operations unless otherwise indicated.
(1) Closed restaurant rent, net of sublease income, for the years ended January 2, 2022, January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019 primarily consists of closed restaurant lease costs of $9.1 million, $9.2 million and $6.8 million, respectively, partially offset by sublease income of $(6.1) million, $(4.9) million and $(3.4) million, respectively.
(2) Restructuring costs and retention bonuses for the year ended January 3, 2021, include severance costs related to eliminated positions related to terminations in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Restructuring costs and retention bonuses for the year ended December 29, 2019, include severance costs related to eliminated positions.
(3) Digital and brand repositioning costs for the years ended January 2, 2022, January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019 include consulting costs related to repositioning the brand and digital experience for our customers.
A reconciliation from Adjusted EBITDA to Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA follows (in thousands):
(1) Corporate overhead that was previously allocated to Taco Cabana is now included within "Other" because it is not a component of discontinued operations.
(2) Excludes general and administrative adjustments included in Adjusted EBITDA.