ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with respect to identifying any business combination target. We intend to complete our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of IPO and the Private Placements of the Private Placement Shares, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. We shall not undertake our initial business combination with any entity with its principal business operations in China (including Hong Kong and Macau). Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation prohibits us from undertaking our initial business combination with any entity that conducts a majority of its business or is headquartered in China (including Hong Kong and Macau).
We presently have no revenue, have had losses since inception from incurring formation and operating costs and have had no operations other than identifying and evaluating suitable acquisition transaction candidates. We have relied upon the sale of our securities and loans from the Sponsor to fund our operations.
On November 5, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 9,775,000 Units, which included 1,275,000 Units issued upon the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A Common Stock, and one-half of one Warrants, each whole Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $97,750,000.
On November 5, 2021, simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, the Company completed the Private Placement of 545,500 Private Placement Shares, including 505,500 shares to the Sponsor and 40,000 shares to the Representative, at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $5,455,000.
The proceeds of $99,705,000 ($10.20 per Public Unit) in the aggregate from the IPO and the Private Placement, were placed in the Trust Account established for the benefit of the Company’s public stockholders and the underwriters of the IPO with Wilmington Trust, National Association acting as trustee.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placements, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally towards consummating a business combination.
Recent Developments
On December 22, 2021, we announced that holders of the Company’s Units may elect to separately trade the shares of Class A Common Stock and Warrants included in its Units, commencing on or about December 27, 2021.
The Class A Common Stock shares and Warrants started to trade on the Nasdaq under the symbols “FRLA” and “FRLAW”, respectively. Units not separated will continue to trade on Nasdaq under the symbol “FRLAU.”
As of the date of this report, we have not entered into any definitive agreements, for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, entering into contractual arrangements with, or engaging in any other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We currently have until November 5, 2022 to consummate our initial business combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate our initial business combination by November 5, 2022, we may, but are not obligated to, extend the period of time twice by an additional three months each time and have until May 5, 2023 to consummate an initial business combination.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception up to date was related to the Company’s formation, the IPO and general and administrative activities. Since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of business combination candidates, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $132,164, consisting of $1,310 of interest income from investments in the Trust Account, offset by $97,513 of operating costs, consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses and $35,961 franchise tax expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the period from February 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $276,811. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the Trust Account of $99,706,310 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash is held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem the shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount on deposit in the Trust Account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Until consummation of the business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional funding that may be loaned to us by our Sponsor, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the business combination and will need to raise additional capital. In this event, our officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we consummate an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us upon consummation of the business combination, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $3,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into units of the post business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. The terms of such loans by our initial stockholders, officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our initial business combination. Following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arraignments
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We are obligated to pay the underwriters a deferred underwriters’ discount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO and the underwriters’ full exercise of the over-allotment. The deferred underwriters’ discount of $3,421,250 will become payable to the Representatives from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Investments held in Trust Account
At December 31, 2021, the assets held in the Trust Account were held in money market funds, which are invested in U.S. Treasury securities.
We classify its U.S. Treasury and equivalent securities as held-to-maturity in accordance with ASC Topic 320 “Investments - Debt and Equity Securities.” Held-to-maturity securities are those securities which we have the ability and intent to hold until maturity. Held-to-maturity treasury securities are recorded at amortized cost on the accompanying balance sheet and adjusted for the amortization or accretion of premiums or discounts.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, whether they meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of equity at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as liabilities at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A Common Stock (including Class A Common Stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A Common Stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our public shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, shares of Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value of $10.20 per share as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable Class A Common Stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of shares of redeemable Class A Common Stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital or accumulated deficit if additional paid in capital equals to zero.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC Topic 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” defines fair value, the methods used to measure fair value and the expanded disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between the buyer and the seller at the measurement date. In determining fair value, the valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, income approach and cost approach shall be used to measure fair value. ASC Topic 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy for inputs, which represent the assumptions used by the buyer and seller in pricing the asset or liability. These inputs are further defined as observable and unobservable inputs. Observable inputs are those that buyer and seller would use in pricing the asset or liability based on market data obtained from sources independent of us. Unobservable inputs reflect our assumptions about the inputs that the buyer and seller would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances.
The fair value hierarchy is categorized into three levels based on the inputs as follows:
● Level 1 - Valuations based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we have the ability to access. Valuation adjustments and block discounts are not being applied. Since valuations are based on quoted prices that are readily and regularly available in an active market, valuation of these securities does not entail a significant degree of judgment.
● Level 2 - Valuations based on (i) quoted prices in active markets for similar assets and liabilities, (ii) quoted prices in markets that are not active for identical or similar assets, (iii) inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities, or (iv) inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by market through correlation or other means.
● Level 3 - Valuations based on inputs that are unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement.
The fair value of our assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheet, primarily due to their short-term nature.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under ASC 740 Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021. We are currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position.
We have identified the United States as its only “major” tax jurisdiction.
We may be subject to potential examination by federal and state taxing authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income among various tax jurisdictions and compliance with federal and state tax laws. Our management does not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
We are incorporated in the State of Delaware and is required to pay franchise taxes to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
Net Income (Loss) per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC 260, Earnings Per Share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares, we first considered the undistributed income (loss) allocable to both the redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock and the undistributed income (loss) is calculated using the total net loss less any dividends paid. We then allocated the undistributed income (loss) ratably based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding between the redeemable and non-redeemable common stock. Any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the common stock subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the public stockholders.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.