Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” above in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
The following section generally discusses our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 7 of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021.
Overview
JFrog’s vision is to power a world of continuously updated, version-less software - we call this Liquid Software.
We provide an end-to-end, hybrid, universal DevOps Platform that powers the software supply chain, enabling organizations to continuously deliver software updates across any system. This platform is the critical bridge between software development and deployment of that software, paving the way for the modern DevOps paradigm. We enable organizations to build and release software faster and more securely while empowering developers to be more efficient. As of December 31, 2021, we had a global customer base of approximately 6,650 organizations across all industries and sizes, including approximately 85% of Fortune 100 organizations, increasing from approximately 6,050 organizations as of December 31, 2020. All of the top 10 technology organizations, 9 of the top 10 financial services organizations, 8 of the top 10 retail organizations, 8 of the top 10 healthcare organizations, and 6 of the top 7 telecommunications organizations in the Fortune 500 have adopted the JFrog platform, embarking on their journey towards Liquid Software. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our 10 largest customers represented approximately 7% of our total revenue and no single customer accounted for more than 1% of our total revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 37% of our revenue was generated from customers outside of the United States.
We have designed our subscription structure and go-to-market strategy to align our growth with the success of our customers. Our business model benefits from our ability to serve the needs of all customers, from individual software developers and IT operators to the largest organizations, in a value-oriented manner.
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions to customers. We offer subscription tiers for self-managed deployments, where our customers deploy and manage our products across their public cloud, on-premise, private cloud, or hybrid environments, as well as JFrog-managed public cloud deployments, which we refer to as our SaaS subscriptions. Revenue from SaaS subscription contributed 24% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our self-managed subscriptions are offered on an annual and multi-year basis, and our SaaS subscriptions are offered on an annual and monthly basis. Revenue from subscriptions that provide our customers with access to multiple products represented approximately 92% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 87% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from Enterprise Plus subscription represented approximately 32% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately 20% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth in revenue from our Enterprise Plus subscription, which was first launched in 2018 for self-managed deployment and during 2020 for SaaS deployment, demonstrates the increased demand for our end-to-end solutions for customers’ entire software supply chain management.
We have an unwavering commitment to the software developer and IT operator communities, and show this commitment by offering varying forms of free access to our products in addition to the paid subscriptions described above. This free access takes the form of free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software, and helps generate demand for our paid offerings within the software developer and IT operator communities.
We had $421.1 million of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021. We generated revenue of $206.7 million and $150.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing year-over-year
growth rate of 37%. Our net loss was $64.2 million and $9.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We generated operating cash flow of $27.9 million and $29.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Acquisitions
In July 2021, we acquired 100% of equity interest in Vdoo Connected Trust Ltd. (“Vdoo”), a privately-held company in Israel, which provides a product security platform for automating all software security tasks throughout the entire product lifecycle. The acquisition accelerates our security technology expansion, aiming to deliver a holistic security solution as part of our Platform. In August 2021, we completed the acquisition of Upswift Ltd. (“Upswift”), a privately-held company providing device management platform. The operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the operating results of Vdoo and Upswift from the date of acquisitions.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of certain businesses, and greater uncertainty in global financial markets. Such conditions have created disruptions in global supply chains, increased rates of unemployment, and adversely impacted many industries. While COVID-19 related restrictions eased in many locations for a period of time pursuant to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines and other governmental and local regulations, some of these restrictions have been reinstated due to the increase in COVID-19 cases caused by the Delta and Omicron variants, and pandemic-related guidance and protocols continue to fluctuate. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations remain uncertain.
We have experienced slowed growth during the COVID-19 pandemic. We may continue experiencing slowed growth for new customers and fewer orders from our existing customers for upgrades within our platform. We have experienced and expect to continue to experience longer average length of sales cycles and delays in new projects, both of which have adversely affected and could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations, and overall financial condition in future periods. The extent and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including: the duration and spread of the outbreak; government responses to the pandemic; the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines; its impact on the health and welfare of our employees and their families; its impact on our customers and our sales cycles; its impact on customer, industry, or technology-based community events; delays in onboarding new employees; and effects on our partners, some of which are uncertain, difficult to predict, and not within our control. General economic conditions and disruptions in global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other global events may also affect our future performance.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we adopted several measures, including temporarily requiring our entire workforce to work remotely and implementing travel restrictions for non-essential business. During 2021, we continued to reassess the conditions to determine whether to return our employees to offices and have adopted safety protocols when we intermittently reopened offices to the extent permitted by local government restrictions. As of December 31, 2021, we fully reopened all of our offices. The impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement are uncertain. The changes we have implemented to date have not affected and are not expected to materially affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
Extending Our Technology Leadership
We intend to continue to enhance our platform by developing new products and expanding the functionality of existing products to maintain our technology leadership. Since our initial launch of JFrog Artifactory, we have released several additional products that together create a unified DevOps platform.
We invest heavily in integrating our products with the major package technologies so that our products can be easily adopted in any development environment. We believe that these integrations increase the value of our platform to our customers, as they
provide freedom of choice for software developers and IT operators and help avoid vendor lock-in. We intend to expend additional resources in the future to continue introducing new products, features, and functionality.
Expanding Usage by Existing Customers
We believe that there is a significant opportunity for growth with many of our existing customers. Many customers purchase our products through self-service channels and often materially expand their usage over time. Increased engagement with our products provides our support and customer success teams opportunities to work directly with customers and introduce them to additional products and features, as well as drive usage of our products across large teams and more broadly across organizations. We will continue to expand our strategic team to identify new use cases and drive expansion and standardization on JFrog within our largest customers, to maintain engineering-level customer support, and to introduce new products and features that are responsive to our customers’ needs.
We quantify our expansion across existing customers through our net dollar retention rate. Our net dollar retention rate compares our annual recurring revenue (“ARR”) from the same set of customers across comparable periods. We define ARR as the annualized revenue run-rate of subscription agreements from all customers as of the last month of the quarter. The ARR includes monthly subscription customers so long as we generate revenue from these customers. We annualize our monthly subscriptions by taking the revenue we would contractually expect to receive from such customers in a given month and multiplying it by 12. We calculate net dollar retention rate by first identifying customers (the “Base Customers”), which were customers in the last month of a particular quarter (the “Base Quarter”). We then calculate the contracted ARR from these Base Customers in the last month of the same quarter of the subsequent year (the “Comparison Quarter”). This calculation captures upsells, contraction, and attrition since the Base Quarter. We then divide total Comparison Quarter ARR by total Base Quarter ARR for Base Customers. Our net dollar retention rate in a particular quarter is obtained by averaging the result from that particular quarter with the corresponding results from each of the prior three quarters. Our net dollar retention rate may fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including the level of penetration within our customer base, expansion of products and features, and our ability to retain our customers. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net dollar retention rate was 130% and 133%, respectively.
We focus on growing the number of large customers as a measure of our ability to scale with our customers and attract larger organizations to adopt our products. As of December 31, 2021, 537 of our customers had ARR of $100,000 or more, increasing from 352 customers as of December 31, 2020. We had 15 customers with ARR of at least $1.0 million as of December 31, 2021, increasing from 10 customers as of December 31, 2020.
Acquiring New Customers
We believe there is a significant opportunity to grow the number of customers that use our platform. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 31% of the Forbes Global 2000 were JFrog customers. Our results of operations and growth prospects will depend in part on our ability to attract new customers. To date, we have primarily relied on our self-service and inbound sales model to attract new customers. Prospective customers can evaluate and adopt our products through our freemium offerings, free trials, and open source software options. The costs associated with providing these freemium offerings, free trials, and open source software options are included in sales and marketing. While we believe we have a significant market opportunity that our platform addresses, we will need to continue to invest in customer support, sales and marketing, and research and development in order to address this opportunity.
Additionally, we believe our products address the software release needs of customers worldwide, and we see international expansion as a major opportunity. We have been operating and selling our products in international markets since our inception. While we believe global demand for our products will continue to increase as international market awareness of our brand grows, our ability to conduct our operations internationally will require considerable management attention and resources and is subject to the particular challenges of supporting a rapidly growing business in an environment of multiple languages, cultures, customs, legal and regulatory systems, alternative dispute systems, and commercial markets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe that free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating the performance of our business.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We believe this is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated from our core operations that, after the purchases of property and equipment, can be used for strategic initiatives, including investing in our business, making strategic acquisitions, and strengthening our balance sheet. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. Some of the limitations of free cash flow are that this metric does not reflect our future contractual commitments and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. We expect our free cash flow to fluctuate in future periods as we invest in our business to support our plans for growth.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented and provides a reconciliation of net cash from operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented:
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenues are comprised of revenue from self-managed subscriptions and SaaS subscriptions. Subscriptions to our self-managed software include license, support, and upgrades and updates on a when-and-if-available basis. Our SaaS subscriptions provide access to our latest managed version of our product hosted in a public cloud.
Subscription-Self-Managed and SaaS
Subscription-self-managed and SaaS revenue is generated from the sale of subscriptions for our self-managed software products and revenue from our SaaS subscriptions. For subscriptions to our self-managed software products, revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term. For our SaaS subscriptions, revenue is recognized based on usage as the usage occurs over the contract period.
License-Self-Managed
The license component of our self-managed subscriptions reflects the revenue recognized by providing customers with access to proprietary software features. License revenue is recognized upfront when the software license is made available to our customer.
Cost of Revenue
Subscription-Self-Managed and SaaS
Cost of subscription-self-managed and SaaS revenue primarily consists of expenses related to providing support to our customers and cloud-related costs, such as hosting and managing costs. These costs primarily consist of personnel-related expenses of our services and customer support personnel, share-based compensation expenses, amortization of acquired
intangible assets, public cloud infrastructure costs, depreciation of property and equipment, and allocated overhead. We expect our cost of subscription and SaaS revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our subscription and SaaS revenue increases.
License-Self-Managed
Cost of license self-managed revenue consists of amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development costs primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, associated with our engineering personnel responsible for the design, development, and testing of our products, cost of development environments and tools, and allocated overhead. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we increase our research and development headcount to further strengthen and enhance our products and invest in the development of our software.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, sales commissions directly associated with our sales and marketing organizations, public cloud infrastructure costs associated with our free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software options, and costs associated with marketing programs and user events. Marketing programs include advertising, promotional events, and brand-building activities. We plan to increase our investment in sales and marketing over the foreseeable future, as we continue to hire additional personnel and invest in sales and marketing programs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, associated primarily with our finance, legal, human resources and other operational and administrative functions, professional fees for external legal, accounting and other consulting services, directors and officer’s insurance expenses, and allocated overhead. We expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net primarily consists of income earned on our cash equivalents and short-term investments. Interest and other income, net also includes foreign exchange gains and losses.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) consists primarily of income taxes related to the U.S. and other foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets in Israel as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our effective tax rate is affected by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, as well as non-deductible expenses, such as share-based compensation, and changes in our valuation allowance.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenue for each of the periods indicated:
_________________________________________
(1) Includes share-based compensation expense as follows:
(2) Includes amortization expense of acquired intangible assets as follows:
(3) Includes acquisition-related costs as follows:
(4) Includes legal settlement costs as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total subscription revenue increased $55.9 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $49.7 million of the increase in revenue was attributable to the growth from existing customers, and the remaining increase in revenue was attributable to new customers.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Total cost of revenue increased $13.4 million, or 47%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $5.1 million in personnel-related expenses mainly as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $4.1 million in amortization of intangibles mainly as a result of our acquisition
of Vdoo in July 2021, and an increase of $2.9 million in share-based compensation expense as discussed in the section titled “Share-Based Compensation Expense” below.
Gross margin was 80% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 81% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects mainly higher amortization expense as discussed above.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $38.5 million, or 94%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $19.3 million in personnel-related expenses mainly as a result of increased headcount, including headcount from our acquisitions, an increase of $10.7 million in share-based compensation expense as discussed in the section titled “Share-Based Compensation Expense” below, and an increase of $4.1 million in compensation expense associated with holdback and retention arrangements as part of our acquisitions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $36.0 million, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $12.5 million in personnel-related expenses mainly as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $10.4 million in share-based compensation expense as discussed in the section titled “Share-Based Compensation Expense” below, an increase of $3.0 million in marketing program costs, and litigation settlement charge of $2.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2021.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $22.1 million, or 64%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $9.2 million in share-based compensation expense as discussed in the section titled “Share-Based Compensation Expense” below, an increase of $4.7 million in personnel-related expenses mainly as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $3.6 million in professional fees for legal, accounting, and other consulting services, and an increase of $2.7 million in officer and director insurance premiums due to the insurance policy purchased in September 2020.
Share-based Compensation Expense
Share-based compensation expenses increased $33.1 million, or 139%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable to grants to new and existing employees. As a result of the Vdoo acquisition, we recognized share-based compensation expense of $4.1 million during the second half of 2021, primarily in research and development. Approximately $3.2 million of the increase in share-based compensation expense in general and administrative increased was attributable to RSUs granted to our CEO in August 2020, which fully vested in September 2021.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net decreased $1.3 million, or 64%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower interest income on deposits and marketable investments as a result of lower interest rates during the period.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded income tax benefit of $3.4 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily a result of higher loss before income tax. Our effective tax rate was 5% and 23% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rate is affected primarily by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, as well as non-deductible expenses, such as share-based compensation, and changes in our valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and cash generated from operations. Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, investing in capital expenditures, and business and asset acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $421.1 million. Cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of cash in banks and money market funds. Short-term investments generally consist of bank deposits, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, corporate debt securities, municipal securities, and government and agency debt. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, together with cash provided by operations, will be sufficient to meet our needs for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing, and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing and research and development efforts, the continuing market acceptance of our products and services, as well as expenses associated with our international expansion, the timing, and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be materially and adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $27.9 million for year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to our net loss of $64.2 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $77.3 million, including share-based compensation expense of $56.9 million and depreciation and amortization of $8.7 million, and net cash inflow of $14.8 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities, which was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue of $43.0 million and an increase in accrued expense and other liabilities of $13.1 million, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expense and other assets of $17.7 million, an increase of accounts receivable of $12.8 million, and an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $6.2 million. The increases in deferred revenue, accounts receivable, and deferred contract acquisition costs were driven by higher sales. The increase in accrued expense and other liabilities was primarily attributable to a $8.8 million increase in compensation and benefit accruals and an accrual for litigation settlement of $2.6 million. $16.1 million of the increase in prepaid expense and other assets were due to prepayments pursuant to holdback agreements associated with our acquisitions.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to our net loss of $9.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $29.4 million and net cash inflows of $9.4 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation of $23.9 million and depreciation and amortization of $3.7 million. The main drivers of net cash inflows were derived from the changes in operating assets and liabilities and were related to an increase in deferred revenue of $20.5 million due to increases in sales, and an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $10.4 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $12.3 million due to timing of collections, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7.0 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $125.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to payments for acquisitions of $195.8 million, net of cash acquired and capital expenditure of $4.2 million, partially offset by net proceeds from sales and maturities of short-term investments of $75.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $311.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to net purchases of short-term investments of $308.3 million and capital expenditures of $3.5 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to proceeds from exercise of share options of $6.8 million and proceeds from employee share purchases under our ESPP of $3.1 million, partially offset by net payments of $8.5 million to tax authorities associated with our employee equity transactions.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $406.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net proceeds from our initial public offering in September 2020 of $393.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs, and proceeds of $9.2 million from employee equity transactions to be remitted to tax authorities.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our non-cancellable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates and assumptions may change materially in future periods. We believe our judgements and estimates associated with the determination of standalone selling price for each performance obligation in revenue recognition, accounting for business combinations, and accounting for income taxes, which we discuss further below, could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Please see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services are delivered. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for these goods or services. Our contracts may contain multiple performance obligations, each of which is separately accounted for as a distinct performance obligation. To determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation, we use observable standalone sales where available. In instances where observable standalone sales are not available, our estimate of the standalone selling price requires judgment. We consider multiple factors including market conditions, pricing strategies, the economic life of the software, and other observable inputs. We may also use the expected cost-plus margin approach to estimate the price we would charge if the products and services were sold separately. The standalone selling price is reassessed periodically or when facts and circumstances change.
Business Combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing the acquired intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from product sales, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience and information obtained from management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in Israel, the U.S., and other foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgement is required in determining the provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws. We recognize and measure benefits for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation based on the technical merits of that position. The second step is to measure a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not threshold to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. We evaluate uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis, based upon a number of factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, correspondence with tax authorities during the course of audits, and effective settlement of audit issues.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. In assessing whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized , we consider all available evidence, including projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and past operating results. In the event that we change our determination, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the section titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.