Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses year-to-year comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Discussions of comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form10-K but can be found in “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management’s discussion and analysis is presented to aid the reader in understanding and evaluating the financial condition and results of operations of Primis. This discussion and analysis should be read with the consolidated financial statements, the footnotes thereto, and the other financial data included in this report.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictive measures taken by governments, businesses and individuals have caused and continue to cause unprecedented uncertainty, volatility and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial and consumer activity in the United States and globally, including the markets that we serve. As the restrictive measures eased during the latter part of 2020 and continued to ease during 2021, the U.S. economy has begun to improve, and with the availability and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, we anticipate continued improvements in commercial and consumer activity and the U.S. economy.
While positive trends existed in 2021, we recognized that our business and consumer customers were continuing to experience varying degrees of financial distress, though to a lesser degree. Commercial activity has improved in our market area, but has not returned to the levels existing prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may result in our customers’ inability to meet their loan obligations to us. In addition, the economic pressures and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence and spread of variants, have resulted in changes in consumer spending behaviors, which may negatively impact the demand for loans and other services we offer. Labor shortages and supply chain interruptions continue to present obstacles to economic recovery and have contributed to inflationary conditions. These conditions have and are expected to continue to result in overall economic and financial market instability and affect businesses’ profitability and individuals’ purchasing power, all of which could also result in our customers’ inability to make scheduled loan payments. Our borrowing base includes customers in industries such as hotels, restaurants, retail and commercial real estate, which have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We recognize that these industries may take longer to recover as consumers may be hesitant to return to full social interaction or may change their spending habits on a more permanent basis as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor these customers closely.
We have taken deliberate actions to meet our goal of ensuring that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients and communities, including by seeking to increase our liquidity and manage our assets and liabilities in order to maintain a strong capital position; however, future economic conditions are subject to significant uncertainty. Uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic include the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and any related variants, the effectiveness and acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines, the impact to our customers, employees and vendors and the impact to the economy as a whole. COVID-19 had a significant adverse impact on our business, financial position and operating results and while uncertainty still exists, we believe we are well-positioned to operate effectively through the present economic environment.
Our branch locations are currently open and operating during normal business hours. We continue to take additional precautions within our branch locations, including enhanced cleaning procedures, to ensure the safety of our customers and our employees.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We follow accounting and reporting policies that conform, in all material respects, to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and to general practices within the financial services industry. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. While we base estimates on historical experience, current information and other factors deemed to be relevant, actual results could differ from those estimates.
We consider accounting estimates to be critical to reported financial results if (i) the accounting estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain and (ii) different estimates that management reasonably could have used for the accounting estimate in the current period, or changes in the accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, could have a material impact on our financial statements.
Accounting policies related to the allowance for credit losses on financial instruments including loans and off-balance-sheet credit exposures are considered to be critical as these policies involve considerable subjective judgment and estimation by management. As discussed in Note 1 - Organization and significant accounting policies, our policies related to allowances for credit losses changed on January 1, 2020 in connection with the adoption of a new accounting standard update as codified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 326 (“ASC 326”) Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. In the case of loans, the allowance for credit losses is a contra-asset valuation account, calculated in accordance with ASC 326, that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of loans to present the net amount expected to be collected.
In the case of off-balance-sheet credit exposures, the allowance for credit losses is a liability account, calculated in accordance with ASC 326. The allowance is reported as a component of other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Adjustments to the allowance are reported in our income statement as a component of other expenses.
The amount of each allowance account represents management's best estimate of current expected credit losses on these financial instruments considering available information, from internal and external sources, relevant to assessing exposure to credit loss over the contractual term of the instrument. Relevant available information includes historical credit loss experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. While historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses, adjustments to historical loss information may be made for differences in current portfolio-specific risk characteristics, environmental conditions or other relevant factors. While management utilizes its best judgment and information available, the ultimate adequacy of our allowance accounts is dependent upon a variety of factors beyond our control, including the performance of our portfolios, the economy, changes in interest rates and the view of the regulatory authorities toward classification of assets. See the section captioned “Allowance for Credit Losses” elsewhere in this discussion as well as Note 1 - Organization and significant accounting policies and Note 3 - Loans in the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data elsewhere in this report for further details of the risk factors considered by management in estimating the necessary level of the allowance for credit losses.
OVERVIEW
On March 31, 2021, Southern National Bancorp of Virginia, Inc. (“Southern National”) changed its name to Primis Financial Corp. (“Primis,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”) and Sonabank changed its name to Primis Bank. Primis is the bank holding company for Primis Bank (“Primis Bank” or the “Bank”), a Virginia state-chartered bank which commenced operations on April 14, 2005. Primis Bank provides a range of financial services to individuals and small and medium sized businesses.
At December 31, 2021, Primis Bank had forty full-service branches in Virginia and Maryland and provides services to customers through certain online and mobile applications. Thirty-five full-service retail branches are in Virginia (Ashland, Burgess, Callao, Central Garage, Charlottesville, Chester, Clifton Forge, Colonial Heights, Courtland, Fairfax, Front Royal, Gloucester, Gloucester Point, Hampton, Hartfield, Heathsville, Kilmarnock, Leesburg, McLean, Mechanicsville (2), Middleburg, Midlothian, New Market, Newport News, Quinton, Reston, Richmond, Surry, Tappahannock (2), Urbanna, Warrenton, Waverly, and Williamsburg) and five full-service retail branches are in Maryland (Bethesda,
Brandywine, Owings, Rockville, and Upper Marlboro). The Company has administrative offices in Warrenton and Glen Allen, Virginia.
While Primis Bank offers a wide range of commercial banking services, it focuses on making loans secured primarily by commercial real estate and other types of secured and unsecured commercial loans to small and medium-sized businesses in a number of industries, as well as loans to individuals for a variety of purposes. Primis Bank invests in real estate-related securities, including collateralized mortgage obligations and agency mortgage backed securities. Primis Bank’s principal sources of funds for loans and investing in securities are deposits and, to a lesser extent, borrowings. Primis Bank offers a broad range of deposit products, including checking (NOW), savings, money market accounts and certificates of deposit. Primis Bank actively pursues business relationships by utilizing the business contacts of its senior management, other bank officers and its directors, thereby capitalizing on its knowledge of its local market areas.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
● Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $31.2 million, or $1.28 per basic and $1.27 per diluted share, compared to $23.3 million, or $0.96 per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Total assets as of December 31, 2021 were $3.40 billion, an increase of 10.2% compared to December 31, 2020.
● Total loans, excluding Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) balances as of December 31, 2021, were $2.26 billion, an increase of $137.2 million, or 6.2%, from December 31, 2020.
● Total deposits were $2.76 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of 13.6% compared to December 31, 2020.
● Non-time deposits increased to $2.40 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $460.0 million over the past year.
● Non-interest bearing demand deposits increased to $530.3 million or 19.2% of total deposits while time deposits decreased to 13.0% of total deposits at December 31, 2021.
● Cost of deposits declined to 0.48% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 0.92% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Return on average assets from continuing operations totaled 0.93% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 0.78% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Recovery of credit losses were $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to provision for credit losses of $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Allowance for credit losses to total loans (excluding PPP balances) were 1.29% at December 31, 2021 compared to 1.71% at December 31, 2020.
● Book value per share of $16.76 at December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $0.73 from December 31, 2020 after $0.40 in dividends paid over the last twelve months.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Income
Net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $31.0 million, or $1.27 basic and $1.26 diluted earnings per share, compared to $14.9 million, or $0.61 basic and diluted earnings per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 108.4% increase in the net income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by recoveries for credit losses in 2021 compared to provision for credit losses in 2020 as loans on deferral and the economic impact of COVID-19 declined dramatically in 2021. The increase in net income was offset by a decrease in recoveries related to acquired charged-off loans and investment securities in the current year.
Net income from discontinued operation for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.23 million, or $0.01 basic and diluted earnings per share, compared to net income from discontinued operation of $8.4 million, or $0.35 basic and diluted earnings per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decline in net income from discontinued operation is
primarily driven by the pre-tax charge of approximately $2.9 million related to the closing of the STM transaction in 2021, as discussed in Note 1 - Organization and significant accounting policies.
Net Interest Income
Our operating results depend primarily on our net interest income, which is the difference between interest and dividend income on interest-earning assets such as loans and investments, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities such as deposits and borrowings.
Net interest income was $94.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $91.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Primis’ net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 3.01%, compared to 3.35% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net interest margin was impacted heavily by the origination of PPP loans. Net PPP fee income recognized was $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net interest margin excluding the effects of PPP loans was 2.79% for the year ended December 31, 2021, comparted to 3.33% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net interest margin, excluding the effects of PPP loans, continues to be negatively impacted by high cash balances at the Bank. Total income on interest-earning assets was $113.2 million and $117.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The yield on average interest-earning assets was 3.62% and 4.31% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily driven by market conditions. The cost of average interest-bearing deposits decreased 53 basis points to 0.60% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 1.13% cost on average interest-bearing deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest and fees on loans totaled $107.0 million and $111.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The accretion of the discount on loans acquired in the acquisitions contributed $2.0 million to net interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in accretion was due to slowdown in the volume of acquired loan prepayments and payoffs. Average loans during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.34 billion compared to $2.40 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table details average balances of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the amount of interest earned/paid on such assets and liabilities, and the yield/rate for the periods indicated:
(1) Includes loan fees in both interest income and the calculation of the yield on loans.
(2) Calculations include non-accruing loans in average loan amounts outstanding.
The following table summarizes changes in net interest income attributable to changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities compared to changes in interest rates. The change in interest, due to both rate and volume, has been proportionately allocated between rate and volume.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is a current charge to earnings made in order to adjust the allowance for credit losses to an appropriate level for inherent probable losses in the loan portfolio based on an evaluation of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, changes in the nature and volume of lending, historical loan experience and other known internal and external factors affecting loan collectability. Our allowance for credit losses is calculated by segmenting the loan portfolio by loan type and applying risk factors to each segment. The risk factors are determined by considering historical loss data, peer data, as well as applying management’s judgment.
In 2020, the Company elected to defer the adoption of ASC Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, under the CARES Act. At December 31, 2020, ASC Topic 326 became effective for the Company and the Company recorded a gross cumulative effect adjustment of $8.3 million as of January 1, 2020. Prior periods, including December 31, 2019 and interim periods ending September 30, 2020 and prior, were not restated to reflect the adoption of ASC Topic 326. The recovery for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.8 million, primarily as a result of an improving economic outlook. The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $19.5 million and the provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.35 million. We had charge-offs totaling $2.5 million during 2021, $2.3 million during 2020 and $3.3 million during 2019. There were recoveries totaling $1.1 million during 2021, $0.69 million during 2020 and $0.91 million during 2019.
The Financial Condition Section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides information on our loan portfolio, past due loans, nonperforming assets and the allowance for credit losses.
Noninterest Income
The following tables present the major categories of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Noninterest income decreased 24.1% to $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Noninterest income no longer includes equity in earnings (loss) related to Southern Trust Mortgage which is now included in discontinued operation. The decrease in noninterest income was driven by a $5.7 million decrease in recoveries related to acquired charged-off loans and investment securities, primarily attributable to a recovery related to a previously charged-off acquired loan of approximately $2.0 million during 2020. This decrease was partially offset by a $0.79 million increase in account maintenance and deposit service fees primarily in account service charges and non-sufficient funds fee, $0.62 million loss on sales of investments securities in the prior year and $0.57 million gain on debt extinguishment in 2021.
Noninterest Expense
The following tables present the major categories of noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Noninterest expenses were $71.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $67.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The 5.4% increase in noninterest expenses was primarily due to an increase in other operating expenses in 2021. Other operating expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020, largely driven by a $0.24 million increase in the reserve for unfunded commitments and a $0.49 million increase in marketing and advertising expenses related to general promotional activities as well as marketing related to the new V1BE service. Occupancy and furniture and equipment expenses increased $0.71 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. Professional fees increased $0.74 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due to increased consulting fees and legal expenses largely related to the STM transaction and from increased recruiter fees for management and Life Premium hires. The increase in noninterest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 was also attributable to a
$0.67 million increase in data processing expense. Virginia franchise tax expense increased $0.44 million in 2021 compared to 2020.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Balance Sheet Overview
Total assets were $3.40 billion and $3.09 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Total loans decreased 4.1%, from $2.44 billion at December 31, 2020 to $2.34 billion at December 31, 2021. Excluding PPP loans, loans outstanding increased $137.2 million, or 6.5%, since December 31, 2020. Total deposits were $2.76 billion and $2.43 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and total equity was $411.9 million and $390.6 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans
Total loans were $2.34 billion and $2.44 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. PPP loan originations totaled $77.0 million and $319.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Excluding PPP loans, loans outstanding increased $137.2 million, or 6.5%, since December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had no loans on deferral compared to $122.0 million of loans on deferral, or 5.75% of total loans excluding PPP loans, at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, substantially all of our loans were to customers located in Virginia and Maryland. We are not dependent on any single customer or group of customers whose insolvency would have a material adverse effect on operations.
The following table summarizes the composition of our loans, net of unearned income, at December 31 for the years indicated (in thousands):
The following table sets forth the contractual maturity ranges of our loan portfolio and the amount of those loans with fixed and floating interest rates in each maturity range as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Asset Quality; Past Due Loans and Nonperforming Assets
Asset quality remained solid during 2021. The outbreak of COVID-19 and resulting economic instability has had and will likely continue to have an impact on our asset quality. While COVID-19 cases are no longer at their peak and vaccinations have stemmed the outbreak, the residual effect of COVID-19 and the different variants continue to cause economic instability and uncertainty in evaluating the impact on our asset quality. We will generally place a loan on nonaccrual status when it becomes 90 days past due. Loans will also be placed on nonaccrual status in cases where we are uncertain whether the borrower can satisfy the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Cash payments received while a
loan is categorized as nonaccrual will be recorded as a reduction of principal as long as doubt exists as to future collections. We defer COVID-impacted loans to the end of the deferral date and track delinquency from the end of that new deferral date. During the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and 2021, the Company saw deferred loans return to traditional loan terms.
We maintain appraisals on loans secured by real estate, particularly those categorized as nonperforming loans and potential problem loans. In instances where appraisals reflect reduced collateral values, we make an evaluation of the borrower’s overall financial condition to determine the need, if any, for impairment or write-down to their fair values. If foreclosure occurs, we record OREO at the lower of our recorded investment in the loan or fair value less our estimated costs to sell.
Our loss and delinquency experience on our loan portfolio has been limited by a number of factors, including our underwriting standards and the relatively short period of time since the loans were originated. Whether losses and delinquencies in our portfolio will increase significantly depends upon the value of the real estate securing the loans and economic factors, such as the overall economy in our market area, including as a result of the impact of COVID-19.
The following table presents a comparison of nonperforming assets as of December 31, for the years indicated (in thousands):
Not included in the table above are $122.0 million of loans that were subject to COVID-related deferrals at December 31, 2020.
OREO at December 31, 2021 was $1.2 million, compared to $3.1 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by sale of properties and write-downs on OREO during 2021.
Nonaccrual loans were $15.0 million (excluding $1.1 million of loans fully covered by SBA guarantees) at December 31, 2021, compared to $14.5 million (excluding $3.1 million of loans fully covered by SBA guarantees) at December 31, 2020, an increase of 3.9%. The ratio of nonperforming assets (excluding the SBA guaranteed loans) to total assets was 0.44% and 0.47% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, our total substandard loans totaled $40.4 million. Included in the total substandard loans were SBA guarantees of $1.0 million. Special mention loans totaled $31.1 million at December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, there were ten TDR loans in the amount of $3.4 million. There have been no defaults of TDRs modified during the past twelve months.
We identify potential problem loans based on loan portfolio credit quality. We define our potential problem loans as our substandard loans less total nonperforming loans noted above. At December 31, 2021, our potential problem loans totaled $25.1 million.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We are very focused on the asset quality of our loan portfolio, both before and after a loan is made. We have established underwriting standards that we believe are effective in maintaining high credit quality in our loan portfolio. We have experienced loan officers who take personal responsibility for the loans they originate, a skilled underwriting team and highly qualified credit officers that review each loan application carefully. We have designed a credit matrix, which requires dual authority to approve any credit over $2.5 million. We have three specialty Executive Credit Officers with extensive industry experience in mortgage, medical practice and life premium credit financing with authority up to $6.0 million and joint authority with the Chief Credit Officer up to $10.0 million. All credit exposures over $10.0 million are reviewed and approved by Executive Loan Committee consisting of all named Credit Officers with concurrence from the President/Chief Executive Officer on any credit in excess of $25.0 million. Loans in excess of 60% of the Bank’s legal lending limit are approved by the full Board of Directors or two outside directors.
Our allowance for credit losses is established through charges to earnings in the form of a provision for credit losses. Management evaluates the allowance at least quarterly. In addition, on a quarterly basis our board of directors reviews our loan portfolio, evaluates credit quality, reviews the loan loss provision and the allowance for credit losses and makes changes as may be required. In evaluating the allowance, management and the board of directors consider the growth, composition and industry diversification of the loan portfolio, historical loan loss experience, current delinquency levels and all other known factors affecting loan collectability.
The allowance for credit losses is based on the CECL methodology and represents management’s estimate of an amount appropriate to provide for expected credit losses in the loan portfolio in the normal course of business. This estimate is based on historical credit loss information adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts applied to various loan types that compose our portfolio, including the effects of known factors such as the economic environment within our market area will have on net losses. The allowance is also subject to regulatory examinations and determination by the regulatory agencies as to the appropriate level of the allowance.
Loan Review
Our loan review program is administrated by the Chief Risk Officer who reports the results directly to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. In 2021, internal loan review performed loan reviews on loans and commitments totaling 28.3% of this loan portfolio outstanding as of December 31, 2020. An independent third party consultant performed loan reviews on 74.6% of this portfolio. In 2021, excluding 5 loans totaling $66.1 million reviewed by both internal and external loan review, loan reviews totaling $1.21 billion were performed representing 97.6% of the specified portfolio of loans.
Primis Bank’s 2022 Loan Review Program was approved by the Audit Committee on January 27, 2022. The Program’s goal is to have an overall review penetration rate of at least 50% of the Commercial Loan Portfolio outstanding as of December 31, 2021. The overall lower penetration rate in 2022 as compared to previous years was intended to allow for the Program to incorporate a robust risk-based approach review of the Bank’s Loan Portfolio that will include process, targeted portfolio and full-scope loan reviews. The Program’s review goal remains well within regulatory standards and industry best practices. In accordance with Credit Policy, the Bank’s Loan Review Program will utilize and incorporate both internal and 3rd party external resources in a complementary fashion to achieve the objectives of the Program.
The following table sets forth the allowance for credit losses allocated by loan category and the percent of loans in each category to total loans at the dates indicated (in thousands):
The following table presents an analysis of the allowance for credit losses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We believe that the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2021 is sufficient to absorb probable incurred credit losses in our loan portfolio based on our assessment of all known factors affecting the collectability of our loan portfolio.
Our assessment involves uncertainty and judgment; therefore, the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses cannot be determined with precision and may be subject to change in future periods. In addition, bank regulatory authorities, as part of their periodic examination, may require additional charges to the provision for credit losses in future periods if the results of their reviews warrant additions to the allowance for credit losses.
Investment Securities
Our investment securities portfolio provides us with required liquidity and investment securities to pledge as collateral to secure public deposits, certain other deposits, advances from the FHLB of Atlanta, and repurchase agreements.
Our investment securities portfolio is managed by our Treasurer, who has significant experience in this area, with the concurrence of our Asset/Liability Committee. In addition to our Treasurer (who is the chairman of the Asset/Liability Committee) and our Controller, this committee is comprised of outside directors and other senior officers of the Bank, including but not limited to our chief executive officer and our chief financial officer. Investment management is performed in accordance with our investment policy, which is approved annually by the Board of Directors. Our investment policy authorizes us to invest in:
● Government National Mortgage Association (“GNMA”), Federal National Mortgage Association (“FNMA”) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“FHLMC”) residential mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”) and commercial mortgage backed securities (“CMBS”)
● Collateralized mortgage obligations
● U.S. Treasury securities
● SBA guaranteed loan pools
● Agency securities
● Obligations of states and political subdivisions
● Corporate debt securities, with rated securities at investment grade
● Collateralized Loan Obligations (“CLOs”)
MBS are securities that have been developed by pooling a number of real estate mortgages and which are principally issued by agency/government-sponsored entities (“GSEs”) such as the GNMA, FNMA and FHLMC. These securities are deemed to have high credit ratings, and minimum regular monthly cash flows of principal and interest are guaranteed by the issuing agencies.
Collateralized mortgage obligations (“CMOs”) are bonds that are backed by pools of mortgages. The pools can be GNMA, FNMA or FHLMC pools or they can be private-label pools. The CMOs are designed so that the mortgage collateral will generate a cash flow sufficient to provide for the timely repayment of the bonds. The mortgage collateral pool can be structured to accommodate various desired bond repayment schedules, provided that the collateral cash flow is adequate to meet scheduled bond payments. This is accomplished by dividing the bonds into classes to which payments on the underlying mortgage pools are allocated. The bond’s cash flow, for example, can be dedicated to one class of bondholders at a time, thereby increasing call protection to bondholders. In private-label CMOs, losses on underlying mortgages are directed to the most junior of all classes and then to the classes above in order of increasing seniority, which means that the senior classes have enough credit protection to be given the highest credit rating by the rating agencies.
Obligations of states and political subdivisions (municipal securities) are purchased with consideration of the current tax position of the Bank. Both taxable and tax-exempt municipal bonds may be purchased, but only after careful assessment of the market risk of the security. Appropriate credit evaluation must be performed prior to purchasing municipal bonds.
Primis’ corporate bonds consist of senior and/or subordinated notes issued by banks. Bank subordinated debt, if rated, must be of investment grade and non-rated bonds are permissible if the credit-worthiness of the issuer has been properly analyzed.
CLOs are actively managed securitization vehicles formed for the purpose of acquiring and managing a diversified portfolio of senior secured corporate bank loans, otherwise known as “broadly syndicated loans. The loan portfolio is transferred to bankruptcy-remote special-purpose vehicle, which finances the acquisition through the issuance of various classes of debt and equity securities with varying levels of senior claim on the underlying loan portfolio. CLOs must be rated AA or better at the time of purchase.
We classify our investment securities as either held-to-maturity or available-for-sale. Debt investment securities that Primis has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as held-to-maturity and carried at amortized cost. Investment securities classified as available-for-sale are those debt securities that may be sold in response to changes in interest rates, liquidity needs or other similar factors. Investment securities available-for-sale are carried at fair value, with unrealized gains or losses net of deferred taxes, included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders’ equity. Investment securities totaling $22.9 million were in the held-to-maturity portfolio at December 31, 2021, compared to $40.7 million at December 31, 2020. Investment securities totaling $271.3 million were in the available-for-sale portfolio at December 31, 2021, compared to $153.2 million at December 31, 2020. During 2021 and 2020, $160.5 million and $38.9 million, respectively, of available-for-sale investment securities were purchased. No held-to-maturity investments were purchased in 2021. During 2020, $15.2 million of held-to-maturity investment securities were purchased. No investment securities were sold during 2021. During 2020, $1.9 million and $1.7 million, respectively, of available-for-sale investment securities and held-to-maturity investment securities were sold. Realized losses on sales of investment securities of $0.62 million were recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investment securities in our portfolio as of December 31, 2021 were as follows:
● agency commercial mortgage-backed securities in the amount of $136.2 million;
● corporate bonds in the amount of $13.7 million;
● collateralized loan obligations of $5.0 million;
● residential government-sponsored collateralized mortgage obligations in the amount of $20.3 million;
● callable agency securities in the amount of $22.5 million;
● commercial mortgage-backed securities in the amount of $52.7 million;
● SBA loan pool securities in the amount of $8.8 million; and
● municipal bonds in the amount of $35.0 million (fair value of $31.2 million) with a taxable equivalent yield of 2.68%
For additional information regarding investment securities refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2-Investment Securities.”
The following table sets forth a summary of the investment securities portfolio as of the dates indicated. Available-for-sale investment securities are reported at fair value, and held-to-maturity investment securities are reported at amortized cost (in thousands).
The following table sets forth the amortized cost, fair value, and weighted average yield of our investment securities by contractual maturity at December 31, 2021. Weighted average yield is calculated as the tax-equivalent yield on a pro rata basis for each security based on its relative amortized cost. Yields on tax-exempt securities have been computed on a tax-equivalent basis. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties (in thousands).
Deposits and Other Borrowings
The market for deposits is competitive. We offer a line of traditional deposit products that currently include noninterest-bearing and interest-bearing checking (or NOW accounts), commercial checking, money market accounts, savings accounts and certificates of deposit. We compete for deposits through our banking branches with competitive pricing, advertising and online banking. We use deposits as a principal source of funding for our lending, purchasing of investment securities and for other business purposes.
Total deposits increased 13.6% to $2.76 billion at December 31, 2021 from $2.43 billion at December 31, 2020. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased from $440.7 million as of December 31, 2021 to $530.3 million as of December 31, 2021. Time deposits decreased from $490.0 million to $360.6 million and savings accounts increased from $183.8 million to $222.9 million over the same period.
The following table sets forth the average balance and average rate paid on each of the deposit categories for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The variety of deposit accounts we offer allows us to be competitive in obtaining funds and in responding to the threat of disintermediation (the flow of funds away from depository institutions such as banking institutions into direct investment vehicles such as government and corporate securities). Our ability to attract and maintain deposits, and the effect of such retention on our cost of funds, has been, and will continue to be, significantly affected by the general economy and market rates of interest.
The following table sets forth the maturities of certificates of deposit of $100 thousand and over as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
We use borrowed funds to support our liquidity needs and to temporarily satisfy our funding needs from increased loan demand and for other shorter term purposes. We are a member of the FHLB and are authorized to obtain advances from the FHLB from time to time as needed. The FHLB has a credit program for members with different maturities and interest rates, which may be fixed or variable. We are required to collateralize our borrowings from the FHLB with our FHLB stock and other collateral acceptable to the FHLB. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, total FHLB borrowings were $100.0 million. At December 31, 2021, we had $763.2 million of unused and available FHLB lines of credit.
Other borrowings can consist of FHLB convertible advances, FHLB overnight advances, other FHLB advances maturing within one year, federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase (“repo”) that mature within one year, which are secured transactions with customers. The balance in repo accounts at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $10.0 million and $16.1 million, respectively.
Other borrowings consist of the following (in thousands):
Junior Subordinated Debt and Senior Subordinated Notes
In 2017, the Company assumed $10.3 million of trust preferred securities that were issued on September 17, 2003 and placed through a trust in a pooled underwriting totaling approximately $650 million. The trust issuer invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities in Floating Rate Junior Subordinated Deferrable Interest Debentures. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was $10.3 million outstanding, net of approximately $600 thousand of debt issuance costs. These securities pay cumulative cash distributions quarterly at a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to the three-month LIBOR plus 2.95%. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the interest rate was 3.17% and 3.18%, respectively. The dividends paid to holders of these securities, which are recorded as interest expense, are deductible for income tax purposes.
The trust preferred securities may be included in Tier 1 capital for regulatory capital adequacy determination purposes up to 25% of Tier 1 capital after its inclusion. At December 31, 2021, all of the trust preferred securities qualified as Tier 1 capital.
On January 20, 2017, Primis completed the sale of $27.0 million of its fixed-to-floating rate senior Subordinated Notes due 2027. These notes initially beared interest at 5.875% per annum until January 31, 2022; interest is currently payable at an annual floating rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a spread of 3.95% until maturity or early redemption. At December 31, 2021, all of these notes qualified as Tier 2 capital.
In 2017, the Company assumed a Senior Subordinated Note Purchase Agreement, dated April 22, 2015, entered into with certain institutional accredited investors, pursuant to which $20.0 million in aggregate principal amount of its 6.50% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Notes due 2025 was sold to the investors. On February 1, 2021, the Company redeemed all of these notes.
On August 25, 2020, Primis completed the sale of $60.0 million of its fixed-to-floating rate Subordinated Notes due 2030. These notes will bear interest at an initial rate of 5.40% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, commencing on March 1, 2021. From and including September 1, 2025 to, but excluding the maturity date or the date of earlier redemption (the “floating rate period”), the interest rate will reset quarterly to an annual interest rate equal to the Benchmark rate, which is expected to be three-month Term SOFR, plus 531 basis points, for each quarterly interest period during the floating rate period, payable quarterly in arrears on March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1 of each year, commencing on December 1, 2025. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the Benchmark rate is less than zero, the Benchmark rate shall be deemed to be zero. At December 31, 2021, all of these notes qualified as Tier 2 capital.
Interest Rate Sensitivity and Market Risk
We are engaged primarily in the business of investing funds obtained from deposits and borrowings into interest-earning loans and investments. Consequently, our earnings depend to a significant extent on our net interest income, which is the difference between the interest income on loans and other investments and the interest expense on deposits and borrowings. To the extent that our interest-bearing liabilities do not reprice or mature at the same time as our interest-earning assets, we are subject to interest rate risk and corresponding fluctuations in net interest income. Our Asset-Liability Committee (“ALCO”) meets regularly and is responsible for reviewing our interest rate sensitivity position and establishing policies to monitor and limit exposure to interest rate risk. The policies established by the ALCO are reviewed and approved by our Board of Directors. We have employed asset/liability management policies that seek to manage our net interest income, without having to incur unacceptable levels of credit or investment risk.
We use simulation modeling to manage our interest rate risk, and review quarterly interest sensitivity. This approach uses a model which generates estimates of the change in our economic value of equity (“EVE”) over a range of interest rate scenarios. EVE is the present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts using assumptions including estimated loan prepayment rates, reinvestment rates and deposit decay rates.
The following tables are based on an analysis of our interest rate risk as measured by the estimated change in EVE resulting from instantaneous and sustained parallel shifts in the yield curve (plus 400 basis points or minus 100 basis points, measured in 100 basis point increments) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. All changes are within our Asset/Liability Risk Management Policy guidelines.
Our interest rate sensitivity is also monitored by management through the use of a model that generates estimates of the change in the net interest income (“NII”) over a range of interest rate scenarios. NII depends upon the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the interest rates earned or paid on them. In this regard, the model assumes that the composition of our interest sensitive assets and liabilities existing at December 31, 2021 and 2020 remains constant over the period being measured and also assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration to maturity or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. All changes are within our ALM Policy guidelines at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodology used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes in EVE and NII sensitivity requires the making of certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, although the EVE tables and NII tables provide an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to, and do not, provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our net worth and NII. Sensitivity of EVE and NII are modeled using different assumptions and approaches.
Liquidity and Funds Management
The objective of our liquidity management is to ensure the ability to meet our financial obligations. These obligations include the payment of deposits on demand or at maturity, the repayment of borrowings at maturity and the ability to fund commitments and other new business opportunities. We obtain funding from a variety of sources, including customer deposit accounts, customer certificates of deposit and payments on our loans and investments. If our level of core deposits are not sufficient to fully fund our lending activities, we have access to funding from additional sources, including borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, institutional certificates of deposit and the sale of available-for-sale investment securities. In addition, we maintain federal funds lines of credit with two correspondent banks and utilize securities sold under agreements to repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement borrowings from approved securities dealers. For additional information about borrowings and anticipated principal repayments refer to the discussion about Contractual Obligations below and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 9 - Securities Sold Under Agreements To Repurchase And Other Short-Term Borrowings and Note 10 - Junior Subordinated Debt and Senior Subordinated Notes.”
We prepare a cash flow forecast on a 30, 60 and 90 day basis along with a one and a two year basis. The projections incorporate expected cash flows on loans, investment securities, and deposits based on data used to prepare our interest rate risk analyses.
At December 31, 2021, we had $411.0 million of unfunded lines of credit and undisbursed construction loan funds. The amount of certificate of deposit accounts maturing in less than one year was $285.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Management anticipates that funding requirements for these commitments can be met from the normal sources of funds.
As of December 31, 2021, Primis was not aware of any known trends, events or uncertainties that have or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, Primis has no material commitments or long-term debt for capital expenditures.
Capital Resources
Capital management consists of providing equity to support both current and future operations. Primis Financial Corp. and its subsidiary bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory - and possibly additional discretionary - actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action (“PCA”), we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the most recent regulatory notifications categorized the Bank as well capitalized under regulatory framework for PCA.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require Primis to maintain minimum amounts and ratios of Total and Tier I capital (as defined in the regulations) to average assets (as defined). Management believes, as of December 31, 2021, that Primis meets all capital adequacy requirements to which it is subject.
See “Item 1. Business, Supervision and Regulation-Capital Requirements.”
The following table provides a comparison of the leverage and risk-weighted capital ratios of Primis Financial Corp. and Primis Bank at the periods indicated to the minimum and well-capitalized required regulatory standards:
(1) Prompt corrective action provisions are not applicable at the bank holding company level.
Primis Financial Corp. and Primis Bank are required to meet minimum capital requirements set forth by regulatory authorities. Bank regulatory agencies have approved regulatory capital guidelines (“Basel III”) aimed at strengthening existing capital requirements for banking organizations. The Basel III Capital Rules require Primis Financial Corp. and Primis Bank to maintain (i) a minimum ratio of Common Equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 4.5%,
plus a 2.5% “capital conservation buffer”, (ii) a minimum ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 6.0%, plus the capital conservation buffer, (iii) a minimum ratio of Total capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 8.0%, plus the capital conservation buffer and (iv) a minimum leverage ratio of 4.0%. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements may result in certain actions by regulators which could have a direct material effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Primis Financial Corp. and Primis Bank remain well-capitalized under Basel III capital requirements. Primis Bank had a capital conservation buffer of 9.43% at December 31, 2021, which exceeded the 2.50% minimum requirement below which the regulators may impose limits on distributions.
Primis Bank’s capital position is consistent with being well- capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related financial data presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K concerning Primis Financial Corp. have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, substantially all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, changes in interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than do the effects of changes in the general rate of inflation and changes in prices. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. Many factors impact interest rates, including the FRB, inflation, recession, changes in unemployment, the money supply, and international disorder and instability in domestic and foreign financial markets. Like most financial institutions, changes in interest rates can impact our net interest income which is the difference between interest earned from interest-earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, as well as the valuation of our assets and liabilities.
Our interest rate risk management is the responsibility of the Bank’s Asset/Liability Management Committee (the “Asset/Liability Committee”). The Asset/Liability Committee has established policies and limits for management to monitor, measure and coordinate our sources, uses and pricing of funds. The Asset/Liability Committee makes reports to the board of directors on a quarterly basis.
Seasonality and Cycles
We do not consider our commercial banking business to be seasonal.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Primis is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit and guarantees of credit card accounts. These instruments involve elements of credit and funding risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheet. Letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by Primis to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loans to customers. We had letters of credit outstanding totaling $13.1 million and $15.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instruments for commitments to extend credit and letters of credit is based on the contractual amount of these instruments. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. Unless noted otherwise, we do not require collateral or other security to support financial instruments with credit risk.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments are made predominately for adjustable rate loans, and generally have fixed
expiration dates of up to three months or other termination clauses and usually require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments may expire without being completely drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had unfunded lines of credit and undisbursed construction loan funds totaling $411.0 million and $355.3 million, respectively. Virtually all of our unfunded lines of credit and undisbursed construction loan funds are variable rate.
Allowance For Credit Losses - Off-Balance-Sheet Credit Exposures
The allowance for credit losses on off-balance-sheet credit exposures is a liability account, calculated in accordance with ASC 326, representing expected credit losses over the contractual period for which we are exposed to credit risk resulting from a contractual obligation to extend credit. No allowance is recognized if we have the unconditional right to cancel the obligation. Off-balance-sheet credit exposures primarily consist of amounts available under outstanding lines of credit and letters of credit detailed above. For the period of exposure, the estimate of expected credit losses considers both the likelihood that funding will occur and the amount expected to be funded over the estimated remaining life of the commitment or other off-balance-sheet exposure. The likelihood and expected amount of funding are based on historical utilization rates. The amount of the allowance represents management's best estimate of expected credit losses on commitments expected to be funded over the contractual life of the commitment. Estimating credit losses on amounts expected to be funded uses the same methodology as described for loans in Note 3 - Loans and Allowance, as if such commitments were funded.