Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO and identifying a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $7,832,573. We incurred $948,969 of formation and operating costs, consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. We had investment income of $28,004 from investments held in the Trust Account. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in fair value of warrants was a decrease in the liability generating $13,884,940 of income. We recognized a loss on the sale of Private Placement Warrants of $4,376,708, resulting from the initial fair value of the Private Placement Warrants exceeding the cash received during the private placement. We also recognized $754,694 of offering costs that were originally recorded against stockholders’ equity (deficit) to expenses that were related to the issuance of the warrants.
For the period from December 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $811, which was comprised of formation and operating costs only.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.8 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $0.7 million. All remaining cash held in the Trust Account is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial Business Combination, and is restricted for use either in a Business Combination or to redeem common stock. As of December 31, 2021, none of the funds in the Trust Account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2021, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the Founder Shares, advances from the Sponsor in an aggregate amount of $12,500 and the remaining net proceeds from the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
We anticipate that the $845,291 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the financial statements, assuming that a Business Combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional working capital loans from the Sponsor, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to the Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to raise additional capital through loans from our Sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the Sponsor, officers or directors is under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of our business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. The Sponsor has indicated that it will provide financial support to the Company to satisfy all working capital obligations as needed.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation date and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by March 12, 2023, the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after March 23, 2023. The Company intends to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. One of the more significant accounting estimates included in these financial statements is the determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities. Such estimates may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued an aggregate of 13,000,000 warrants in connection with our IPO and private placement, which are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statements of operations. The fair value of warrants issued by the Company in connection with the private placement has been estimated using Black-Scholes Option Pricing Method at each measurement date. The Company updated the measurement as of December 31, 2021.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of common stock feature certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable shares of common stock to equal the redemption value. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares of common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A- “Expense of Offering”. Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs that are directly related to the IPO. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the shares of Class A common stock were charged against the carrying value of the shares of Class A common stock upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The Company classifies deferred underwriting commissions as noncurrent liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities. Offering costs amounting to $19,691,331 (consisting of $7,000,000 in underwriting commissions, $12,250,000 of deferred underwriters’ fee and $441,331 of other offering costs) were incurred, of which $754,694 was allocated to warrants and expensed and $18,936,637 were charged to temporary equity.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
The Company complies with the accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. Net income per share of common stock is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and private placement to purchase 13,000,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not adopted ASU 2020-06. The Company is still evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU-2020-06 would have on its financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.