ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K of Freeze Tag, Inc. (“Freeze Tag” or the “Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2021 contains forward-looking statements, principally in this Section and “Business.” Generally, you can identify these statements because they use words like “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “future,” “intends,” “plans,” and similar terms. These statements reflect only our current expectations. Although we do not make forward-looking statements unless we believe we have a reasonable basis for doing so, we cannot guarantee their accuracy and actual results may differ materially from those we anticipated due to a number of uncertainties, many of which are unforeseen, including, among others, the risks we face as described in this filing. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this annual report. To the extent that such statements are not recitations of historical fact, such statements constitute forward-looking statements that, by definition, involve risks and uncertainties. In any forward-looking statement where we express an expectation or belief as to future results or events, such expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the statement of expectation of belief will be accomplished.
We believe it is important to communicate our expectations to our investors. There may be events in the future; however, that we are unable to predict accurately or over which we have no control. The risk factors listed in this filing, as well as any cautionary language in this annual report, provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those anticipated, include, but are not limited to: distributors not accepting our games; price reductions; unforeseen delays in game production; changes in product strategies; general economic, financial and business conditions; changes in and compliance with governmental regulations; changes in various tax laws; and the availability of key management and other personnel. As noted in our risk factors, we are also closely monitoring the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on our business, as well as its effects on general market and economic conditions.
Summary Overview
Freeze Tag, Inc. is a creator of location-based, mobile social games that are fun and engaging for consumers and businesses. Based on a free-to-play business model that has propelled games built and marketed by some of our competitors to worldwide success, we employ state-of-the-art data analytics and proprietary technology to dynamically optimize the gaming experience for revenue generation. Players can download and enjoy our games for free, and, if they so choose, they can purchase virtual items and additional features within the game to increase the fun factor.
In October 2017, Rob Vardeman, former President of Munzee Inc. joined gaming industry veterans, Craig Holland and Mick Donahoo, to form a stronger and well-rounded Freeze Tag team through a merger. In addition to successful games Freeze Tag has launched previously, the current portfolio of games includes hits such as Munzee, a real-world gaming adventure and social platform with over 8 million locations worldwide and hundreds of thousands of players, WallaBee, an addictive collecting game with over 2,000 beautifully drawn digital cards, and Garfield Go, a Pokemon Go style augmented reality game based on the iconic cat Garfield.
We also offer our technology and services to businesses that want to leverage our expertise in location-based mobile gaming in their marketing and branding programs. For example, our Eventzee solution allows businesses to create private scavenger hunts in physical places such as malls, tradeshows, company events or campuses to create immersive brand experiences.
We are closely monitoring the coronavirus pandemic and the directives from federal and local authorities regarding not only our workforce, but how it impacts both the companies we work with for the development of our games and apps, and our users. We believe these social distancing and “stay-at-home” regulations may negatively impact our users and their ability to play our geolocation games for the foreseeable future. The extent and duration of this impact is difficult to predict at this time.
Central to Freeze Tag’s core strategy is capitalizing on fast-growing trends in the mobile applications world, including geofencing and location-based advertising. We plan to leverage the combined company’s proprietary technology and expertise to create more exciting location-based experiences in our games. Throughout 2022, we plan to continue to explore opportunities to incorporate geofencing into our applications, and then, when the time is right, we will examine opportunities to introduce advertising opportunities to Freeze Tag clients and customers.
Beginning in the quarter ended March 31, 2020, our wholly-owned subsidiary, Space Coast Geo Store, LLC, a Florida limited liability company, sells merchandise to the geocaching industry.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, expenses and related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions are often based on historical experience and judgments that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time made. However, all such estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and actual results may differ. For further information on our significant accounting policies see Note 2 to our financial statements included in this filing.
The following is a summary of our critical accounting policies that involve estimates and management’s judgment.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues are derived primarily by licensing software products in the form of mobile games for smartphone and tablet platforms. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
·
identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
·
identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
·
determination of the transaction price;
·
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Allowances for Sales Returns and Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for sales returns is based on the Company’s estimates of potential future product returns and other allowances related to current period product revenue. The Company analyzes historical returns, current economic trends and changes in customer demand and acceptance of the Company’s products. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on the Company’s assessment of the collectability of customer accounts and the aging of the related invoices, and represents the Company’s best estimate of probable credit losses in its existing trade accounts receivable. The Company regularly reviews the allowance by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, the age of the accounts receivable balances, and current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. We determined that no allowances for sales returns and doubtful accounts were required at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of intellectual property, customer base and non-compete agreements acquired in 2017, which are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 5 years. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the expected undiscounted cash flows of the asset, an impairment charge is recognized equal to the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value. The testing of these intangibles under established guidelines for impairment requires significant use of judgment and assumptions. Changes in forecasted operations and other assumptions could materially affect the estimated fair values. Changes in business conditions could potentially require adjustments to these asset valuations. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company reviewed the intangible assets and determined that no impairment was required.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718-10, Compensation-Stock Compensation and ASC Subtopic 505-50, Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees. Stock-based compensation expense recognized during the requisite services period is based on the value of share-based payment awards after reduction for estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and are revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Software Development Costs
Software development costs include direct costs incurred for internally developed products and payments made to independent software developers and/or contract engineers and artists. The Company accounts for software development costs in accordance with the FASB guidance for the costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed as found in ASC Subtopic 985-20. On a case-by-case basis, certain software development costs are capitalized once the technological feasibility of a product is established and such costs are determined to be recoverable. Technological feasibility of a product encompasses both technical design documentation and game design documentation, or the completed and tested product design and working model. Software development costs are capitalized once technological feasibility of a product is established and such costs are determined to be recoverable against future revenues. For products where proven game engine technology exists, this may occur early in the development cycle.
Significant management judgments and estimates are utilized in the assessment of when technological feasibility is established. For most products, technological feasibility is established when a detailed game design document containing sufficient technical specifications written for a proven game engine or framework technology had been created and approved by management. However, technological feasibility is evaluated on a product-by-product basis. Amounts related to software development that are not capitalized are charged immediately to the appropriate expense account. Amounts that were considered ‘research and development’ that are not capitalized are immediately charged to general and administrative expense.
Prior to a product’s release, the Company expenses, as part of “Cost of Sales-Product Development,” capitalized costs when the Company believes such amounts are not recoverable. Capitalized costs for those products that are cancelled or abandoned are charged to product development expense in the period of cancellation. Commencing upon product release, capitalized software development costs are amortized to “Cost of Sales-Product Development” based on the straight-line method.
The Company evaluates the future recoverability of capitalized software development costs and intellectual property licenses on an annual basis. For products that have been released in prior years, the primary evaluation criterion is actual title performance. For products that are scheduled to be released in future years, recoverability is evaluated based on the expected performance of the specific products to which the costs relate or in which the licensed trademark or copyright is to be used. Criteria used to evaluate expected product performance include: historical performance of comparable products developed with comparable technology; orders for the product prior to its release; and, for any sequel product, estimated performance based on the performance of the product on which the sequel was based.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
In accordance with current accounting standards, certain assets and liabilities must be measured at fair value. ASC 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (an exit price). The standard outlines a valuation framework and creates a fair value hierarchy in order to increase the consistency and comparability of fair value measurements and the related disclosures. ASC 820 requires that certain assets and liabilities must be measured at fair value, and the standard details the disclosures that are required for items measured at fair value. The Company had no assets and liabilities required to be measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The current assets and current liabilities reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets are estimated by management to approximate fair market value due to their short-term nature.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes. Under ASC Topic 740, income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
ASC Topic 740 includes accounting guidance which clarifies the accounting for the uncertainty in recognizing income taxes in an organization by providing detailed guidance for financial statement recognition, measurement and disclosure involving uncertain tax positions. This guidance requires an uncertain tax position to meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold at the effective date to be recognized both upon the adoption of the related guidance and in subsequent periods.
The Company has no uncertain tax positions at any of the dates presented.
Earnings per Share
The computation of basic earnings per common share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period. The computation of diluted earnings per common share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period plus the weighted average common stock equivalents which would arise from the exercise of stock options, warrants, convertible preferred stock and other rights during the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the diluted weighted average number of shares includes 18,991,250 common shares issuable upon conversion of related party convertible debt and 1,886,298 common shares issuable from outstanding stock options. For the years ended December 31, 2020, the diluted weighted average number of shares is the same as the basic weighted average number of shares as the inclusion of any common stock equivalents would be anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Although there were new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the FASB during the year ended December 31, 2021 and through the date of filing of this report, the Company does not believe any of these accounting pronouncements, other than the item listed above, has had or will have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Our revenue can typically fluctuate based on when we release our games and the popularity of the games we release. Currently, our games are free to download and play, but have built-in features that require the consumer to pay if they want to access the feature, which means our revenue is tied to when the consumer pays to access the features. The exception to this business model is Eventzee, which generates revenue by way of a licensing fee paid by clients based on the number of participants who use our software.
Revenues increased $356,625 to $2,136,358 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,779,733 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to all of our major games (Munzee, Eventzee, WallaBee, and our other product sales) experiencing greater interest and sales. Our Eventzee app saw over a 200% increase in revenues compared to 2020, due to increased marketing efforts and the newly re-designed app.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales increased $27,819 to $276,098 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $248,279 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was a result of increased costs in server and backend technology as our Munzee and Eventzee games increased in the numbers of players using the games, as well as an increase in cost of sales of physical goods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $88,101 to $1,694,072 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,782,173 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of a decrease in payroll expenses and capitalizing some of our production costs, a decrease in general office expenses related to the coronavirus pandemic, partially offset by an increase in marketing expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) of $125,605 for the year ended December 31, 2021 was up $144,468 from ($18,863) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily driven by the recognition of revenue from the forgiveness of our first PPP loan of $174,420 to aid in business losses caused by the COVID-19 Crisis. The money was received in 2020, but could not be recognized until forgiveness of the loan was approved by the government, which approval of loan forgiveness came in 2021. The remaining amounts relate to interest expense comprised primarily of imputed interest accrued for the entire year on the related party debt. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense of ($48,815) was relatively consistent with prior year amounts. This imputed interest does not represent on obligation payable in cash, but is recorded as a contribution to capital.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $1,454 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the above, we reported net income (loss) of $290,339 and ($269,582) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net income in 2021 was due to increased revenues from our game sales, recognition of the PPP loan forgiveness, and a decrease in expenses. The net income in 2021 and net loss in 2020 includes non-cash expenses such as imputed interest and impairment expense. Our net loss in 2020 also included increased spending for improvements in the code base of our largest game, a project that is nearing completion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Introduction
As of December 31, 2021, we had current assets of $778,471, including cash of $752,826, and current liabilities of $1,071,942, resulting in a working capital deficit of $293,471. In addition, we had a total stockholders’ deficit of $303,807 at December 31, 2021.
From a financial perspective, one of our focuses in 2021 was to improve our cash positions and increase flow management, as well as increasing overall game revenues. Properly managing cash allows the company to move forward in development and growth without borrowing funds from investors or third parties. Freeze Tag management made a concentrated effort on managing cash flow.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, operating activities provided (used) $300,080 and ($84,741) net cash, respectively. Management believes that by continuing cost reductions and realizing cost efficiencies, operating cash flows will be sufficient to support our business plan. We will also continue to update and launch new components of our games to maximize revenues. As a result, we may have short-term cash needs. Therefore, management is currently evaluating alternative financing sources to fund our current business plan should cash provided by operations be insufficient. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in these efforts.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Net cash provided by operating activities was $300,080 for the year ended December 31, 2021 mainly as a result of our net income of $290,339, non-cash expenses totaling $182,481 and decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $10,160. These are partially offset by forgiveness of our PPP loan of $174,420, decreases in accounts receivable of $1,699 and other assets of $1,453, and an increase in other liabilities of $5,474.
By comparison, net cash used by operating activities was $84,141 for the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly as a result of our net loss of $269,582, increases in accounts receivable of $1,699, and decreases in accounts payable of $23,745. These are partially offset by non-cash expenses totaling $183,284, decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $5,007, and an increase in accrued expenses of $17,021 and other liabilities of $4,973.
Net cash used by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $203,624 as a result of capitalized software. Net cash used by investing activities was $46,009 for the year ended December 31, 2020, comprised of the purchase of property and equipment of $46,609 and $600 of proceeds from the sale of an asset.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $164,731 and $367,613, respectively, related to new loans during the period partially offset by payments on outstanding loans. The significant portion of these new loans was to alleviate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis.
Notes Payable - Related Party
As of December 31, 2021, our related party debt was comprised of notes payable totaling $379,825 to Craig Holland, our Chief Executive Officer and Mick Donahoo, our Chief Financial Officer. These notes are non-interest bearing and mature on December 31, 2022. Of this related party indebtedness, there are two convertible notes payable of $186,450 to each of Messrs. Holland and Donahoo, who have the right, at any time, at their election, to convert all or part of the amount due into shares of fully paid and non-assessable shares of common stock of the Company. The Company has imputed interest on these notes payable using an annual rate of 10%. This imputed interest does not represent on obligation payable in cash, but is recorded as a contribution to capital. The fixed conversion price is $0.02 per share.
Debt Instruments, Guarantees, and Related Covenants
We have no disclosures required by this item.