Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions as described under the “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” that appears earlier in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis does not address certain items in respect of the year ended December 31, 2019 in reliance on amendments to disclosure requirements adopted by the SEC in 2019. See Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for comparative discussions of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Executive Overview
We are a leading American solar technology company and global provider of PV solar energy solutions. Developed at our R&D labs in California and Ohio, we manufacture and sell PV solar modules with an advanced thin film semiconductor technology that provide a high-performance, lower-carbon alternative to conventional crystalline silicon PV solar modules. From raw material sourcing through end-of-life module recycling, we are committed to reducing the environmental impacts and enhancing the social and economic benefits of our products across their life cycle. We are the world’s largest thin film PV solar module manufacturer and the largest PV solar module manufacturer in the Western Hemisphere.
Certain of our financial results and other key operational developments for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the following:
•Net sales for 2021 increased by 8% to $2.9 billion compared to $2.7 billion in 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily attributable to an increase in the volume of modules sold to third parties, the sales of certain projects in the United States and Japan in the current period, and the settlement of an outstanding indemnification arrangement associated with the sale of one of our projects, partially offset by the sales of certain projects in Japan, the United States, and India in the prior period and a decrease in the average selling price per watt. See Note 13. “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of our indemnification arrangements.
•Gross profit decreased 0.1 percentage points to 25.0% in 2021 from 25.1% in 2020 primarily due to a decrease in the average selling price per watt of our modules, the volume of higher gross profit projects sold during the prior period, and an increase in logistics costs, partially offset by continued module cost reductions and the indemnification matter mentioned above.
•As of December 31, 2021 we had 7.9 GWDC of total installed nameplate module production capacity across all our facilities. We produced 7.9 GWDC of solar modules during 2021, which represented a 34% increase in Series 6 module production from 2020. The increase in Series 6 production was primarily driven by the incremental Series 6 production capacity added in Malaysia in early 2021 and higher throughput at our manufacturing facilities. We expect to produce between 8.2 GWDC and 8.8 GWDC of Series 6 and Series 6 Plus modules during 2022.
•During 2021, we announced plans to expand our manufacturing capacity by 6.6 GWDC by constructing our third manufacturing facility in the U.S. and our first manufacturing facility in India. These new facilities are expected to commence operations in the first half of 2023 and the second half of 2023, respectively.
•Following an evaluation of the long-term cost structure, competitiveness, and risk-adjusted returns of our O&M services business, we received an offer to purchase certain portions of the business and determined it was in the best interest of our stockholders to pursue this transaction. Accordingly, in August 2020, we entered into an agreement with a subsidiary of Clairvest Group, Inc. (“Clairvest”) for the sale of our North American O&M operations. We completed the transaction in March 2021. Following certain customary post-closing adjustments, we received total consideration of $149.1 million. As a result of this transaction, we recognized a gain of $115.8 million, net of transaction costs and post-closing adjustments, which is presented in “Gain on sales of businesses, net” in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Following a separate evaluation of the long-term cost structure, competitiveness, and risk-adjusted returns of our U.S. project development business, we determined it was also in the best interest of our stockholders to pursue the sale of this business. In January 2021, we entered into an agreement with Leeward Renewable Energy Development, LLC (“Leeward”), a subsidiary of the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System, for the sale of our U.S. project development business, which included developing, contracting for the construction of, and selling utility-scale PV solar power systems in the United States. The transaction included our approximately 10 GWAC utility-scale solar project pipeline, including the advanced-stage Horizon, Madison, Ridgely, Rabbitbrush, and Oak Trail projects; the 30 MWAC Barilla Solar project, which is operational; and certain other equipment. In addition, Leeward agreed to certain module purchase commitments. We completed the transaction in March 2021 for an aggregate purchase price of $284.0 million. Such purchase price included $151.4 million for the sale of the U.S. project development business and $132.6 million for the sale of 392 MWDC of solar modules, which is presented in “Net sales” on our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result of this transaction, we recognized a gain of $31.5 million, net of transaction costs and post-closing adjustments, which is presented in “Gain on sales of businesses, net” in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•In late 2021, we received an offer to purchase our project development and O&M services businesses in Japan and determined it was in the best interest of our stockholders to pursue this transaction. As a result, we expect to enter into an agreement for the sale of these businesses in the near term. The completion of the transaction is contingent on the completion of final contract negotiations and the achievement of certain closing conditions. Assuming satisfaction of such items, we expect the sale to be completed in the first half of 2022.
Market Overview
Global solar markets continue to expand and develop, in part aided by demand elasticity resulting from declining average selling prices, both at the module and system levels, which has promoted the widespread adoption of solar energy. As a result of such market opportunities, we recently announced plans to expand our manufacturing capacity by 6.6 GWDC by constructing our third manufacturing facility in the U.S. and our first manufacturing facility in India. These new facilities, which we expect to produce our next generation Series 7 modules, are currently under construction and are expected to commence operations in the first half of 2023 and the second half of 2023, respectively. In the aggregate, we believe manufacturers of solar cells and modules, particularly those in China, have significant installed production capacity, relative to global demand, and the ability for additional capacity expansion. Accordingly, we believe the solar industry may experience periods of structural imbalance between supply and demand (i.e., where production capacity exceeds global demand), and that excess capacity will also put pressure on pricing. In light of such market realities, we continue to focus on our strategies and points of differentiation, which include our advanced module technology, our manufacturing process, our research and development capabilities, the sustainability advantage of our modules, and our financial stability.
The solar industry continues to be characterized by intense pricing competition, both at the module and system levels. This competition may result in an environment in which pricing falls rapidly, thereby potentially increasing
demand for solar energy solutions but constraining the ability for project developers and module manufacturers to sustain meaningful and consistent profitability. Although module average selling prices in many global markets have declined for several years, recent module spot pricing has increased, in part, due to elevated commodity and freight costs. For example, the price of polysilicon has significantly increased in recent months due to a coal shortage in China, which resulted in higher energy prices and the Chinese government mandating power restrictions that led to curtailments of silicon metal production. Given the majority of global polysilicon capacity is located in China, such higher energy prices and reduced operating capacities have adversely affected the supply of polysilicon, contributing to an increase in polysilicon pricing. In response to such supply shortage, certain other Chinese-based producers of polysilicon are in the process of expanding their production capacity, which is expected to reduce the price of polysilicon in future periods. Accordingly, while the duration of this elevated period of spot pricing is uncertain, module average selling prices in global markets are expected to continue to decline in the long-term.
Competitive pricing for modules and systems, relative to the cost of traditional forms of energy generation, is expected to contribute to diversification in global electricity generation and further demand for solar energy. Over time, however, declining average selling prices may adversely affect our results of operations to the extent we have not already entered into contracts for future module sales. Our results of operations could also be adversely affected if competitors reduce pricing to levels below their costs, bid aggressively low prices for module sale agreements, or are able to operate at minimal or negative operating margins for sustained periods of time. For certain of our competitors, including many in China, these practices may be enabled by their direct or indirect access to sovereign capital or other forms of state-owned support. In certain markets in California and elsewhere, an oversupply imbalance at the grid level may reduce short-to-medium term demand for new solar installations relative to prior years, lower pricing for PPAs, and lower margins on module and system sales to such markets. However, we believe the effects of such imbalance can be mitigated by modern solar power plants and energy storage solutions that offer a flexible operating profile, thereby promoting greater grid stability and enabling a higher penetration of solar energy. We continue to address these uncertainties, in part, by executing on our module technology improvements and implementing certain other cost reduction initiatives.
We face intense competition from manufacturers of crystalline silicon solar modules. Solar module manufacturers compete with one another on sales price per watt, which may be influenced by several module value attributes, including wattage (through a larger form factor or an improved conversion efficiency), energy yield, degradation, sustainability, reliability, warranty terms, and customer payment terms. While conventional solar modules, including the solar modules we currently produce, are monofacial, meaning their ability to produce energy is a function of direct and diffuse irradiance on their front side, most module manufacturers offer bifacial modules that also capture diffuse irradiance on the back side of a module. Bifaciality compromises nameplate efficiency, but by converting both front and rear side irradiance, such technology may improve the overall energy production of a module relative to nameplate efficiency when applied in certain applications, which could potentially lower the overall LCOE of a system when compared to systems using conventional solar modules, including the modules we currently produce. Additionally, certain module manufacturers recently introduced n-type mono-crystalline modules, such as TOPCon modules, which are expected to provide certain improvements to module efficiency, temperature coefficient, and bifacial performance, and claim to provide certain degradation advantages compared to other mono-crystalline modules.
We believe we are among the lowest cost module manufacturers in the solar industry on a module cost per watt basis, based on publicly available information. This cost competitiveness allows us to compete favorably in markets where pricing for modules and systems is highly competitive. Our cost competitiveness is based in large part on our advanced thin-film semiconductor technology, module wattage (or conversion efficiency), proprietary manufacturing process (which enables us to produce a CdTe module in a matter of hours using a continuous and highly automated industrial manufacturing process, as opposed to a batch process), and our focus on operational excellence. In addition, our CdTe modules use approximately 2% of the amount of semiconductor material that is used to manufacture conventional crystalline silicon solar modules. The cost of polysilicon is a significant driver of the manufacturing cost of crystalline silicon solar modules, and the timing and rate of change in the cost of silicon feedstock and polysilicon could lead to changes in solar module pricing levels. In recent years, polysilicon
consumption per cell has been reduced through various initiatives, such as the adoption of diamond wire saw technology, which have contributed to declines in our relative manufacturing cost competitiveness over conventional crystalline silicon module manufacturers.
In terms of performance, in many climates our solar modules provide certain energy production advantages relative to competing crystalline silicon modules. For more information about these advantages, see Item 1. “Business - Business Strategy.” Additionally, we warrant that our solar modules will produce at least 98% of their labeled power output rating during the first year, with the warranty coverage reducing by a degradation factor between 0.3% and 0.5%, depending on the module series, every year thereafter throughout the limited power output warranty period of up to 30 years. Following the implementation of our CuRe program, we expect the warranted degradation of our modules to decline to 0.2% per year in the near term. As a result of these and other factors, our solar modules can produce more annual energy in real world operating conditions than conventional crystalline silicon modules with the same nameplate capacity. For more information about the risks associated with our CuRe program, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Our failure to further refine our technology and develop and introduce improved PV products, including as a result of delays in implementing planned advancements, could render our solar modules uncompetitive and reduce our net sales, profitability, and/or market share.”
While our modules are generally competitive in cost, reliability, and performance attributes, there can be no guarantee such competitiveness will continue to exist in the future to the same extent or at all. Any declines in the competitiveness of our products could result in further declines in the average selling prices of our modules and additional margin compression. We continue to focus on enhancing the competitiveness of our solar modules by accelerating progress along our module technology and cost reduction roadmaps.
Certain Trends and Uncertainties
We believe that our business, financial condition, and results of operations may be favorably or unfavorably impacted by the following trends and uncertainties. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussions of other risks that may affect us.
Our business is evolving worldwide and is shaped by the varying ways in which our offerings can be compelling and economically viable solutions to energy needs in various markets. In addressing such demand for electricity, we are focusing on providing utility-scale module offerings in key geographic markets that we believe have a compelling need for mass-scale PV solar electricity, including markets throughout the United States, India, Europe, and Japan. We closely evaluate and monitor the appropriate level of resources required to support such markets and their associated sales opportunities. When deployed in utility-scale applications, our modules provide energy at a lower LCOE compared to traditional forms of energy generation, making them an attractive alternative to or replacement for aging fossil fuel-based generation resources. Based on publicly available information, retirements of coal generation plants in the United States alone are expected to approximate 50 GWDC over the next ten years, representing a significant increase in the potential market for solar energy in the near term.
This focus on utility-scale module offerings exists within a current market environment that includes rooftop and distributed generation solar, particularly in the United States. While it is unclear how rooftop and distributed generation solar might impact our core offerings over the next several years, we believe that utility-scale solar will continue to be a compelling offering for companies with technology and cost leadership and will continue to represent an increasing portion of the overall electricity generation mix. However, our module offerings in certain markets may be driven, in part, by future demand for rooftop and distributed generation solar solutions.
Demand for our PV solar module offerings depends, in part, on market factors outside our control, such as the availability of debt and/or equity financing (including, in the United States, tax equity financing), interest rate fluctuations, domestic or international trade policies, government regulations, and government support programs. Many governments have proposed policies or support programs intended to encourage renewable energy investments. Such support programs may include additional incentives over several years for renewable energy
projects or manufacturers of renewable energy products. For example, during 2021 legislation was introduced in the U.S. Congress to incentivize domestic solar manufacturing and accelerate the transition to clean energy by providing tax credits for U.S. solar manufacturers and project developers. Among other things, such proposed legislation extends the investment tax credit up to 40% for 10 years for solar projects that satisfy certain domestic content, labor, and wage requirements; introduces certain refundable tax credits for solar module components manufactured in the U.S.; revives certain tax credits for capital investments in the manufacturing of solar module components; and expands the scope of production tax credits for energy storage projects. At this time, it is unclear whether and to what extent such measures will be enacted into law. If such legislation is successfully signed into law, or other similar policies or support programs are enacted, it could positively impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations. While we compete in many markets that do not require solar-specific government subsidies or support programs, our net sales and profits remain subject to variability based on the availability and size of government subsidies and economic incentives. Adverse changes in these factors could increase the cost of utility-scale systems, which could reduce demand for our PV solar modules.
We generally price and sell our solar modules on a per watt basis. As of December 31, 2021, we had entered into contracts with customers for the future sale of 21.9 GWDC of solar modules for an aggregate transaction price of $5.9 billion, which we expect to recognize as revenue through 2025 as we transfer control of the modules to the customers. Such volume includes contracts for the sale of 7.3 GWDC of solar modules that include transaction price adjustments associated with future module technology improvements, including new product designs and enhancements to certain energy related attributes. Based on these potential technology improvements, the contracted module volumes as of December 31, 2021, and the expected timing of module deliveries, such adjustments, if realized, could result in additional revenue of up to $0.2 billion, the majority of which would be recognized in 2023. In addition to these price adjustments, certain of our contracts with customers may also include favorable price adjustments for the proposed extension of the U.S. investment tax credit described above.
Our ability to provide PV solar modules on economically attractive terms is also affected by the availability and cost of logistics services associated with the procurement of raw materials or equipment used in our manufacturing process and the shipping, handling, storage, and distribution of our modules. For example, the cost of ocean freight throughout many parts of the world has continued to increase due to the limited availability of shipping containers, increased port congestion resulting from labor shortages, an increase in cancellations of shipments by logistics providers, and elevated fuel costs. Such factors may disrupt our supply chain and adversely impact our manufacturing operations as several of our key raw materials and components are either single-sourced or sourced from a limited number of suppliers. In response to these disruptions, we have accommodated certain requests for delayed shipments in an effort to manage our shipping routes and mitigate our exposure to uncontracted freight rates. Additionally, due to ongoing schedule reliability issues with many operating ships, we are adjusting our shipping plans to include additional lead time for module deliveries and utilizing our U.S. distribution network to better meet our customer commitments. For certain contracts with customers, we have also started employing module contract structures that provide additional consideration to us if logistic costs exceed a defined threshold. Additionally, our manufacturing capacity expansions in the U.S. and India are expected to bring manufacturing activities closer to customer demand, further mitigating our exposure to the cost of ocean freight. While it is currently unclear how long these issues will persist, they may be further exacerbated by the disruption of major shipping routes or other economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to invest significant financial resources in R&D initiatives, including in efforts to enhance module performance such as our CuRe program. However, our CuRe program has encountered certain challenges in achieving full module performance entitlement in high volume manufacturing conditions, which, together with COVID-19 related travel restrictions, quarantine requirements, and government orders impacting our ability to upgrade tooling to support our CuRe program at our manufacturing facilities in Malaysia and Vietnam, has resulted in delays in implementing our CuRe program. We previously revised our expected integration schedule to early 2022 for our lead line implementation. Our ability to implement our CuRe program by such time will be based on the results of a series of production tests in high volume manufacturing conditions. This and further testing will ultimately inform our lead line implementation timing and our subsequent fleet-wide replication schedule. In
connection with the aforementioned challenges, we have amended or will endeavor to amend certain customer contracts for modules utilizing CuRe technology, including by potentially making certain price concessions and substituting our other modules for the modules with CuRe technology that were expected to be delivered under the terms of the original customer contracts. For more information about the risks associated with our CuRe program, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Our failure to further refine our technology and develop and introduce improved PV products, including as a result of delays in implementing planned advancements, could render our solar modules uncompetitive and reduce our net sales, profitability, and/or market share.”
On occasion, we have elected to temporarily own and operate certain PV solar power systems with the intention to sell them at a later date. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the recoverability of our Luz del Norte PV solar power plant was based, in part, on the likelihood of our continued ownership and operation of the system. However, it is reasonably possible that our intent to hold the asset may change in the near term due to our evaluation of strategic sale opportunities for the system. The pursuit of such opportunities, which require coordination with the system’s lenders, may result in a determination that the carrying value of the system is not recoverable based on the probability-weighted undiscounted future cash flows, which in turn could result in a possible impairment of the system in future periods. Accordingly, any changes in our expected use of the asset or its disposition may result in impairment charges that could be material to our consolidated financial statements and have a significant adverse impact on our results of operations.
We continually evaluate forecasted global demand, competition, and our addressable market and seek to effectively balance manufacturing capacity with market demand and the nature and extent of our competition. We continue to increase the nameplate production capacity of our existing manufacturing facilities by improving our production throughput, increasing module wattage (or conversion efficiency), and improving manufacturing yield losses. Additionally, we recently announced plans to expand our manufacturing capacity by 6.6 GWDC by constructing our third manufacturing facility in the U.S. and our first manufacturing facility in India. Such additional capacity, and any other potential investments to add or otherwise modify our existing manufacturing capacity in response to market demand and competition, may require significant internal and possibly external sources of capital, and may be subject to certain risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” including those described under the headings “Our future success depends on our ability to effectively balance manufacturing production with market demand, convert existing production facilities to support new product lines, decrease our cost per watt, and, when necessary, continue to build new manufacturing plants over time in response to market demand, all of which are subject to risks and uncertainties” and “If any future production lines are not built in line with committed schedules, it may adversely affect our future growth plans. If any future production lines do not achieve operating metrics similar to our existing production lines, our solar modules could perform below expectations and cause us to lose customers.”
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental authorities have recommended or ordered the limitation or cessation of certain business or commercial activities in jurisdictions in which we do business or have operations. While some of these orders permit the continuation of essential business operations, or permit the performance of minimum business activities, these orders are subject to continuous revision or may be revoked or superseded, or our understanding of the applicability of these orders and exemptions may change at any time. In addition, due to contraction of the virus, or concerns about becoming ill from the virus, we may experience reductions in the availability of our operational workforce, such as our manufacturing personnel. As a result, we may at any time be ordered by governmental authorities, or we may determine, based on our understanding of the recommendations or orders of governmental authorities or the availability of our personnel, that we have to curtail or cease business operations or activities altogether, including manufacturing, fulfillment, research and development activities, the implementation of our technology roadmap (such as certain Series 6 Plus manufacturing upgrades in Vietnam and our CuRe program), or construction activities associated with our expanding manufacturing capacity. At this time, such limitations have had a minimal effect on our manufacturing facilities, with the exception of the aforementioned technology roadmap delays, and we have implemented a wide range of safety measures intended to enable the continuity of our operations and inhibit the spread of COVID-19 at our manufacturing, administrative, and other sites and facilities, including those in the United States, Malaysia, and Vietnam.
While we continue to work with relevant government agencies in Malaysia and Vietnam to allow the essential travel of personnel that support the implementation of our technology roadmap, such implementation may be delayed, and in the case of our CuRe program has been delayed, due to travel restrictions, quarantine requirements, other government orders, or increases in COVID-19 infection rates. See Item 1A. Risk Factors - “The COVID-19 pandemic could materially impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations.”
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of net sales for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Segment Overview
Our primary segment is our modules business, which involves the design, manufacture, and sale of CdTe solar modules, which convert sunlight into electricity. Third-party customers of our modules segment include developers and operators of PV solar power systems. Our residual business operations include certain project development activities and O&M services, which are primarily concentrated in Japan, as well as the results of operations from PV solar power systems we own and operate in certain international regions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we changed our reportable segments to align with revisions to our internal reporting structure and long-term strategic plans. Following this change, our modules business represents our only reportable segment. We previously operated our business in two segments, which included our modules and systems businesses. Systems business activities primarily involved (i) project development, (ii) EPC services, and (iii) O&M services, which now comprise our residual business operations and are categorized as “Other” in the tables below. All prior year balances were revised to conform to the current year presentation.
Net sales
We generally price and sell our solar modules on a per watt basis. During 2021, SB Energy accounted for more than 10% of our modules business net sales, and the majority of our solar modules were sold to developers and operators of systems in the United States. Substantially all of our modules business net sales during 2021 were denominated in U.S. dollars. We recognize revenue for module sales at a point in time following the transfer of control of the modules to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. The revenue recognition policies for module sales are further described in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements. Net sales from our residual business operations primarily consists of revenue recognized for sales of development projects or completed systems, including any modules installed in such systems and any revenue from energy generated by such systems. In certain prior periods, our residual business operations also included EPC services we provided to third parties.
The following table shows net sales by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Net sales from our modules segment increased by $595.3 million in 2021 primarily due to a 48% increase in the volume of watts sold, partially offset by a 10% decrease in the average selling price per watt. Net sales from our residual business operations decreased by $383.3 million in 2021 primarily due to the sales of certain projects in Japan, the United States, and India in the prior period and the completion of substantially all construction activities at a project in the United States in 2020, partially offset by the sales of certain projects in the United States and Japan in the current period and the settlement of an outstanding indemnification arrangement associated with the sale of one of our projects. Under the terms of the indemnification arrangement, we received $65.1 million for our portion of the settlement payment, which we recorded as revenue during 2021. See Note 13. “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of our indemnification arrangements.
Cost of sales
Our modules business cost of sales includes the cost of raw materials and components for manufacturing solar modules, such as glass, transparent conductive coatings, CdTe and other thin film semiconductors, laminate materials, connector assemblies, edge seal materials, and frames. In addition, our cost of sales includes direct labor for the manufacturing of solar modules and manufacturing overhead, such as engineering, equipment maintenance, quality and production control, and information technology. Our cost of sales also includes depreciation of manufacturing plant and equipment, facility-related expenses, environmental health and safety costs, and costs associated with shipping, warranties, and solar module collection and recycling (excluding accretion). Cost of sales for our residual business operations primarily consists of project-related costs, such as development costs (legal, consulting, transmission upgrade, interconnection, permitting, and other similar costs), EPC costs (consisting primarily of solar modules, inverters, electrical and mounting hardware, project management and engineering, and construction labor), and site specific costs.
The following table shows cost of sales by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Cost of sales increased $162.8 million, or 8%, and was consistent as a percent of net sales when comparing 2021 with 2020. The increase in cost of sales was driven by a $551.5 million increase in our modules segment cost of sales primarily as a result of the following:
•higher costs of $608.2 million from an increase in the volume of modules sold;
•higher logistics costs of $86.0 million;
•a reduction to our product warranty liability of $19.7 million in 2020 due to lower-than-expected settlements for our older series of module technology and revisions to projected settlements, resulting in a lower projected return rate;
•a reduction to our module collection and recycling liability of $18.9 million in 2020 due to changes to the estimated timing of cash flows associated with capital, labor, and maintenance costs and updates to certain valuation assumptions; and
•an increase to our module collection and recycling liability of $10.8 million in 2021 due to lower estimated by-product credits for certain semiconductor materials recovered during the recycling process and updates to certain valuation assumptions; partially offset by
•continued module cost reductions, which decreased cost of sales by $160.8 million;
•a reduction to our product warranty liability of $33.1 million in 2021 due to lower-than-expected claims for our older series of module technology as well as the evolving claims profile of our newest series of module technology, resulting in reductions to our projected module return rates; and
•an impairment loss of $17.4 million in 2020 for certain module manufacturing equipment, including framing and assembly tools, which were no longer compatible with our long-term module technology roadmap.
Such increase in our modules segment cost of sales was partially offset by a $388.8 million decrease in our residual business operations cost of sales primarily due to the lower volume and size of projects sold and under construction during the period.
Gross profit
Gross profit may be affected by numerous factors, including the selling prices of our modules and the selling prices of projects and services included in our residual business operations, our manufacturing costs, project development costs, the capacity utilization of our manufacturing facilities, and foreign exchange rates. Gross profit may also be affected by the mix of net sales from our modules business and residual business operations.
The following table shows gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Gross profit decreased 0.1 percentage points to 25.0% in 2021 from 25.1% in 2020 primarily due to a decrease in the average selling price per watt of our modules, the volume of higher gross profit projects sold during the prior period, and an increase in logistics costs, partially offset by continued module cost reductions and the indemnification matter described above.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, professional fees, insurance costs, and other business development and selling expenses.
The following table shows selling, general and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Selling, general and administrative expense in 2021 decreased compared to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in employee compensation expense driven by reductions in headcount from the sales of our North American O&M operations and U.S. project development business, higher impairment charges in the prior period for certain project assets, lower expected credit losses for our accounts receivable, and lower professional fees.
Research and development
Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs; the cost of products, materials, and outside services used in our R&D activities; and depreciation and amortization expense associated with R&D specific facilities and equipment. We maintain a number of programs and activities to improve our technology and processes in order to enhance the performance and reduce the costs of our solar modules.
The following table shows research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Research and development expense in 2021 increased compared to 2020 primarily as a result of increased material and module testing costs, partially offset by lower employee compensation expense resulting from reductions in R&D headcount that supported our residual business operations, lower share-based compensation expense driven by the forfeiture of unvested shares by our former Chief Technology Officer, who retired effective March 15, 2021, and lower impairment charges for certain equipment.
Production start-up
Production start-up expense consists of costs associated with operating a production line before it is qualified for commercial production, including the cost of raw materials for solar modules run through the production line during the qualification phase, employee compensation for individuals supporting production start-up activities, and applicable facility related costs. Production start-up expense also includes costs related to the selection of a new site and implementation costs for manufacturing process improvements to the extent we cannot capitalize these expenditures.
The following table shows production start-up expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
During 2021, we incurred production start-up expense primarily for the transition to Series 6 module manufacturing at our second facility in Kulim, Malaysia, which commenced commercial production in early 2021, and for certain manufacturing upgrades at our Malaysian facilities. During 2020, we incurred production start-up expense for the transition to Series 6 module manufacturing at our second facility in Kulim, Malaysia and the capacity expansion of our manufacturing facility in Perrysburg, Ohio.
Litigation loss
The following table shows litigation loss for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
In June 2020, we entered into an agreement in principle to settle certain claims filed in 2015 in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona (hereafter “Arizona District Court”) by putative stockholders that opted out of our previously settled class action lawsuit (the “Opt-Out Action”). In July 2020, the parties executed a definitive settlement agreement pursuant to which we agreed to pay a total of $19 million in exchange for mutual releases and a dismissal with prejudice of the Opt-Out Action. The agreement contains no admission of liability, wrongdoing, or responsibility by any of the defendants. In July 2020, First Solar funded the settlement and the parties filed a joint stipulation of dismissal. In September 2020, the Arizona District Court entered an order dismissing the case with prejudice. As of December 31, 2019, we had accrued $13 million of estimated losses for this action. As a result of the settlement, we accrued an incremental $6 million litigation loss during 2020. See Note 13. “Commitments and Contingencies - Legal Proceedings” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on this matter.
Gain on sales of businesses, net
The following table shows gain on sales of businesses, net for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
In August 2020, we entered into an agreement with a subsidiary of Clairvest for the sale of our North American O&M operations. On March 31, 2021, we completed the transaction. Following certain customary post-closing adjustments, we received total consideration of $149.1 million. As a result of this transaction, we recorded a gain of $115.8 million, net of transaction costs and post-closing adjustments.
In January 2021, we entered into an agreement with Leeward for the sale of our U.S. project development business. On March 31, 2021, we completed the transaction for an aggregate purchase price of $284.0 million. Such purchase price included $151.4 million for the sale of the U.S. project development business and $132.6 million for the sale of 392 MWDC of solar modules, which is presented in “Net sales” on our consolidated statements of operations. As a
result of this transaction, we recognized a gain of $31.5 million, net of transaction costs and post-closing adjustments.
See Note 3. “Sales of Businesses” to our consolidated financial statements for further information related to these transactions.
Foreign currency (loss) income, net
Foreign currency (loss) income, net consists of the net effect of gains and losses resulting from holding assets and liabilities and conducting transactions denominated in currencies other than our subsidiaries’ functional currencies.
The following table shows foreign currency (loss) income, net for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Foreign currency loss increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher costs associated with hedging activities related to our subsidiaries in Japan and India and differences between our economic hedge positions and the underlying exposures.
Interest income
Interest income is earned on our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, restricted cash, and restricted marketable securities. Interest income also includes interest earned from late customer payments.
The following table shows interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Interest income during 2021 decreased compared to 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates on marketable securities and cash and cash equivalents and lower average balances associated with marketable securities.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net is primarily comprised of interest incurred on long-term debt, settlements of interest rate swap contracts, and changes in the fair value of interest rate swap contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815. We may capitalize interest expense to our project assets or property, plant and equipment when such costs qualify for interest capitalization, which reduces the amount of net interest expense reported in any given period.
The following table shows interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Interest expense, net in 2021 decreased compared to 2020 primarily due to unfavorable changes in the fair value of interest rate swap contracts in the prior period, which did not qualify for hedge accounting, lower interest expense associated with project debt, and lower amortization of debt discounts and issuance costs in the current period primarily driven by the repayment of the Ishikawa credit agreement in the prior period.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net is primarily comprised of miscellaneous items and realized gains and losses on the sale of marketable securities and restricted marketable securities.
The following table shows other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Other income, net increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to expected credit losses associated with certain notes receivable in the prior period, partially offset by lower realized gains from sales of restricted marketable securities in the current period when compared to the prior period.
Income tax (expense) benefit
Income tax expense or benefit, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which we operate, principally Japan, Malaysia, and Vietnam. Significant judgments and estimates are required to determine our consolidated income tax expense. The statutory federal corporate income tax rate in the United States is 21%, and the tax rates in Japan, Malaysia, and Vietnam are 30.6%, 24%, and 20%, respectively. In Malaysia, we have been granted a long-term tax holiday, scheduled to expire in 2027, pursuant to which substantially all of our income earned in Malaysia is exempt from income tax, conditional upon our continued compliance with certain employment and investment thresholds. In Vietnam, we have been granted a tax incentive, scheduled to expire at the end of 2025, pursuant to which income earned in Vietnam is subject to reduced annual tax rates.
The following table shows income tax (expense) benefit for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Our tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions. The rate is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given period, but are not consistent from period to period. Income tax expense increased by $210.8 million during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to a tax benefit in the prior year from the effect of tax law changes associated with the CARES Act, the prior year reversal of uncertain tax positions due to the expiration of the statute of limitations, higher pretax income in the current year, and the prior year release of the valuation allowance associated with our Vietnamese subsidiary due to its prior year operating income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, cash flows from operating activities, and contracts with customers for the future sale of solar modules will be sufficient to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, and project asset investment needs for at least the next 12 months. As necessary, we also believe we will have adequate access to the capital markets. We monitor our working capital to ensure we have adequate liquidity, both domestically and internationally. We intend to maintain appropriate debt levels based upon cash flow expectations, our overall cost of capital, and expected cash requirements for operations, such as construction activities and purchases of manufacturing equipment for our recently announced manufacturing facility in India and ongoing development activities for certain projects in Japan. However, our ability to raise capital on terms commercially acceptable to us could be constrained if there is insufficient lender or investor interest due to company-specific, industry-wide, or broader market concerns. Any incremental debt financings could result in increased debt service expenses and/or restrictive covenants, which could limit our ability to pursue our strategic plans. Additionally, given the duration of these and other capital investments and the currency risk relative to the U.S. dollar in certain international markets in which we operate, we continue to explore local financing alternatives. Should these financing alternatives be unavailable or too cost prohibitive, we could be exposed to significant currency risk and our liquidity could be adversely impacted.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.8 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities compared to $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities was primarily driven by cash receipts from module sales to customers; cash proceeds from the sale of our North American O&M operations and U.S. project development business; and cash proceeds from the sale and prior period construction of certain projects in the United States and Japan; partially offset by purchases of property, plant and equipment; and other operating expenditures. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, $0.8 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively, of our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities was held by our foreign subsidiaries and was primarily based in U.S. dollar, Japanese yen, and Indian rupee denominated holdings.
We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. If certain international funds were needed for our operations in the United States, we may be required to accrue and pay certain U.S. and foreign taxes to repatriate such funds. We maintain the intent and ability to permanently reinvest our accumulated earnings outside the United States, with the exception of our subsidiaries in Canada and Germany. In addition, changes to foreign government banking regulations may restrict our ability to move funds among various jurisdictions under certain circumstances, which could negatively impact our access to capital, resulting in an adverse effect on our liquidity and capital resources.
We continually evaluate forecasted global demand and seek to balance our manufacturing capacity with such demand. We recently announced our plans to invest approximately $1.4 billion to expand our solar manufacturing capacity by 6.6 GWDC by constructing our third manufacturing facility in the U.S. and our first manufacturing facility in India. These new facilities are expected to commence operations in the first half of 2023 and the second half of 2023, respectively. In addition, we continue to increase the nameplate production capacity of our existing manufacturing facilities by improving our production throughput, increasing module wattage (or conversion efficiency), and improving manufacturing yield losses. During 2022, we expect to spend $0.9 billion to $1.1 billion for capital expenditures, including the new facilities mentioned above and upgrades to machinery and equipment that we believe will further increase our module wattage and expand capacity and throughput at our manufacturing facilities.
We also expect to commit significant working capital to purchase various raw materials used in our module manufacturing process. Our failure to obtain raw materials and components that meet our quality, quantity, and cost requirements in a timely manner could interrupt or impair our ability to manufacture our solar modules or increase our manufacturing costs. Accordingly, we may enter into long-term supply agreements to mitigate potential risks related to the procurement of key raw materials and components, and such agreements may be noncancelable or cancelable with a significant penalty. For example, we have entered into long-term supply agreements for the purchase of certain specified minimum volumes of substrate glass and cover glass for our PV solar modules. Our remaining purchases under these supply agreements are expected to be approximately $1.7 billion of substrate glass and approximately $369 million of cover glass. We have the right to terminate these agreements upon payment of specified termination penalties (which, in aggregate, are up to $322 million as of December 31, 2021 and decline over the remaining supply periods).
We have also committed certain financial resources to fulfill our solar module collection and recycling obligations, and have established a trust under which these funds are put into custodial accounts with an established and reputable bank. As of December 31, 2021, such funds were comprised of restricted marketable securities of $244.7 million and restricted cash balances of $0.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, our module collection and recycling liability was $139.1 million. Trust funds may be disbursed for qualified module collection and recycling costs (including capital and facility related recycling costs), payments to customers for assuming collection and recycling obligations, and reimbursements of any overfunded amounts. Investments in the trust must meet certain investment quality criteria comparable to highly rated government or agency bonds. As necessary, we adjust the funded amounts for our estimated collection and recycling obligations on an annual basis based on the estimated costs of collecting and recycling covered modules, estimated rates of return on our restricted marketable securities, and an estimated solar module life of 25 years, less amounts already funded in prior years.
Our residual business operations include certain project development activities and O&M services, which are primarily concentrated in Japan. Solar power project development cycles, which span the time between the identification of a site location and the commercial operation of a system, vary substantially and can take many years to mature. As a result of these long project cycles and strategic decisions to finance the development of certain projects using our working capital, we may need to make significant investments of resources in advance of the receipt of any cash from the sale of such projects. In late 2021, we received an offer to purchase our project development and O&M services businesses in Japan and determined it was in the best interest of our stockholders to pursue this transaction. As a result, we expect to complete the sale of these businesses in the first half of 2022. To the extent the sale is not completed in the near term, our residual business operations may continue to have significant liquidity requirements in the future for project development and construction costs, commitments under land lease arrangements associated with project sites, and commitments under certain project debt arrangements. The net amount of our project assets and related portions of long-term debt and deferred revenue, which approximates our net capital investment in the development and construction of solar power projects, was $241.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, from time to time we have elected to retain an ownership interest in certain PV solar power systems after they became operational. The decision to retain ownership of a system impacts our liquidity depending upon the size and cost of the project. The net amount of our PV solar power systems and related portions of long-term debt, which approximates our net capital investment in our operating power plants, was $33.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet debt or similar obligations, other than financial assurance related instruments, which are not classified as debt. We do not guarantee any third-party debt. See Note 13. “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for further information about our financial assurance related instruments.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes key cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during 2021 was primarily driven by the $350 million settlement payment in 2020 associated with our prior class action lawsuit and higher cash receipts from module sales, partially offset by lower cash proceeds from sales of project assets in the current year.
Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during 2021 was primarily due to proceeds from the sale of our North American O&M operations and U.S. project development business, partially offset by lower net sales and maturities of marketable securities and restricted marketable securities and higher purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was primarily due to higher net borrowings under project specific debt financings associated with the construction of certain projects in Japan.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
None.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of reported assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Some of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment in the selection of the appropriate assumptions for making these estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We base our judgments and estimates on our historical experience, our forecasts, and other available information as appropriate. The actual results experienced by us may differ materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations will be affected. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies that require the most significant judgment and estimates include the following:
Accrued Solar Module Collection and Recycling Liability. We previously established a module collection and recycling program, which has since been discontinued, to collect and recycle modules sold and covered under such program once the modules reach the end of their service lives. For legacy customer sales contracts that were covered under this program, we recognized expense at the time of sale for the estimated cost of our obligations to collect and
recycle such modules. We estimate the cost of our collection and recycling obligations based on the present value of the expected future cost of collecting and recycling the solar modules, which includes estimates for the cost of packaging materials; the cost of freight from the solar module installation sites to a recycling center; material, labor, and capital costs; and by-product credits for certain materials recovered during the recycling process. We base these estimates on our experience collecting and recycling solar modules and certain assumptions regarding the estimated useful lives of modules covered by the program and the number of modules expected to be recycled. In the periods between the time of sale and the related settlement of the collection and recycling obligation, we accrete the carrying amount of the associated liability and classify the corresponding expense within “Selling, general and administrative” expense on our consolidated statements of operations. We periodically review our estimates of expected future recycling costs and may adjust our liability accordingly. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed our annual cost study of obligations under our module collection and recycling program and increased the associated liability by $10.8 million primarily due to lower estimated by-product credits for certain semiconductor materials recovered during the recycling process and updates to certain valuation assumptions. As of December 31, 2021, a 10% increase in the expected future recycling costs would increase the liability by $13.9 million.
Product Warranties. We provide a limited PV solar module warranty covering defects in materials and workmanship under normal use and service conditions for up to 12 years. We also typically warrant that modules installed in accordance with agreed-upon specifications will produce at least 98% of their labeled power output rating during the first year, with the warranty coverage reducing by a degradation factor every year thereafter throughout the limited power output warranty period of up to 30 years. Among other things, our solar module warranty also covers the resulting power output loss from cell cracking.
As an alternative form of our standard limited module power output warranty, we have also offered an aggregated or system-level limited module performance warranty. This system-level limited module performance warranty is designed for utility-scale systems and provides 25-year system-level energy degradation protection. This warranty represents a practical expedient to address the challenge of identifying, from the potential millions of modules installed in a utility-scale system, individual modules that may be performing below warranty thresholds by focusing on the aggregate energy generated by the system rather than the power output of individual modules. The system-level limited module performance warranty is typically calculated as a percentage of a system’s expected energy production, adjusted for certain actual site conditions, with the warranted level of performance declining each year in a linear fashion, but never falling below 80% during the term of the warranty.
In addition to our limited solar module warranties described above, for PV solar power systems we have constructed, we have provided limited warranties for defects in engineering design, installation, and BoS part workmanship for a period of one to two years following the substantial completion of a system or a block within the system.
When we recognize revenue for sales of modules or projects, we accrue liabilities for the estimated future costs of meeting our limited warranty obligations. We make and revise these estimates based primarily on the number of solar modules under warranty installed at customer locations, our historical experience with and projections of warranty claims, and our estimated per-module replacement costs. We also monitor our expected future module performance through certain quality and reliability testing and actual performance in certain field installation sites. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we revised this estimate based on updated information regarding our warranty claims, which reduced our product warranty liability by $33.1 million. This updated information reflected lower-than-expected warranty claims for our older series of module technology as well as the evolving claims profile of our newest series of module technology, resulting in reductions to our projected module return rates. In general, we expect the return rates for our Series 6 modules to be lower than our older series, and we estimate that the return rate for such newer series of module technology will be less than 1%. As of December 31, 2021, a 1% increase in the return rate across all series of module technology would increase our product warranty liability by $119.6 million, and a 1% increase in the return rate for BoS parts would not have a material impact on the associated warranty liability.
Income Taxes. We are subject to the income tax laws of the United States, its states and municipalities, and those of the foreign jurisdictions in which we have significant business operations. Such tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant taxing authorities. We make judgments and interpretations regarding the application of these inherently complex tax laws when determining our provision for income taxes and also make estimates about when in the future certain items are expected to affect taxable income in the various tax jurisdictions. Disputes over interpretations of tax laws may be settled with the relevant taxing authority upon examination or audit. We regularly evaluate the likelihood of assessments in each of our taxing jurisdictions resulting from current and future examinations, and we record tax liabilities as appropriate.
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we calculate our income tax provision based on our interpretation of the tax laws and regulations in the various jurisdictions where we conduct business. This requires us to estimate our current tax obligations, evaluate our ability and intent to permanently reinvest our accumulated earnings in jurisdictions outside the United States, assess uncertain tax positions, and assess temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities. We must also assess the likelihood that each of our deferred tax assets will be realized. To the extent we believe that realization of any of our deferred tax assets is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance. When we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance in a reporting period, we generally record a corresponding tax expense. Conversely, to the extent circumstances indicate that a valuation allowance is no longer necessary, that portion of the valuation allowance is reversed, which generally reduces our overall income tax expense.
We establish liabilities for potential additional taxes based on our assessment of the outcome of our tax positions. Once established, we adjust these liabilities when additional information becomes available or when an event occurs requiring an adjustment. Significant judgment is required in making these estimates and the actual cost of a tax assessment, fine, or penalty may ultimately be materially different from our recorded liabilities, if any.
We continually explore initiatives to better align our tax and legal entity structure with the footprint of our global operations and recognize the tax impact of these initiatives, including changes in the assessment of uncertain tax positions, indefinite reinvestment exception assertions, and the realizability of deferred tax assets, in the period when we believe all necessary internal and external approvals associated with such initiatives have been obtained, or when the initiatives are materially complete.
Asset Impairments. We assess long-lived assets classified as “held and used,” including our property, plant and equipment; PV solar power systems; project assets; operating lease assets; and intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances arise, including consideration of technological obsolescence, that may indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable, and these assessments require significant judgment in determining whether such events or changes have occurred. These events or changes in circumstances may include a significant decrease in the market price of a long-lived asset; a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset is being used or in its physical condition; a significant adverse change in the business climate that could affect the value of a long-lived asset; an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of a long-lived asset; a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of such losses or a projection of future losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset; or a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. For purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, long-lived assets are grouped with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, and we must also exercise judgment in assessing such groupings and levels.
When impairment indicators are present, we compare undiscounted future cash flows, including the eventual disposition of the asset group at market value, to the asset group’s carrying value to determine if the asset group is recoverable. If the carrying value of the asset group exceeds the undiscounted future cash flows, we measure any impairment by comparing the fair value of the asset group to its carrying value. Fair value is generally determined
by considering (i) internally developed discounted cash flows for the asset group, (ii) third-party valuations, and/or (iii) information available regarding the current market value for such assets. If the fair value of an asset group is determined to be less than its carrying value, an impairment in the amount of the difference is recorded in the period that the impairment indicator occurs. Estimating future cash flows requires significant judgment, and such projections may vary from the cash flows eventually realized.