ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 11, 2021, for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock, and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $12,965,855 which consists of a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $15,508,485 and interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $173,593, offset by transaction costs allocated to warrants of $1,180,711, general, and administrative expenses of $1,534,739, and a provision for income taxes of $773.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 2, 2021, we completed the initial public offering of 50,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $500,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we completed the sale of 7,133,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $10,700,000.
Following the initial public offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $500,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $15,688,848 in transaction costs, including $8,700,000 of cash underwriting fees, 18,800,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $619,847 of other offering costs.
For the period January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,846,016. Net income of $12,965,855 was affected by transaction costs allocated to warrants of $1,180,711, interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $173,593, and a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $15,508,485. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $310,504 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the trust account of $500,173,593 (including approximately $173,600 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $59,137 cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our directors and officers. Our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Going Concern
We have until March 2, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the liquidity concerns and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 2, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On January 11, 2021, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of our offering costs in exchange for 8,625,000 founder shares, or approximately $0.003 per share. On February 18, 2021, we effected a 1:1.2167 stock split of our Class B common stock, resulting in our Sponsor holding an aggregate of 10,493,750 founder shares. On February 25, 2021, we effected a 1:1.19178 stock split of the Company’s Class B common stock, resulting in the Sponsor holding an aggregate of 12,506,250 founder shares. As a result of the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, the Sponsor forfeited 6,250 founder shares, which resulted in the Sponsor holding an aggregate of 12,500,000 founder shares.
The Sponsor has agreed, subject to certain limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the founder shares until the earlier of (A) one year after the completion of a business combination and (B) subsequent to a business combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a business combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Related Party Loans
On January 11, 2021, the Sponsor issued an unsecured promissory note to the Company (the “Promissory Note”), pursuant to which the Company could borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000. The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021, or the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The outstanding amount of $173,972 outstanding under the Promissory Note was repaid on March 5, 2021. Borrowings under the Promissory Note are no longer available.
On March 5, 2021, the Company issued an unsecured convertible promissory note (the “Sponsor Convertible Note”) to the Sponsor, pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to $1,500,000 from the Sponsor for ongoing expenses reasonably related to the business of the Company and the consummation of the business combination. All unpaid principal under the Sponsor Convertible Note will be due and payable in full on the earlier of (i) March 2, 2023, and (ii) the consummation of a business combination (such earlier date, the “Maturity Date”). The Sponsor will have the option, at any time on or prior to the Maturity Date, to convert any amounts outstanding under the Sponsor Convertible Note into warrants to purchase shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, there was no borrowings outstanding under the Sponsor Convertible Note.
On December 3, 2021, the Company issued an unsecured convertible promissory note (the “Convertible Note”) to John James, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to $300,000 from Mr. James for ongoing expenses reasonably related to the business of the Company and the consummation of the business combination, as defined below. All unpaid principal under the Convertible Note will be due and payable in full on the Maturity Date. Mr. James will have the option, at any time on or prior to the Maturity Date, to convert any amounts outstanding under the Convertible Note into warrants to purchase shares of the Company's Class A common stock at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to the same adjustments applicable to the private placement warrants sold concurrently with the Company’s initial public offering; provided, that Mr. James’ optional conversion shall be reduced by the amount of principal in excess of $1,200,000 that the Sponsor converts under the Sponsor Convertible Note.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the trust account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account on the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial, and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on February 25, 2021, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation. We also paid $15,000 per month to our former chief financial officer, Jeffrey Gary, which terminated on December 31, 2021.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $18,800,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters solely in the event that the Company fails to complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to the registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the initial public offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The Company accounts for the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts on an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815-40”) and determined that the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder. As such, each Warrant must be recorded as a liability and is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statement of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated using a Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model. The Public Warrants were initially valued using a Monte Carlo Simulation. The subsequent measurements of the Public Warrants after the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units was valued using the instrument’s publicly listed trading price.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. This presentation assumes a business combination as the most likely outcome. Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted.. We adopted ASU 2020-06 as of January 11, 2021, and the adoption did not have an impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.