ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 25, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $660,312, which consists of operating and formation costs of $2,368,051 and transaction costs incurred in connection with our initial public offering of $536,079, offset by changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,215,245 and interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $28,573.
For the period from August 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,952 which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 29, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 25,875,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $258,750,000, which is described in Note 3. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 7,175,000 private placement warrant at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,175,000, which is described in Note 4.
Following our initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the founder shares, a total of $258,750,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $14,667,474 in initial public offering related costs, including $5,175,000 of underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, and $436,224 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $927,502. Net loss of $660,312 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $28,573, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,215,245 and transaction costs incurred in connection with our initial public offering of $536,079. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1,440,549 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from August 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $3,952 was affected by the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $258,778,573 (including $28,573 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $661,275. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through January 23, 2023, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a business combination is not consummated. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of one of our executive officers a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on January 26, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per share, or $9,056,250 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our condensed statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating net loss per common share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from net loss per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06 - “Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”)”, to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.