Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on November 5, 2020 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
As previously announced, on August 3, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”) with Pico Quantitative Trading Holdings LLC (“Pico”).
On February 24, 2022, the Business Combination Agreement was terminated (the “Termination”).
As a result of the Termination, the Business Combination Agreement will be of no further force and effect, and certain transaction agreements entered into in connection with the Business Combination Agreement, including, but not limited to, (i) the Sponsor Share Restriction Agreement, dated as of August 3, 2021, by and among the Company, FTAC Athena Sponsor, LLC, and FTAC Athena Advisors, LLC, (ii) the Support Agreement, dated as of August 3, 2021, by and among the Company, FTAC Athena Sponsor, LLC, FTAC Athena Advisors, LLC, Pico and the members of Pico party thereto, and (iii) the PIPE Subscription Agreements, each dated August 3, 2021, between the Company and certain investors, will automatically either be terminated in accordance with their terms or be of no further force and effect. Neither party will be required to pay the other a termination fee as a result of the Termination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and consummating the Business Combination with Pico more fully described above. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $4,215, which consists of general and administrative expenses of $1,861,924 and transaction cost allocable to warrants of $592,728, offset by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,437,700 and interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $21,167.
For the period from November 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $6,139, which consists of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 25, 2021, we completed the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 Units, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 660,000 Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Placement Unit in a private placement to the sponsor and Cantor Fitzgerald, generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,444,712. Net income of $4,215 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $21,167, the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,437,700 and offering costs allocable to warrants of $592,728. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $417,212 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from November 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $6,139 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $6,139 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the trust account of $250,021,167 (including approximately $21,167 of interest income) consisting of money market funds which are invested primarily in U.S. Treasury securities. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the trust account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held outside the trust account of $271,045. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units upon consummation of the Business Combination at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Placement Units.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. If we are unable to raise such additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
Going Concern
We have until February 25, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Management intends to complete a Business Combination prior to February 25, 2023. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 25, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a total of $25,000 per month for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services. We began incurring these fees on February 23, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation. On June 7, 2021, the administrative services agreement was amended and restated to increase the monthly charge for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services payable to an affiliate of the sponsor from $25,000 to $32,500.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of (i) $0.40 per Unit of the gross proceeds of the initial 22,000,000 Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, or $8,800,000 and (ii) $0.60 per Unit of the gross proceeds from the 3,000,000 Units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $1,800,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Placement Warrants and the Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using Black Scholes Option Pricing Model and a binomial lattice model, respectively. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”), to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.