Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Part I, Item1A. "Risk Factors" and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Additionally, our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in any future period.
Overview
FTC Solar, Inc. (the “Company”, “we”, “our”, or “us”) was founded in 2017 and is incorporated in the state of Delaware. We are a global provider of advanced solar tracker systems, supported by proprietary software and value-added engineering services. Our mission is to provide differentiated products, software, and services that maximize energy generation and cost savings for our customers, and to help facilitate the continued growth and adoption of solar power globally. Trackers significantly increase the amount of solar energy produced at a solar installation by moving solar panels throughout the day to maintain an optimal orientation relative to the sun. Our tracker systems are currently marketed under the Voyager brand name (“Voyager Tracker” or “Voyager”). Voyager is a next-generation two-panel in-portrait single-axis tracker solution that we believe offers industry-leading performance and ease of installation.
We have a team of dedicated renewable energy professionals with significant project installation experience focused on delivering cost reductions to our US and worldwide clients across the solar project development and construction cycle. Our solar solutions span a range of applications, including ground mount, tracker, canopy, and rooftop. The Company is headquartered in Austin, Texas, and has international subsidiaries in Australia, India, Singapore, and South Africa.
In April 2021, we completed an initial public offering (IPO) of 19,840,000 shares of our common stock receiving proceeds of $241.2 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, but before offering costs, and began trading on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “FTCI”. Prior to the completion of the IPO, the board of directors and stockholders approved an approximately 8.25-for-1 forward stock split (the “Forward Stock Split”) of the Company’s shares of common stock which became effective on April 28, 2021. Proceeds from the IPO were used for general corporate purposes, with $54.2 million used to purchase an aggregate of 4,455,384 shares of our common stock, including shares resulting from the settlement of certain vested restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and exercise of certain options in connection with the IPO at the IPO price, less underwriting discounts and commissions.
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act. Under the JOBS Act, we elected to use the allowed extended transition period to delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Investment in technology and personnel. We invest in both the people and technology behind our products. We intend to continue making significant investments in the technology for our products and expansion of our patent portfolio to attract and retain customers, expand the capabilities and scope of our products, and enhance user experience. We also intend to make significant investments to attract and retain employees in key positions, including sales leads, engineers, software developers, quality assurance personnel, supply chain personnel, product management, and operations personnel, to help us drive additional efficiencies across our marketplace and, in the case of sales leads, to continue to enhance and diversify our sales capabilities, including international expansion.
Megawatts ("MW") shipped and average selling price ("ASP"). The primary operating metric we use to evaluate our sales performance and to track market acceptance of our products is the change in quantity of megawatts (MW) shipped from period to period. MW are measured for each individual project and are calculated based on the expected output of that project once installed and fully operational. We also utilize metrics related to price and cost of goods sold per watt, including the change in ASP from period to period and cost per watt. ASP is calculated by dividing total revenue by total watts and cost per watt is calculated by dividing total costs of goods sold by total watts. These metrics enable us to evaluate trends in pricing, manufacturing cost and profitability. Events such as the COVID-19 pandemic can impact the U.S. economy, global supply chains, and our business. These impacts can cause significant shipping delays and cost increases, as well as offsetting ASP increases, and also raise the price of inputs like steel and logistics, affecting our cost per watt.
Government regulations. Changes in the U.S. trade environment, including the imposition of import tariffs, AD/CVD investigations and WROs directed at forced labor in China, affect the amount and timing of our revenue, results of operations and cash flows. Escalating trade tensions, particularly between the United States and China, have led to increased tariffs and trade restrictions, including tariffs applicable to certain raw materials and components for our products. We have taken measures with the intention of mitigating the effect of tariffs, AD/CVD and WROs on our business by reducing our reliance on China. In 2019, 90% of our supply chain was sourced from China. As of December 31, 2021, we have qualified suppliers outside of China for all our commodities and reduced the extent to which our supply chain for U.S.-based projects is subject to existing tariffs. We have entered into partnerships with manufacturers in the United States, Mexico, Canada, Spain, Brazil, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, India, Vietnam and Korea to diversify our supply chain and optimize costs.
Disruptions in transportation and supply chain. Our costs are affected by the underlying costs of raw materials including steel, component costs including motors and micro-chips and transportations costs. Current market conditions that constrain supply of materials and disrupt the flow of materials from international vendors impacts the cost of our products and services. We have also seen increases in domestic transportation costs. These cost increases impact our margins. We are taking steps to expand and diversify our manufacturing partnerships and we are implementing alternative modes of transportation to mitigate the impacts of these current headwinds in the global supply chain and logistics market. We also have a sharp focus on our design to value initiative to improve margin by reducing manufacturing and material costs of our products.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March of 2020, the World Health Organization declared that the worldwide spread and severity of a new coronavirus, referred to as COVID-19, was severe enough to be characterized as a pandemic. In response to the continued spread of COVID-19, governmental authorities in the United States and around the world have imposed various restrictions designed to slow the pace of the pandemic, including restrictions on travel and other restrictions that prohibit employees from going to work, including in cities where we have offices, employees, and customers, causing severe disruptions in the worldwide economy. The broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations remain uncertain and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact of virus variants, the rate of vaccinations, the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on our customers and suppliers and the range of governmental and community reactions to the pandemic. While our day-to-day operations have been affected, the impact has been less pronounced as most of our staff has worked remotely and continued to develop our product offerings, source materials and install our products. However, we have experienced significant supply chain disruptions that have caused delays in product deliveries due to diminished vessel capacity and port detainment of vessels as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic (including as a result of multiple COVID-19 variants), which have contributed to an increase in lead times for delivery of our tracker systems. For instance, we experienced a COVID-related supplier production slowdown in India at the end of March 2021, which continued throughout 2021 due to the emergence of the Omicron variant. The reduced capacity for logistics is also causing increases in logistics costs. Additionally, ground operations at project sites have been impacted by health-related restrictions, shelter-in-place orders and worker absenteeism, which resulted in delays in project completions in 2020, and these restrictions have also hindered our ability to provide on-site support to our customers and conduct inspections of our contract manufacturers. The disruptions in the global supply chain have resulted in extended lead times for some of our component parts. Management will continue to monitor the impact of the global situation on our financial condition, cash flows, operations, contract manufacturers, industry, workforce and customer relationships.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net loss and adjusted earnings per share (“EPS”)
We utilize Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted EPS as supplemental measures of our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss plus (i) provision (benefit) for income taxes, (ii) interest expense, net, (iii) depreciation expense, (iv) amortization of intangibles, (v) stock-based compensation, (vi) non-routine legal fees, severance and certain other costs (credits) and (vii) the loss (income) from our unconsolidated subsidiary. We also deduct the gains from the disposal of our investment in unconsolidated subsidiary and from extinguishment of our debt from net loss in arriving at Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted Net Loss as net loss plus (i) amortization of debt issue costs and intangibles, (ii) stock-based compensation, (iii) non-routine legal fees, severance and certain other costs (credits), (iv) the loss (income) from our unconsolidated subsidiary and (v) income tax expense (benefit) of adjustments. We also deduct the gains or add back the losses from the disposal of our investment in unconsolidated subsidiary and from extinguishment of our debt from net loss in arriving at Adjusted Net Loss. Adjusted EPS is defined as Adjusted Net Loss on a per share basis using the weighted average diluted shares outstanding.
Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted EPS are intended as supplemental measures of performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We present Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS, because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on an ongoing basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies.
Among other limitations, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted EPS do not reflect (i) our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments, and (ii) the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations. Further, the adjustments noted in Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the impact of any income tax expense or benefit. Additionally, other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted EPS differently than we do, which limits its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted EPS should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and you should not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. These non-GAAP financial measures, when presented, are reconciled to the most closely applicable GAAP measure as disclosed below:
(a) Amounts for 2020 and 2019 were not considered material for inclusion in the calculation of Adjusted Net Loss.
(b) Non-routine legal fees represent legal fees incurred for matters that were not ordinary or routine to the operations of the business.
(c) Severance costs were incurred related to agreements with employees due to restructuring changes.
(d) Other costs include consulting fees in connection with operations and finance ($2,233), costs associated with our IPO ($2,424) and 2021 CEO transition costs ($270).
(e) Our management excludes the gain from sale and the income (loss) prior to sale arising from an interest we held in an unconsolidated subsidiary when evaluating our operating performance.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
The following discussion describes certain line items in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue
Revenue from the sale of Voyager Trackers and customized components of Voyager Trackers is recognized over time, as work progresses, utilizing an input measure of progress determined by cost incurred to date relative to total expected cost on these projects to correlate with our performance in transferring control over Voyager Trackers and its components. Revenue from the sale of a Voyager Tracker’s individual parts is recognized point-in-time as and when control transfers based on the terms of the contract. Revenue from sale of term-based software licenses is recognized upon transfer of control to the customer. Revenue for shipping and handling services is recognized over time based on progress in meeting shipping terms of the arrangements. Subscription revenue, which is derived from a subscription-based enterprise licensing model, and support revenue, which is derived from ongoing security updates and maintenance, are generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract.
Our customers include project developers, solar asset owners and EPC contractors that design and build solar energy projects. For each individual solar project, we enter into a contract with our customers covering the price, specifications, delivery dates and warranty for the products being purchased, among other things. Our contractual delivery period for Voyager Trackers and related parts can vary depending on size of the project and availability of vessels and other means of delivery. Contracts can range in value from tens of thousands to tens of millions of dollars.
Our revenue is affected by changes in the volume and ASP of our solar tracking systems purchased by our customers and volume of sales of software products and engineering services, among other things. The ASP of our solar tracker systems and quarterly volume of sales is driven by the supply of, and demand for, our products, changes in product mix, geographic mix of our customers, strength of competitors’ product offerings and availability of government incentives to the end-users of our products. Additionally, our revenue may be impacted by seasonality and variability related to ITC step-downs and construction activity as well as the cold weather.
The vast majority of our revenue was attributable to sales in the United States, with a smaller portion derived from sales in Southeast Asia and Europe. Our revenue growth is dependent on continued growth in the number of solar tracker projects and engineering services we win in competitive bidding processes and growth in our software sales each year, as well as our ability to increase our market share in each of the geographies in which we currently compete, expand our global footprint to new emerging markets, grow our production capabilities to meet demand and continue to develop and introduce new and innovative products that address the changing technology and performance requirements of our customers, among other things.
Cost of revenue and gross profit (loss)
We subcontract with third-party manufacturers to manufacture and deliver our products directly to our customers. Our product costs are affected by the underlying cost of raw materials procured by these contract manufacturers, including steel and aluminum; component costs, including electric motors and gearboxes; technological innovation in manufacturing processes; and our ability to achieve economies of scale resulting in lower component costs. We do not currently hedge against changes in the price of raw materials, but we continue to explore opportunities to mitigate the risks of foreign currency and commodity fluctuations through the use of hedges and foreign exchange lines of credit. Some of these costs, primarily personnel, are not directly affected by sales volume.
We have increased our headcount over the last three years as we scale up our business. Our gross profit may vary period-to-period due to changes in our headcount, ASP, product costs, product mix, customer mix, geographical mix, shipping methods, warranty costs and seasonality. Pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), we received employee retention credits, which have reduced the impact of increased personnel costs on our operating results.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses consist of research and development expenses, selling and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component of our operating expenses and include salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions and stock-based compensation expenses.
Our increased headcount over the last three years has contributed to increased operating costs both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue and we expect to continue to hire new employees in the future to support our growth and in response to expected turnover. In addition, our operating costs have been impacted by (i) our level of research activities to originate, develop and enhance our products, (ii) our sales and marketing efforts as we expand
our development activities in other parts of the world, and (iii) increased legal and professional fees, compliance costs, insurance, facility costs and other costs associated with our expected growth and in being a public company.
Results of Operations - 2021 Compared to 2020
Revenue
We generate our revenue in two streams - Product revenue and Service revenue. Product revenue is derived from the sale of Voyager Trackers, customized components of Voyager Trackers, individual part sales for certain specific transactions and the sale of term-based software licenses. Service revenue includes revenue from shipping and handling services, subscription-based enterprise licensing model and maintenance and support services in connection with the term-based software licenses.
Product revenue
The increase in product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a 25% increase in MW shipped, as well as an increase of approximately 15% in ASP.
Service revenue
The increase in service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in shipping and logistics revenue on Voyager Tracker sales as a result of a 25% increase in MW shipped and by increased contract prices which helped partially offset a portion of the rising shipping and logistics costs, much of which was not fully recoverable.
Cost of revenue and gross (loss) profit
Cost of revenue consists primarily of Voyager Trackers’ raw material costs, including purchased components, as well as costs related to freight and delivery, product warranty, supply chain personnel and consultants, insurance and customer support. Personnel costs include both direct labor costs as well as costs attributable to any individuals whose activities relate to the procurement, installation and delivery of the finished product and provision of services and are net of federal employee retention credits received.
Gross profit may vary from period-to-period and is primarily affected by our ASP, product costs, product mix, customer mix, geographical mix, shipping method, logistics costs, warranty costs and seasonality.
The increase in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by the aforementioned increase in MW shipped as well as increases in steel costs and shipping and logistics costs. Cost per MW increased 32% due to increases in steel prices and shipping and logistics costs. Overhead costs were higher year over year due to increased headcount to support our growth and the higher stock-based compensation expense due to our IPO triggering vesting of a significant number of shares in the second quarter of 2021, as well as awards granted to new employees in 2021. Cost of revenue in 2021 was also impacted by approximately $8.6 million in expenditures related to certain retrofits, remediations and product reconfigurations for certain of our solar tracker systems that had been previously installed, or were in the process of being installed, at customer sites.
Our gross profit (loss) percentage of revenue for 2021 was a negative 12.0%, as compared to a positive 1.9% in 2020. The decrease was due primarily to increased logistics costs that were not passed on to our customers, increases in headcount as we scaled up our operating structure and higher stock-based compensation triggered by the IPO and grants to new employees.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries (net of federal employee retention credits received), employee benefits, stock-based compensation expenses and travel expenses related to our engineers performing research and development activities to originate, develop and enhance our products. Additional expenses include consulting charges, component purchases, legal fees for registering patents and other costs for performing research and development on our software products.
The increase in research and development expenses in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to (i) $3.6 million of higher stock-based compensation expense mainly triggered by our 2021 IPO, along with grants to new employees during 2021, (ii) $1.3 million in higher personnel-related expenses, as headcount increased allowing for expansion of our research and development activities designed to enhance our products, (iii) an increase of $0.7 million in professional services largely related to increased patent protection costs and (iv) higher expenditures related to our design-to-value initiatives to reduce the costs of our tracker product. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue were 4.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries (net of federal employee retention credits received), employee benefits, stock-based compensation expenses and travel expenses related to our sales and marketing and business development personnel. Additionally, selling and marketing expenses include costs associated with professional fees and support charges for software subscriptions and licenses, trade shows and conventions.
The increase in selling and marketing expenses in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to (i) $2.0 million of higher stock-based compensation expense triggered by our 2021 IPO and grants to new employees in 2021, and (ii) $0.9 million in higher personnel-related expenses, as headcount increased to support our international expansion plans. Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue were 2.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 1.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries (net of federal employee retention credits received), employee benefits, stock-based compensation expenses, and travel expenses related to our executives, finance team, and administrative employees. It also consists of legal, consulting, and professional fees, rent and lease expenses pertaining to our headquarters and international offices, business insurance costs and other costs.
The increase in general and administrative expense in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to (i) $46.6 million of higher stock-based compensation expense triggered by our 2021 IPO and grants to new employees in 2021, (ii) $5.9 million of higher personnel-related expenses related to headcount increases, (iii) $7.1 million of higher professional fees for consulting, legal and accounting services, and (iv) higher costs for business insurance, rent, and other office expenses. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue were 28.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense primarily consisted of interest on our revolving line of credit with Western Alliance Bank, which was paid off during the quarter ended March 31, 2021, and a commitment fee on our revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank that we entered into in April 2021, along with associated debt issue cost amortization.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
In January 2021, our Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loan that was received in April 2020 pursuant to the CARES Act, was forgiven, resulting in a gain on extinguishment of debt. The terms of the CARES Act provided for loan forgiveness if the proceeds were used to retain and pay employees and for other qualifying expenditures. In 2020, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment in connection with our Secured Promissory Notes which we had repaid the principal in full as of December 31, 2020.
Income (loss) from unconsolidated subsidiary
We sold our interest in our unconsolidated subsidiary, Dimension Energy LLC ("Dimension"), on June 24, 2021. Dimension is a community solar developer based in Atlanta, Georgia that provides renewable energy solutions for local communities in the United States. Our share of the loss from this unconsolidated subsidiary for the period from January 1, 2021, to the disposal date was $0.4 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a gain of $1.4 million as our share of the income from this equity investment. Upon sale of our interest in June 2021,
we recognized a gain of $20.8 million, which is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Loss as a "Gain from disposal of investment in unconsolidated subsidiary".
Results of Operations - 2020 Compared to 2019
Revenue
Product revenue
The increase in product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by a 250% increase in MW shipped due to new projects with existing customers, as well as projects for new customers in the year ended December 31, 2020. New customers represented 89% of the additional MW shipped in 2020. We increased our ASP by 2.8% from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a shift in the geographic mix of our projects toward projects in the United States.
Service revenue
The increase in service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in shipping and logistics revenue on Voyager Tracker sales due to a 250% increase in MW shipped to our U.S. customers.
Cost of revenue and gross (loss) profit
The increase in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by the aforementioned increase in MW shipped. Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, was also impacted by approximately $14.0 million in expenditures related to certain retrofits, remediations and product reconfigurations for certain of our solar tracker systems that had been previously installed, or were in the process of being installed, at customer sites. In addition, we had a slight reduction in our cost per MW due to improvements in scale and diversification of our supply chain which reduced tariff costs.
Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $5.6 million, or 286.5%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the above stated reasons.
Research and development
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to (i) an increase of $1.5 million in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, due to a net increase in headcount by 18 for the research and development of our products, (ii) an increase of $0.5 million in legal fees for registering patents and other related consulting and recruiting fees, and (iii) an increase of $0.4 million in facilities and equipment related expenses, partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in research and development expenses related to Voyager Tracker technology as its development cycle ended in the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue was 2.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 7.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling and marketing
The increase in selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, of $2.5 million due to a net increase in headcount by 10, a $0.1 million increase in various consulting and recruiting fees, and an increase of $0.1 million in expenses pertaining to IT software. The increase was partially offset by (i) a decrease in bad debt expense of $0.5 million, (ii) a $0.3 million reduction in advertising expenses associated with trade shows and conventions and other business development expenses, and (iii) a decrease of $0.3 million related to travel expenses of sales personnel. Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue was 1.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to (i) an increase of $4.0 million in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, due to a net increase in headcount by 24, (ii) an increase of $1.9 million in professional fees for consulting, legal and accounting services, (iii) an increase of $0.2 million related to overall travel expenses, (iv) an increase of $0.3 million related to office equipment, (v) an increase of $0.6 million in business insurance costs, and (vi) an increase of $0.2 million pertaining to rent, lease and other office expenses in
line with an increase in headcount. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue was 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 8.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense consisted of annual amortization of debt issuance costs and interest on our Secured Promissory Notes and a revolving line of credit with Western Alliance Bank.
Income (loss) from unconsolidated subsidiary
The increase in our income from unconsolidated subsidiary resulted from recording $1.4 million of income from our investment in Dimension for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a loss from such investment for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the fact that Dimension generated $22.6 million of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to no revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. The community solar development cycle is approximately 18 to 24 months and Dimension began development activity in 2018, therefore the initial revenue was recognized in fiscal year 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of shares of common stock and payments from our customers. During the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, we received net amounts of $6.0 million, $28.9 million and $235.2 million, respectively, from issuances of our common stock, including our IPO in April 2021. During those same years, we also incurred new debt in the form of a PPP loan in 2020 pursuant to the CARES Act and a draw in 2019 under our then existing revolving line of credit agreement, but have since paid off all outstanding borrowings, including debt incurred prior to 2019, or in the case of PPP loan, had such debt forgiven as of December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, we have $102.2 million of cash on hand and $100 million of unused borrowing capacity under our existing revolving credit facility as described under "Revolving line of credit" below. We have no material long term obligations requiring the use of cash and have positive working capital as of December 31, 2021. Management believes that our existing capital, which includes our cash on hand, as well as our unused borrowing capacity under our revolving line of credit is sufficient for us to remain in operation for at least one year from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements, despite our use of cash during 2021 to meet our operating needs. While management believes that the Company’s existing sources of liquidity are adequate to fund operations through twelve months from the date the financials are issued, we may need to raise additional debt or obtain new equity financing to fund operations in the future beyond the next twelve months should our use of cash to fund operations continue at levels experienced during 2021.
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities were as follows:
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used approximately $57.3 million of cash to fund (i) losses on certain of our projects, largely related to increased material and logistics costs due to supply chain disruptions during the year that were not fully recoverable, (ii) higher personnel and facility-related costs associated with headcount increases, and (iii) increased professional service fees, largely as a result of being a new public company. Economic conditions during 2021 caused our industry to experience rapid commodity price increases and significant increases in transportation costs which negatively impacted our margins in the near term and thus, our cash flow from operations.
We are taking steps to diversify our supply chain and implement design changes to lower the material requirements for our trackers in order to mitigate these economic headwinds. We believe this impact to be temporary as we work through our cost improvement roadmap.
A total of approximately $75.6 million was also used in 2021 to fund increases in working capital and other items, largely related to (i) increased project activity compared to 2020, as well as the timing of that activity, (ii) our efforts to ensure steel capacity for our products and to acquire inventory that has a longer lead time due to global market supply and logistics constraints, and (ii) a slowdown in collections from a major customer during the latter part of 2021.
During 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $0.5 million primarily due to a net loss of $15.9 million which was reflective of our investment in growing our operations and expanding our presence to additional countries. This was offset by $7.5 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $7.9 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash adjustments primarily related to (i) a warranty provision of $7.9 million attributable to warranties issued with increased sales of Voyager Trackers, (ii) a stock-based compensation expense of $1.8 million in line with overall increase in headcount, (iii) income from unconsolidated subsidiary of $1.4 million, which represented our share of profit from our equity method investment, (iv) recognition of $1.0 million for warranty amounts expected to be recoverable from our contract manufacturers, (v) loss on debt extinguishment of $0.1 million and (vi) other non-cash items of $0.1 million. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to a net increase in deferred revenue of $3.1 million, partially offset by a $9.7 million increase in accounts receivable, both of which were due to the increase in sales of Voyager Trackers in 2020. Additionally, accounts payable increased by $8.9 million due to increases in procurement and supply chain activity to support our revenue growth, accrued expenses and other liabilities increased by $7.2 million. These increases were partially offset by (i) a decrease in inventories of $2.8 million in line with increased sales, (ii) an increase in prepaid and other current assets of $2.8 million due to increases in advances to suppliers, (iii) a decrease of $0.5 million for operating lease assets, (iv) an increase of $0.7 million in current and non-current liabilities, (v) a decrease of $0.1 million in accrued interest on related party debt and (vi) an increase of $1.7 million in other non-current assets.
During 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $0.3 million, primarily due to a net loss of $13.5 million which was reflective of our investment in growing our operations. This was offset by $4.3 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $8.9 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash adjustments primarily related to (i) warranty provision of $2.1 million attributable to warranties issued with increased sales of Voyager Trackers, (ii) stock-based compensation expense of $0.9 million, (iii) loss from unconsolidated subsidiary of $0.7 million, which represented our share of loss from our equity method investment, (iv) depreciation and amortization expense of $0.4 million, (v) bad debt expense of $0.4 million and (vi) recognition of a warranty asset of $0.3 million for amounts expected to be recoverable from our contract manufacturers. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to a net increase in deferred revenue of $19.7 million, partially offset by a $13.8 million increase in accounts receivable, both of which were due to the increase in revenue from sales of Voyager Trackers in 2019. Additionally, accounts payable increased by $7.8 million due to increases in procurement and supply chain activity to support our revenue growth and accrued expenses and other liabilities increased by $3.4 million. These increases were partially offset by (i) a decrease of $0.3 million in accrued interest on related party debt, (ii) an increase in prepaid and other current assets of $3.2 million and (iii) an increase in other non-current assets of $0.2 million in line with our increased operating activities, and inventories of $4.5 million to support expected increases in sales in subsequent years.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of $22.3 million from the sale of our 23% equity investment in Dimension, a community solar developer based in Atlanta, Georgia that provides renewable energy solutions for local communities in the United States. Partially offsetting this was cash spending on capital expenditures totaling $1.0 million, primarily for new lab equipment to be used for product testing, as well as new computer and IT equipment and tooling, much of which was related to higher project activity levels during the year, along with higher headcount.
During 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $1.9 million, of which $2.1 million was attributable to distributions received from unconsolidated subsidiary as return of investment, offset by $0.2 million used to purchase property and equipment.
During 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $0.02 million, respectively, which was attributable to the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing activities
We received $235.2 million of proceeds, net of offering costs, from our IPO in April 2021. A portion of these proceeds, totaling $54.2 million, were subsequently used to purchase an aggregate of 4,455,384 shares of our common stock. We also repaid the outstanding balance on our revolving line of credit with Western Alliance Bank during 2021, totaling $1.0 million, after which this facility was closed and a new facility was entered into with various lenders, including Barclays Bank (see "Revolving line of credit" below). We also received cash from the exercise of stock options during 2021.
During 2020, we received $28.9 million of proceeds from issuance of our common stock and repaid the outstanding balance on certain private placement promissory notes totaling $7.0 million. We also received a PPP loan pursuant to the CARES Act in the amount of $0.8 million in 2020.
During 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $7.0 million, consisting of proceeds from stock issuances of $6.0 million and proceeds from borrowings of $1.0 million.
Revolving line of credit
On April 30, 2021, we entered into a senior secured revolving credit facility with various lenders, including Barclays Bank PLC, as an issuing lender, the swingline lender and as administrative agent (the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement has an initial three-year term and will be used for working capital and for other general corporate purposes. The Credit Agreement includes the following terms: (i) aggregate commitments of up to $100 million, with letter of credit and swingline sub-limits; (ii) a base rate of LIBOR, plus 3.25% per annum, (iii) initial commitment fees of 0.50% per annum; (iv) initial letter of credit fees of 3.25% per annum; and (v) other customary terms for a corporate revolving credit facility. We have not made any draws on the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2021. Should LIBOR rates become unavailable during the term of the Credit Agreement, the rate per annum on loans will be based on the secured overnight financing rate (SOFR) published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or a successor SOFR administrator.
The facility is secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our assets, subject to certain exclusions, and customary guarantees. The Credit Agreement includes the following financial condition covenants that we are required to satisfy: (i) maintain a minimum liquidity limit of $125 million for each quarter; (ii) maintain a 3.75 times leverage ratio; and (iii) maintain a 1.5 times interest coverage ratio. The leverage and interest coverage ratios will be triggered when we achieve $50 million in adjusted EBITDA over a trailing twelve months, or upon our election if we have achieved positive adjusted EBITDA over a trailing twelve months. Once the leverage and interest coverage ratios are triggered the minimum liquidity limit will not have a minimum limit. Minimum liquidity includes unrestricted cash plus the undrawn balance of the revolving credit facility. The minimum liquidity covenant was the only financial condition covenant we had to satisfy as of the period ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we were in full compliance with our financial condition covenant.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Management Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported revenue and expenses during the period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue recognition
Policy description
We recognize revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services by following a five-step process, (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation, as further described below.
Identify the contract with a customer: A contract with a customer exists when (i) the Company enters into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the products and services to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these products and services, (ii) the contract has commercial substance and, (iii) the Company determines that collection of substantially all consideration for products and services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. In assessing the recognition of revenue, we also evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one contract and if the combined or single contract should be accounted for as multiple performance obligations which could change the amount of revenue and profit (loss) recorded in a period. Change orders may include changes in specifications or design, manner of performance, equipment, materials, scope of work, and/or the period of completion of the project. We analyze change orders to determine if they should be accounted for as a modification to an existing contract or a new stand-alone contract.
Contracts we enter into with our customers for sale of Voyager Trackers are generally under two different types of arrangements: (1) purchase agreements and equipment supply contracts (“Purchase Agreements”) and (2) sale of individual parts of the Voyager Tracker.
Change orders from our customers are generally modifications to existing contracts and are included in the total estimated contract revenue when it is probable that the change order will result in additional value that can be reliably estimated and realized.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract: We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are either capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations or as one performance obligation since the majority of tasks and services are part of a single project or capability. However, determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may sometimes require significant judgment.
Our Purchase Agreements typically include two performance obligations- 1) Voyager Tracker or customized components of Voyager Tracker, and 2) shipping and handling services. The deliverables included as part of the Voyager Tracker are predominantly accounted for as one performance obligation, as these deliverables are part of a combined promise to deliver a project.
The revenue for shipping and handling services will be recognized over time based on shipping terms of the arrangements, as this faithfully depicts the Company’s performance in transferring control.
Sale of individual parts of Voyager Tracker for certain specific transactions includes multiple performance obligations consisting of individual parts of the Voyager Tracker. Revenue is recognized for parts sales at a point in time when the obligations under the terms of the contract with our customer are satisfied. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the asset, which is in line with shipping terms.
Determine the transaction price: The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. Such amounts are typically stated in the customer contract, and to the extent that we identify variable consideration, we will estimate the variable consideration at the onset of the arrangement as long as it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The majority of our contracts do not contain variable consideration provisions as a continuation of the original contract. None of our contracts contain a significant financing component. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are not included in revenue.
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract: Once we have determined the transaction price, we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in a manner depicting the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the good(s) or service(s) to the customer. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract on a relative standalone selling price basis.
We use the expected cost-plus margin approach based on hardware, labor, and related overhead cost to estimate the standalone selling price of the Voyager Tracker, customized components of Voyager Tracker, and individual parts
of Voyager Tracker for certain specific transactions. We use the adjusted market assessment approach for all other performance obligations except shipping, handling, and logistics. For shipping, handling, and logistics performance obligations, we use a residual approach to calculate the standalone selling price, because of the nature of the highly variable and broad range of prices we charge to various customers for this performance obligation in the contracts.
Recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation: For each performance obligation identified, we determine at contract inception whether we satisfy the performance obligation over time or at a point in time. Voyager Tracker and customized components of Voyager Tracker performance obligations in the contract are satisfied over-time as work progresses for its custom assembled Voyager Tracker, utilizing an input measure of progress determined by cost-to-cost measures on these projects as this faithfully depicts our performance in transferring control. Additionally, our performance does not create an asset with an alternative use, due to the highly customized nature of the product, and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Our performance obligations for individual part sales for certain specific transactions are recognized point-in-time as and when control transfers based on the Incoterms for the contract. Our performance obligations for term-based software licenses are recognized point-in-time as and when control transfers, either upon delivery to the customer or the software license start date, whichever is later. Our performance obligation for shipping and handling services is satisfied over-time as the services are delivered over the term of the contract. We recognize subscription services sales/other services on a straight-line basis over the contract period. With regard to support revenue, a time-elapsed method is used to measure progress because we transfer control evenly over the contractual period. Accordingly, the fixed consideration related to support revenue is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term.
Contract accounting: The timing of revenue recognition, billing, and cash collection results in the recognition of accounts receivable, unbilled receivables for revenue recognized in excess of billing, and deferred revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We may receive advances or deposits from our customers before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities, which are reflected as “deferred revenue” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Judgments and assumptions
The timing and amounts of revenue and cost of revenue recognition, as well as recording of related receivables and deferred revenue, is highly dependent on our identification of performance obligations in each contract and our estimates by contract of total project cost and our progress toward project completion as of each period end. Certain estimates are subject to factors outside of our control that may impact our suppliers and the global supply chain. As an example, we began to experience increases in steel prices and shipping and logistics costs, as well as delays in delivery of our products to customers during 2021, which negatively impacted our results of operations as we were not able to recover all of the additional costs under certain of our fixed fee contracts. We base our estimates on the best information available at each period end, but future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, and actual results could differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
Accounts receivable, net
Policy description
Trade receivables are recorded at invoiced amounts, net of allowances for doubtful accounts if applicable, and do not bear interest. We generally do not require collateral from our customers; however, in certain circumstances, we may require letters of credit, other collateral, additional guarantees or advance payments. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on our assessment of the collectability of our customer accounts.
We plan to adopt ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments effective January 1, 2023. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we have utilized the incurred loss model in estimating our allowance for doubtful accounts.
Judgments and assumptions
We regularly review our accounts receivable that remain outstanding past their applicable payment terms and establish allowances or make potential write-offs by considering certain factors such as historical experience, industry data, credit quality, age of balances and current economic conditions that may affect a customers’ ability to pay.
Adjustments to the allowance may either impact the amount of revenue previously recognized or bad debt expense depending on the facts and circumstances leading to the adjustment. Adjustments to amounts originally estimated to be collectible that are considered to be potential price concessions as a result of a dispute regarding performance or other matters affecting customer relationships will result in a reduction in revenue whereas adjustments due to changes in customer credit risk or their expected ability to pay will be recognized in bad debt expense.
Warranty
Policy description
Typically, the sale of Voyager Tracker projects includes parts warranties to customers as part of the overall price of the product. We provide standard assurance type warranties for our products for periods generally ranging from five to ten years. We record a provision for estimated warranty expenses in cost of sales, net of amounts recoverable from manufacturers under their warranty obligations to us. We do not maintain general or unspecified reserves; all warranty reserves are related to specific projects. All actual or estimated material costs incurred for warranty services in subsequent periods are charged to those established reserves.
Judgments and assumptions
We base our estimated warranty obligations on our historical experience and forward-looking factors including the nature and frequency of product failure rates and costs to address future claims. These estimates are inherently uncertain given our relatively short history of sales and changes to our historical or projected warranty experience may result in material changes to our warranty reserve in the future. Additionally, we make estimates of what costs we believe will be recoverable from the manufacturer of our products that we use to offset our obligations to our customers.
While we periodically monitor our warranty activities and claims, if actual costs incurred were to be different from our estimates, we would recognize adjustments to our warranty reserves in the period in which those differences arise or are identified. Such adjustments could be material to our results of operations in the period the adjustments are made.
Stock-based compensation
Policy description
We recognize compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made, including stock options and restricted stock, based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date, in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes Option-Pricing model while the fair value of restricted stock grants is based on the estimated fair value of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. For service-based awards, stock-based compensation is recognized using the straight-line attribution approach over the requisite service period. For performance-based awards, stock-based compensation is recognized based on graded vesting over the requisite service period when the performance condition is probable of being achieved.
Judgments and assumptions
The Black-Scholes model relies on various assumptions, in addition to the exercise price of the option and the value of our common stock on the date of grant. These assumptions include:
Expected Term: The expected term represents the period that the Company’s stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is calculated as the average of the option vesting and contractual terms, based on the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
Expected Volatility: Since the Company did not have a trading history of its common stock prior to our IPO and since such trading history subsequent to our IPO is limited, the expected volatility is derived from the average historical stock volatilities of several public companies within the Company’s industry that it considers to be comparable to its business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants.
Risk-Free-Interest-Rate: The Company bases the risk-free interest rate on the implied yield available on US Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to the expected term.
Expected Dividend: The Company has not issued any dividends in its history and does not expect to issue dividends over the life of the options and, therefore, has estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Changes to any of these assumptions, but particularly our estimates of expected term and volatility, could change the fair value of our options and impact the amount of stock-based compensation expense we report each period.
Common stock valuations
Prior to the completion of our IPO in April 2021, our board of directors determined the best estimate of fair value of our common stock utilizing guidance in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. These valuations were used to determine expense to be recognized under certain pre-IPO stock-based compensation awards.
Our board considered numerous objective factors in exercising reasonable judgment to determine fair value prior to our IPO including at that time:
•contemporaneous third-party valuations of our common stock;
•the prices at which we or other holders sold our common stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•our financial condition, results of operations and capital resources;
•contemporaneous third-party valuations of our common stock;
•the prices at which we or other holders sold our common stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•the industry outlook;
•the fact that option and restricted stock awards involved rights in illiquid securities in a private company;
•the valuation of comparable companies;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends and competitive environment; and
•general economic outlook including economic growth, inflation, unemployment, interest rate environment and global economic trends.
Our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by first determining the enterprise value of our business, and then using that to derive a per share value of our common stock.
The enterprise value of our business was estimated by considering several factors, including estimates using the cost approach, market approach and the income approach. The cost approach estimates the fair market value of an organization by utilizing the balance sheet to take the total fair market value of assets minus the fair market value of liabilities. The market approach was estimated based on the projected value of comparable public companies in a similar line of business that are publicly traded. We kept the comparable public companies consistent throughout each valuation. The income approach estimates the enterprise value of the business based on the cash flows that it expects to generate over its remaining life. These future cash flows were discounted to their present values using a rate of return appropriate for the risk of achieving the business’ projected cash flows. The present value of the estimated cash flows was then added to the present value equivalent of the residual value of the business at the end of the projected period to calculate the business enterprise value. In addition to the three approaches described above, we factored in the closest round of equity financing preceding the date of valuation.
After determining our enterprise value, we allocated value to our equity to determine the value of common stock. In allocating the enterprise value of our business to our common stock prior to January 2019, we used the option pricing method (“OPM”), whereas after January 2019, we used a combination of OPM and probability weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). PWERM involves a forward-looking analysis of the possible future outcomes of the enterprise. This method is particularly useful when discrete future outcomes can be predicted at a relatively high level of confidence with a probability distribution. Discrete future outcomes considered under PWERM included an initial public offering of our common stock, as well as non-IPO market-based outcomes. Determining the fair value of the enterprise using PWERM requires us to develop assumptions and estimates for both the probability of an IPO liquidity event and stay private outcomes, as well as the values we expect those outcomes could yield.
A discount for lack of marketability (“DLOM”) was applied to arrive at a fair value of our common stock. A DLOM is meant to account for the lack of marketability of a stock that is not traded on public exchanges. In making the final determination of common stock value, consideration was also given to recent sales of common stock.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that were highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events.
Subsequent to completion of our IPO, the fair value of each share of our common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market.
JOBS Act accounting election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We elected to use the allowed extended transition period for adopting new or revised accounting standards.