Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Except for the historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. We caution you not to put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. See “Cautionary Statement” in the forepart of this report. Our actual future results or actions may differ materially from these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including but not limited to the risks described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report and other reports filed by us with the SEC. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we currently expect.
Introduction
We were incorporated in Colorado, U.S.A. and our subsidiaries are GRC Nevada Inc. (“GRCN”), Walker Lane Minerals Corp. (“WLMC”), County Line Holdings Inc. (“CLH”), County Line Minerals Corp. (“CLMC”) and Golden Mile Minerals Corp. (“GMMC”). WLMC, CLH, CLMC, and GMMC are wholly-owned subsidiaries of GRCN. We are a mining company which pursues gold and silver projects that are expected to have both low operating costs and high returns on capital.
Spin-Off from Gold Resource Corporation
Prior to December 31, 2020, we were a subsidiary of Gold Resource Corporation (“GRC”). On December 31, 2020, GRC completed the spin-off of our shares of common stock, which separated our business, activities and operations into a separate, public company. The spin-off was effected by the distribution of all of our outstanding shares of common stock to GRC’s shareholders. GRC’s shareholders received one share of our common stock for every 3.5 shares of GRC’s common stock held as of December 28, 2020.
In February 2021, we began trading on the OTC Market operated by the OTC Markets Group under the ticker symbol "FRTT". Subsequently the symbol was changed to “FTCO”. Our common stock was subsequently up listed to the OTCQB on March 5, 2021.
The following discussion summarizes our results of operations for the two fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including GRCN prior to it becoming Fortitude Gold’s wholly-owned subsidiary on August 18, 2020. It also analyzes our financial condition at December 31, 2021.
2021 Financial Results and Highlights
● $17.9 million net income or $0.75 per share;
● $40.0 million cash balance on December 31, 2021;
● $82.1 million net sales;
● Exceeded annual outlook with record gold production;
● 46,459 gold ounces and 44,553 silver ounces produced;
● $7.3 million cash dividends, three successive increases;
● 3.76 g/t average open pit grade mined;
● $76.0 million working capital;
● $40.6 million mine gross profit;
● $24.7 million cash from operating activities;
● $705 per ounce total all in sustaining cost;
● 104% exploration spending increase; and
● Released initial resource on the Golden Mile Property.
Operating Data: The following tables summarize certain information about our operations at our Isabella Pearl Mine for the periods indicated:
(1) The difference between what we report as “metal production” and “metal sold” is attributable to the difference between the quantities of metals contained in the doré we produce versus the portion of those metals actually paid for according to the terms of our sales contracts. Differences can also arise from inventory changes incidental to shipping schedules, or variances in ore grades and recoveries which impact the amount of metals contained in doré produced and sold.
(1) Average metal prices realized vary from the market metal prices due to final settlement adjustments from our provisional invoices when they are settled. Our average metal prices realized will therefore differ from the market average metal prices in most cases.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Sales, net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net sales were $82.1 million as compared to $54.0 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in is primarily attributable to higher sales volumes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, gold sales volumes increased 53% from the same period in 2020 as a result of higher-grade ore mined and processed.
Mine cost of sales. For the year ended December 31, 2021, mine cost of sales totaled $41.5 million compared to $37.8 million for the same period in 2020. The change is mainly attributable to higher depreciation and amortization expenses due to an increase in sales volumes in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization was slightly offset by lower production costs as there was no net realizable value expense related to our inventory in 2021, whereas in 2020, we recorded a $3.6 million adjustment.
Mine gross profit. For the year ended December 31, 2021, mine gross profit totaled $40.6 million compared to $16.2 million for the same period in 2020. The change is attributable to higher sales volumes and higher average realized prices for gold and silver, resulting in a lower cash cost after by-products per gold ounce sold. The lower cash cost per ounce is due to mining efficiencies and higher-grade ore mined in 2021 as compared to 2020 as well as no net realizable value
expense related to our inventory in 2021 as noted above.
General and administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses totaled $11.4 million as compared to $2.9 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily the result of non-recurring stock-based compensation and onboarding incentive compensation totaling $5.5 million relating to building out the Company’s staffing needs post Spin-Off which was recognized in the first quarter. While the Company anticipated working under the MSA for a longer period, the Company believed it would be prudent to fully staff up during the first quarter. On April 21, 2021, the Company was delivered official notice from GRC that the MSA was being canceled. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Exploration expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, property exploration expenses totaled $5.4 million as compared to $2.6 million for the same period of 2020. The increase of $2.8 million is the result of increased drilling and other exploration activities at the Golden Mile and Isabella Pearl (Scarlet target) projects.
Other expense, net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expense, net of $0.2 million did not materially change from $0.2 million for the same period in 2020.
Income and mining tax expense. For the year ended December 31, 2021, income and mining tax expense was $5.7 million as compared to $0.2 million for the same period in 2020. The increase is the result of our increased income before income and mining taxes and increased Nevada net proceeds of minerals tax as a result of increases metal sales. See Note 5 in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Net income. For the year ended December 31, 2021 we recorded a net income of $17.9 million as compared to $10.2 million in the corresponding period for 2020. The increase is due to the changes in our consolidated results of operations as discussed above.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic based on the rapid increase in global exposure. In response to the pandemic, many jurisdictions, including the United States, instituted restrictions on travel, public gatherings, and certain business operations.
During 2021 and 2020, and as of the date of this report, the mining industry is listed as an essential business in the state of Nevada. Accordingly, we continue to operate the Isabella Pearl Mine while utilizing safety measures and protocols. In an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and protect the health and safety of our employees, contractors, and communities, we have taken precautionary measures including specialized training, social distancing, screening workers before they enter facilities, a work from home mandate where possible, and close monitoring of national and regional COVID-19 impacts and governmental guidelines. As our non-mining workforce is able to work remotely using various technology tools, we have been able to maintain our operations and internal controls over financial reporting and disclosures.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including widely available and utilized vaccines, the duration and severity of the pandemic and related restrictions, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Non-GAAP Measures
Throughout this report, we have provided information prepared or calculated according to U.S. GAAP and have referenced some non-GAAP performance measures which we believe will assist with understanding the performance of our business. These measures are based on precious metal gold equivalent ounces sold and include cash cost before by-product credits per ounce, total cash cost after by-product credits per ounce, and total all-in sustaining cost per ounce (“AISC”). Because the non-GAAP performance measures do not have any standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP, they may not be comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. Accordingly, these measures should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These non-GAAP measures are not necessarily indicative of operating profit or cash flow from operations as determined under GAAP.
Revenue generated from the sale of silver is considered a by-product of our gold production for the purpose of our total cash cost after by-product credits for our Isabella Pearl Mine. We periodically review our revenues to ensure that our reporting of primary products and by-products is appropriate. Because we consider silver to be a by-product of our gold production, the value of silver continues to be applied as a reduction to total cash costs in our calculation of total cash cost after by-product credits per precious metal gold equivalent ounce sold. Likewise, we believe the identification of silver as by-product credits is appropriate because of its lower individual economic value compared to gold and since gold is the primary product we produce.
Total cash cost, after by-product credits, is a measure developed by the Gold Institute to provide a uniform standard for comparison purposes. AISC is calculated based on the current guidance from the World Gold Council.
Total cash cost before by-product credits includes all direct and indirect production costs related to our production of metals (including mining, milling and other plant facility costs, royalties, and site general and administrative costs) plus treatment and refining costs.
Total cash cost after by-product credits includes total cash cost before by-product credits less by-product credits, or revenues earned from silver.
AISC includes total cash cost after by-product credits plus other costs related to sustaining production, including sustaining exploration expenses and sustaining capital expenditures. We determined sustaining capital expenditures as those capital expenditures that are necessary to maintain current production and execute the current mine plan.
Cash cost before by-product credits per ounce, total cash cost after by-product credits per ounce and AISC are calculated by dividing the relevant costs, as determined using the cost elements noted above, by precious metal gold equivalent ounces sold for the periods presented.
Reconciliations to U.S. GAAP
The following table provides a reconciliation of total cash cost after by-product credits to total mine cost of sales (a U.S. GAAP measure) as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations:
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures of total cash cost and AISC:
(1) Production cost plus treatment and refining charges.
(2) Please see the tables below for a summary of our by-product revenue and by-product credit per precious metal equivalent ounces sold.
(3) Sustaining capital expenditures and sustaining exploration expenses divided by gold ounces sold.
The following tables summarize our by-product revenue and by-product credit per precious metal gold ounce sold:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Through December 31, 2020, our primary source of liquidity during development, construction and ramp up stages of the Isabella Pearl Mine was cash contributions from GRC. Since December 31, 2020, our liquidity has largely been impacted through operating activities. As production and sales from Isabella Pearl have continued to increase, so has our cash position. As of December 31, 2021, we had a cash position of $40.0 million compared to $27.8 million at December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to increased cash from operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had positive working capital of $76.0 million, representing an increase of $34.1 million from a working capital balance of $41.9 million at December 31, 2020. Our working capital balance fluctuates as we use cash to fund our operations, financing and investing activities, including exploration, mine development and income taxes. With our working capital balance as of December 31, 2021, we believe that our liquidity and capital resources are adequate to fund our operations, exploration, capital, and corporate activities for the next twelve months.
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 increased to $40.0 million from $27.8 million as of December 31, 2020, a net increase in cash of $12.2 million. The increase is primarily due to cash from operations, which was offset by cash spent on capital expenditures at Isabella Pearl, including the heap leach pad expansion, as well as $7.3 million cash paid for shareholder dividends.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $24.7 million, compared to $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary difference is due to increased net income.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.5 million compared to $6.5 million during the same period in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the completion of phase one Pearl mine development in 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities was $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $20.4 million net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net change is due to dividend payments in 2021, whereas in 2020, financing activities were substantially comprised of capital contributions from GRC. No such contributions were made in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had a $7.5 million off-balance sheet arrangement consisting of a $12.2 million surety bond off-set by a $4.7 million Reclamation Liability for future reclamation obligations for Isabella Pearl.
Accounting Developments
Recently issued accounting pronouncements have been evaluated and do not presently impact our financial statements and supplemental data.
COVID-19 Assessment
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have reviewed and evaluated our long-lived assets for events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. As of December 31, 2021, we determined that no impairment indicators existed at the balance sheet date, as the pandemic-related restrictions are viewed as temporary and are not expected to have a material impact on our ability to recover the carrying amounts of our long-lived assets.
We have been closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts and potential impacts on our business. However, because of the changing developments with respect to the spread of COVID-19 and the unprecedented nature of the pandemic, we are unable to predict the extent and duration of any potential adverse financial impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Future developments could impact our assessment and result in material impairments to our long-lived assets.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities and contingencies at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. As a result, management is required to routinely make judgments and estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different conditions or assumptions. The following discussion pertains to accounting estimates management believes are most critical to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations that require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments.
Revenue
Doré sales are recognized upon the satisfaction of performance obligations, which occurs when control of the doré transfers to the customer and price and quantity are agreed upon. Transfer of control occurs once the customer takes possession of the doré. Doré sales are recorded using quoted metal prices, net of refining charges.
Proven and Probable Reserves
Critical estimates are inherent in the process of determining our reserves. Our reserves are affected largely by our assessment of future metals prices, as well as by engineering and geological estimates of ore grade, accessibility, and production cost. Metals prices are estimated at three-year trailing averages. Our assessment of reserves occurs annually, and we may utilize external audits in the future. Reserves are a key component in the valuation of our property, equipment and mine development and related depreciation rates.
Reserve estimates are used in determining appropriate rates of units-of-production depreciation, with net book value of many assets depreciated over remaining estimated reserves. Reserves are also a key component in forecasts, with which we compare estimated future cash flows to current asset values in an effort to ensure that carrying values are reported appropriately. Reserves are a culmination of many estimates and are not guarantees that we will recover the indicated quantities of metals or that we will do so at a profitable level.
Depreciation and Amortization
Capitalized costs are depreciated or amortized using the straight-line method or unit-of-production (“UOP”) method at rates sufficient to depreciate such costs over the shorter of estimated productive lives of such assets or the useful life of the individual assets. Significant judgment is involved in the determination of the estimated life of the assets. Our estimates
for reserves are a key component in determining our UOP rates. Our estimates of proven and probable ore reserves may change, possibly in the near term, resulting in changes to depreciation, depletion and amortization rates in future reporting periods. Productive lives range from 3 to 7 years, but do not exceed the useful life of the individual asset.
Please see Note 1 in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for depreciation rates of major asset categories.
Carrying Value of Stockpiles
Stockpiles represent ore that has been extracted from the mine and is available for further processing. Stockpiles are measured by estimating the number of tonnes added and removed from the stockpile, the number of contained ounces (based on assay data), and the estimated metallurgical recovery rates. Stockpile ore tonnages are verified by periodic surveys. Costs are added to stockpiles based on current mining costs, including applicable overhead and depreciation and amortization relating to mining operations and removed at each stockpile’s average cost per recoverable unit as material is processed.
We record stockpiles at the lower of average cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value represents the estimated future sales price based on short-term and long-term metals price assumptions that are applied to expected short-term (12 months or less) and long-term sales from stockpiles, less estimated costs to complete production and bring the product to sale.
Carrying Value of Ore on Leach Pad
Ore on the leach pad represents ore that has been mined and placed on the leach pad where a solution is applied to the surface of the heap to dissolve the gold. Costs are added to ore on the leach pad based on current mining costs, including applicable depreciation and amortization relating to mining operations. Costs are removed from ore on the leach pad as ounces are recovered based on the average cost per estimated recoverable ounce of gold on the leach pad. Estimates of recoverable ore on the leach pad is calculated from the quantities of ore placed on the leach pad (measured tonnes added to the leach pad), the grade of ore placed on the leach pad (based on assay data) and a recovery percentage (based on ore type). In general, the leach pad is estimated to recover between 60% and 81% of the contained ounces placed on the leach pad, depending upon whether run-of-mine or crushed ore is placed on the leach pad.
The metallurgical balancing process is constantly monitored and estimates are refined based on actual results over time. Variations between actual and estimated quantities resulting from changes in assumptions and estimates that do not result in write-downs to net realizable value are accounted for on a prospective basis. We recorded write-downs to reduce the carrying value of leach pad inventory at our Isabella Pearl Mine to net realizable value of $3.6 million in 2020, as a component of Production Costs. These write-downs were primarily due to the expected lower realized ore grade during the ramp-up stage of the mining and processing activities. No net realizable value write-downs occurred in 2021.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets to be held and used, using a fair-value based approach when events and circumstances indicate that the related carrying amount of our assets may not be recoverable. The economic environment and commodity prices may be considered as impairment indicators for the purposes of these impairment assessments. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the carrying value of a long-lived asset or asset group is considered impaired when the anticipated undiscounted cash flows from such asset or asset group is less than its carrying value. In that event, a loss will be recorded in our consolidated statements of operations based on the difference between book value and the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group computed using discounted estimated future cash flows, or the application of an expected fair value technique in the absence of an observable market price. Future cash flows include estimates of recoverable quantities to be produced from estimated proven and probable mineral reserves, commodity prices (considering current and historical prices, price trends and related factors), production quantities, production costs, and capital expenditures, all based on life-of-mine plans and projections. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist that are largely independent of cash flows from other asset groups. It is possible that actual future cash flows will be significantly different than the estimates, as actual future quantities of
recoverable minerals, gold and other commodity prices, production levels and costs and capital are each subject to significant risks and uncertainties.
Asset Retirement Obligation
Our mining and exploration activities are subject to various laws and regulations, including legal and contractual obligations to reclaim, remediate, or otherwise restore properties at the time the property is removed from service. Accounting for reclamation and remediation obligations requires management to make estimates of the future costs that we will incur to complete the work required to comply with existing laws and regulations. Actual costs may differ from the amounts estimated. Reclamation costs are allocated to expense over the life of the related assets and are periodically adjusted to reflect changes in the estimated present value resulting from the passage of time and revisions to the estimates of either the timing or amount of the reclamation and remediation costs. Also, future changes to environmental laws and regulations could increase the extent of reclamation and remediation work required.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based employee compensation under the fair value recognition and measurement provisions in accordance with applicable accounting standards, which require all stock-based payments to employees, including stock grants, and grants of stock options, to be measured based on the grant date fair value of the awards, with the resulting expense generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period during which the employee is required to perform service in exchange for the award.
Stock-based compensation expense is recorded over the requisite service period of the award on a straight-line basis. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Income Taxes
The calculation of income tax expense, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities involve significant management estimation and judgment involving a number of assumptions. In determining these amounts, management interprets tax legislation and makes estimates of the expected timing of the reversal of future tax assets and liabilities. We also make assumptions about future earnings, tax planning strategies and the extent to which potential future tax benefits will be used. We are also subject to assessments by various taxation authorities which may interpret tax legislation differently, which could affect the final amount or the timing of tax payments.