Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to complete our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the placement units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of the initial public offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On March 16, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as amended, the “Merger Agreement”) with eToro Group Ltd., a company organized under the laws of the British Virgin Islands (“eToro”), Buttonwood Merger Sub Corp., a Delaware corporation and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of eToro (“Merger Sub”), and the Company, which provides for, among other things, the merger of Merger Sub with and into the Company (the “Merger”), with the Company surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of eToro (the “Business Combination”). At the closing of the Business Combination and the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), the stockholders of the Company will receive certain of the common shares, no par value, of eToro (“eToro Common Shares”), and eToro will list as a publicly traded company on NASDAQ and will continue to conduct the social trading platform business conducted by eToro prior to the Business Combination.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a Business Combination after our Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from April 22, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest earned on investments held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $8,141,836, which consists of operating costs of $3,991,372 and a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,175,467, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $25,003.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,804,534, which consists of operating costs of $105,760, a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,277,733 and transaction costs attributable to the Initial Public Offering of $422,617, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,576.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 8, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,200,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 640,000 units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to FinTech Investor Holdings V, LLC, that closed simultaneously with the Initial Public Offering, generating gross proceeds of $6,400,000. The manager of FinTech Investor Holdings V, LLC is Cohen Sponsor Interests V, LLC.
Transaction costs amounted to $15,461,590, consisting of $4,360,000 in cash underwriting fees, $10,640,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $461,590 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,336,391. Net loss of $8,141,836 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $25,003, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,175,467, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $2,654,981 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $548,774. Net loss of $1,804,534 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,576, payments of operating costs through promissory notes of $425, a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,277,733 and transaction costs attributable to the Initial Public Offering of $422,617, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $443,439 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments held in the Trust Account of $250,008,357. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we withdrew $18,222 of interest income from the Trust Account to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $36,042 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, members of the Company’s management team or any of their respective affiliates or other third parties may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”), which will be repaid only upon the consummation of a Business Combination. If the Company does not consummate a Business Combination, the Company may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. If such funds are insufficient to repay the Working Capital Loans, the unpaid amounts would be forgiven. The Working Capital Loans may be converted into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. At December 31, 2021, $300,000 of Working Capital Loans were outstanding. As of October 26, 2021, the Company amended the Working Capital Loans to remove the conversion feature.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through one year from the date of these financial statements if a Business Combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, utilities, and shared personnel support services. We began incurring these fees on December 4, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination or the Company’s liquidation.
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on December 3, 2020, the holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and the units that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the placement warrants or the warrants included in the units issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will be entitled to registration rights requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., as representative of the several underwriters, is entitled to a deferred fee of $10,640,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the representative from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and ASC 815. We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust them to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Warrants for periods where no observable trading price was available are valued using a Modified Black-Scholes Option Pricing model for the Placement Warrants and a Monte Carlo simulation methodology for the Public Warrants. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.