ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Future FinTech is a holding company incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida. The Company historically engaged in the production and sale of fruit juice concentrates (including fruit purees and fruit juices), fruit beverages (including fruit juice beverages and fruit cider beverages) in People’s Republic of China (“PRC” or “China”). Due to drastically increased production costs and tightened environmental laws in China, the Company had transformed its business from fruit juice manufacturing and distribution to a real-name blockchain based e-commerce platform, supply chain financing services and trading business and financial technology business. The main business of the Company includes an online shopping platform, Chain Cloud Mall (“CCM”), which is based on blockchain technology; supply chain financing services and trading, financial technology service business and the application and development of blockchain-based technology in financial technology services. The Company has also expanded into financial services and cryptocurrency market data and information service businesses.
On August 6, 2021, the Company completed acquisition of 90% of the issued and outstanding shares of Nice Talent Asset Management Limited (“NTAM”), a Hong Kong-based asset management company, from Joy Rich Enterprises Limited (“Joy Rich”). NTAM is licensed under the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong (“SFC”) to carry out regulated activities in Type 4: Advising on Securities and Type 9: Asset Management.
On September 1, 2021, FTFT UK Limited, a company organized under the laws of United Kingdom and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“FTFT UK”) entered into a Share Purchase Agreement with Rahim Shah, a resident of United Kingdom (“Seller”) to acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding shares (the “Sale Shares”) of Khyber Money Exchange Ltd., which is a money transfer company with a platform for transferring money through one of its agent locations or via its online portal, mobile platform or over the phone. Khyber Money Exchange Ltd. is regulated by the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the parties are waiting for the approval by the FCA before formal closing of the transaction.
In December 2021, FTFT Capital Investments, LLC officially launched FTFTX, a cryptocurrency market data platform that provides investors with real-time cryptocurrency market data and trading information from a large number of cryptocurrency exchanges. The market data is available for Bitcoin, ETH, EOS, Litecoin, TRON and other cryptocurrencies at https://www.ftftx.com and via the FTFTX App on iOS and Android devices. The FTFTX app is free to download on Google Play and the Apple Store.
In March 2022, FTFT UK received has received approval to operate as an Electronic Money Directive (“EMD”) Agent and has been registered as such with the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), a UK regulator. This status grants FTFT UK the ability to distribute or redeem e-money and provide certain financial services on behalf of an e-money institution (registration number 903050).
We are a holding company incorporated in Florida and we are not a Chinese operating company. As a holding company with no material operations of our own, we conduct a substantial majority of our operations through our subsidiaries and VIE E-Commerce Tianjin in China and this structure involves unique risks. Our shares of common stock are shares of our Florida holding company, and we do not have any equity ownership of our VIE, instead we control and receive the economic benefits of our VIE’s business operations through certain contractual arrangements, which are used to replicate foreign investment in Chinese-based companies where Chinese law prohibits direct foreign investment in value added telecom/e-commerce business. Chinese regulatory authorities could disallow the VIE structure, which would likely result in a material change in our operations and/or value of our shares, including that it could cause the value of shares to significantly decline.
There are legal and operational risks associated with being based in and having a substantial majority of operations in China and Hong Kong. These risks could result in a material change in our operations and/or the value of our common stock or could significantly limit or completely hinder our ability to offer or continue to offer securities to investors and cause the value of our shares to significantly decline or be worthless. Recently, the PRC government initiated a series of regulatory actions and statements to regulate business operations in China with little advance notice, including cracking down on illegal activities in the securities market, enhancing supervision over China-based companies listed overseas using variable interest entity structure, adopting new measures to extend the scope of cybersecurity reviews, and expanding the efforts in anti-monopoly enforcement. On July 6, 2021, the General Office of the Communist Party of China Central Committee and the General Office of the State Council jointly issued an announcement to crack down on illegal activities in the securities market and promote the high-quality development of the capital market, which, among other things, requires the relevant governmental authorities to strengthen cross-border oversight of law-enforcement and judicial cooperation, to enhance supervision over China-based companies listed overseas, and to establish and improve the system of extraterritorial application of the PRC securities laws. Recently, the PRC State Internet Information Office issued the Measures of Cybersecurity Review (Revised Draft for Comments, not yet effective), which requires cyberspace operators with personal information of more than 1 million users who want to list abroad to file a cybersecurity review with the Office of Cybersecurity Review. As of the date of this report, these new laws and guidelines have not impacted the Company’s ability to conduct its business, accept foreign investments, or list on a U.S. or other foreign stock exchange; however, there are uncertainties in the interpretation and enforcement of these new laws and guidelines, which could materially and adversely impact our business and financial outlook and may impact our ability to accept foreign investments or continue to list on a U.S. or other foreign stock exchange. Our VIE and certain subsidiaries of the Company are incorporated and operating in mainland China and they have received all required permissions from Chinese authorities to operate their current business in China, including a Business license, Bank Account Open Permits and Value Added Telecom Business License.
Chain Cloud Mall is a unique real-name based blockchain e-commerce shopping platform that integrates blockchain, internet technology.
The CCM shared shopping mall platform is designed to be a block-chain based shopping mall for merchants and goods, not the exchange of digital currencies, and it currently only accepts payment from credit cards, Alipay and WeChat.
The Company started its trial operation of NONOGIRL, a cross-border e-commerce platform, in March 2020 and formally launched it in July 2020. The cross-border e-commerce platform aimed to build a new s2b2c (supplier to business and consumer) outsourcing sales platform dominated by social media influencers. It was aimed at the growing female consumer market, with the ability to broadcast, short video, and all forms communication through the platform. It could also create a sales oriented sharing ecosystem with other major social media used by customers, etc. The Company’s promotion strategy previously mainly relied on the training of members and distributors through meetings and conferences. Due to the outbreak of COVID-19, the Chinese government put a restriction on large gatherings. These restrictions made the promotion strategy for our online e-commerce platforms difficult to be implemented and the Company has experienced difficulties to subscribe new members for its online e-commerce platforms. Due to the lack of new subscribers, in June 2021, the Company suspended its cross-border e-commerce platform (NONOGIRL). Also, since the second quarter of 2021, the Company has transformed its member-based business model of Chain Cloud Mall to a sale agent based eCAAS platform and began to provide supply chain financing services and trading of coal for coal mines and power generation plants as well as aluminum ingots.
The Company currently has nine direct wholly-owned subsidiaries: DigiPay FinTech Limited (“DigiPay”), a company incorporated under the laws of the British Virgin Islands, Future FinTech (Hong Kong) Limited, a company incorporated under the laws of Hong Kong, GlobalKey Shared Mall Limited, a company incorporated under the laws of Cayman Islands (“GlobalKey Shared Mall”), Tianjin Future Private Equity Fund Management Partnership, a Limited Partnership under the laws of China, FTFT UK Limited, a company incorporated under the laws of United Kingdom, Future Fintech Digital Capital Management, LLC, a company incorporated under the laws of Connecticut, Future Fintech Digital Number One GP, LLC, a company incorporated under the laws of Connecticut. Future FinTech Labs Inc., a company incorporated under the laws of New York and FTFT SuperComputing Inc. a company incorporated under the laws of Ohio.
SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited (“SkyPeople BVI”) was a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and a company organized under the laws of the British Virgin Islands, which held 100% of the equity interest of HeDeTang Holdings (HK) Ltd. (“HeDeTang HK”), a company organized under the laws of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China (“Hong Kong”), and HeDeTang HK held 73.42% of the equity interest of SkyPeople Juice Group Co., Ltd., (“SkyPeople (China)”), a company incorporated under the laws of the PRC. SkyPeople (China) had eleven subsidiaries in the PRC, which were mainly involved in the production and sales of fruit juice concentrates, fruit juice beverages and other fruit-related products in the PRC and overseas markets. On February 27, 2020, SkyPeople BVI (the “Seller”) completed the transfer of its ownership of HeDeTang HK to New Continent International Co., Ltd. (the “Buyer”), an unrelated third party and a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands for a total price of RMB 0.6 million (approximately $85,714), pursuant to a Share Transfer Agreement entered into by the Seller and the Buyer on September 18, 2019 and approved at the special shareholders meeting of the Company on February 26, 2020 (the “Sale Transaction”). SkyPeople BVI had no operational assets or business after the transfer and the Company dissolved SkyPeople BVI on July 27, 2020.
CCM Shopping Mall
Due to the lack of new member subscriptions caused by restrictions on our promotion strategy for the control of spread of COVID-19, we have transformed the CCM shopping mall from a member based platform to a sale agent based eCAAS platform. The eCAAS platform is entrusted by the Anti-Counterfeiting Committee to run its Responsible Brand Program.
Anti-Counterfeiting Committee will review and accept the companies to join its Responsible Brand Program. After acceptance, these companies are authorized to use 315 anti-counterfeiting labels on their products and sell them on our eCAAS platform. The companies can also use sales agents to sell their products on our eCAAS platform and parties can negotiate the commission percentages for the products sold. Any new sales agent must be recommended by existing agents and pay a one-time fee to the eCAAS platform to be admitted as the authorized agent to provide sales agent services on the platform.
Coal and Aluminum Ingots Supply Chain Financing Service and Trading
Since the second quarter of 2021, we started coal supply chain financing service and trading business. Since the third quarter of 2021, we started aluminum ingots supply chain financing service and trading business.
Our supply chain finance business mainly serves the receivables and payables of industrial customers, obtains the creditor’s rights or commodity goods rights of large state-owned enterprises through trade execution, provides customers with working capital, accelerates capital turnover, and then expands the business scale and improves the industrial value.
Through our supply chain service ability and customer resources, we can tap into low-risk assets, flexibly carry out financial services around the actual financial needs of certain industries, and reduce the overall risk of the business by using the control of business flow, goods logistics and capital flow in the process of commodity circulation.
We focus on bulk coal and aluminum ingots an take large state-owned or listed companies as the core service targets; We use our own funds as the operation basis, actively uses a variety of channels and products for financing, such as banks, commercial factoring companies, accounts receivable, asset-backed securities, and other innovative financing methods to obtain sufficient funds.
We sign purchase and sale agreements with suppliers and buyers. The suppliers are responsible for the supply and transportation of coal to the end users’ designated freight yard or transfer the title of aluminum ingots to us in certain warehouses. We select the customers and suppliers that have good credit and reputation.
Asset Management Service.
NTAM engages assets management and advisory services. NTAM’s main revenue is generated from providing professional advices to customers and management fees for managing the investment of the clients. NTAM is licensed under the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong (SFC) for carrying out regulated activities in “Advising on Securities” and “Asset Management”. NTAM offers diversified asset management portfolio for professional investors. Assets of NTAM’s clients are held in banks, where clients gave the banks their authorization allowing NTAM to place trading instructions on behalf of the clients in order to manage the clients’ assets.
NTAM mainly engages in following asset management services for its clients:
(1) Equity Investment
NTAM manages clients’ investment portfolio in stocks of the companies listed on the international market with strong liquidity. At the same time, it selects companies that have unique or differentiated businesses, realizing above average profit growth.
(2) Debt investment
When NTAM manages clients’ investment portfolio in bonds that are denominated in major international currencies such as US dollar, euro and sterling, the issuer of debts shall have good credit rating and asset liability ratio. Through active management, NTAM focus in bonds with higher yield to maturity among bonds with the same maturity and credit rating.
(3) Precious metals and currencies investment
NTAM also manages clients’ investment portfolio in major international currencies and precious metals, including US dollar, euro, British pound, Japanese yen, Australian dollar and offshore Chinese yuan. Precious metals include gold, platinum and silver. With research on the fundamentals of market supply and demand to predict the trend of commodity prices, NTAM endeavors to improve the rate of return for clients through dual currency investment, options and structured products.
(4) Derivative Investment
NTAM also manages clients’ investment portfolio in financial derivatives in different asset classes, such as options and structured products.
(5) External Asset Management Services (EAM)
This business takes customer demand as the service purpose, cooperates with several private banks which provide asset custody services, and innovatively introduces the function of investment bank to provide exclusive private solutions for our clients.
NTAM’s main revenue is generated from providing professional advices to clients and management fees for managing the investment of the clients. As of March 15, 2022, NTAM has approximately US$260 million assets under its management.
Recent Developments Related to the COVID-19 Outbreak
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported and has spread throughout China and other parts of the world. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak as a “pandemic”. In early 2020, Chinese government took emergency measures to combat the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions, and the temporary closure of office buildings and facilities in China. In response to the evolving dynamics related to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Company is following the guidelines of local authorities as it prioritizes the health and safety of its employees, contractors, suppliers and business partners. Our offices in China were closed and the employees worked from home at the end of January until late March 2020 and was closed again in January 2022 due to the COVID-19 outbreak. The quarantines, travel restrictions, and the temporary closure of office buildings have materially negatively impacted our business. Our suppliers were negatively affected, and could continue to be negatively affected in their ability to supply and ship products to our customers in case of any resurgence of COVID-19. Our customers that have been negatively impacted by the outbreak of COVID-19 may reduce their budgets to purchase products and services from us, which may materially adversely impact our revenue. The business operations of the third parties’ stores on our e-commerce platform have been and continue to be negatively impacted by the outbreak, which in turn adversely affects the business of our platform as a whole as well as our financial condition and operating results. The outbreak has had and continues to have disruption to our supply chain, logistics providers, customers or our marketing activities with the new variants of COVID-19, which could materially adversely impact our business and results of operations. Although China has already begun to recover from the outbreak of COVID-19, there are still outbreak in various cities and provinces due to new variants, including the recent outbreak of Omicron variant in Xi’an city, Hong Kong and Shanghai city in 2022, which have resulted quarantines, travel restrictions, and temporary closure of office buildings and facilities in these cities. The Company’s promotion strategy of CCM Shopping Mall previously mainly relied on the training of members and distributors through meetings and conferences. Although China has already begun to recover from the outbreak of COVID-19, there are still outbreak in various cities and provinces due to new variants including the recent outbreak of Omicron variant in Xi’an city, Hong Kong and Shanghai city during the first quarter of 2022 which have resulted quarantines, travel restrictions, and temporary closure of office buildings and facilities in these cities. Chinese government still puts a restriction on large gatherings. These restrictions made the promotion strategy for our online e-commerce platforms difficult to implement and the Company has experienced difficulties to subscribe new members for its online e-commerce platforms. Due to the lack of new subscribers, in June 2021, the Company suspended its cross-border e-commerce platform NONOGIRL. Also, since the second quarter of 2021, the Company has transformed its member-based Chain Cloud Mall to a sale agent based eCAAS platform and began to provide supply chain financing services.
The global economy has also been materially negatively affected by the COVID-19 and there is continued severe uncertainty about the duration and intensity of its impacts. The Chinese and global growth forecast is extremely uncertain, which would seriously affect our business.
While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of COVID-19 and its new variants may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 and its new variants could materially negatively affect our business and the value of our common stock.
Further, as we do not have access to a revolving credit facility, there can be no assurance that we would be able to secure commercial debt financing in the future in the event that we require additional capital. We currently believe that our financial resources will be adequate to see us through the outbreak. However, in the event that we do need to raise capital in the future, outbreak-related instability in the securities markets could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital.
Consequently, our results of operations have been materially and adversely affected by COVID-19 pandemic. Any potential further impact to our results will depend on, to a large extent, future developments and new information that may emerge regarding the duration and severity of the COVID-19, new variants of COVID-19, the efficacy and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines and the actions taken by government authorities and other entities to contain the COVID-19 or treat its impact, almost all of which are beyond our control.
Discontinued Operations
On September 18, 2019, SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited, entered into a Share Transfer Agreement (the “Agreement”) with New Continent International Co., Ltd., (the “Buyer”) a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, the Buyer purchased 100% ownership of HeDeTang HK from SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited, which value is primarily derived from HeDeTang HK’s wholly-owned subsidiary HeDeJiaChuan Holdings Co., Ltd. and 73.41% owned subsidiary SkyPeople Juice Group Co., Ltd., for a total price of RMB 600,000 (approximately $85,714) (the “Sale Transaction”). The Sale Transaction was closed on February 27, 2020. In accordance with ASC Topic 205, Presentation of Financial Statement Discontinued Operations (“ASC Topic 205”), the Company presented the operation results of HeDeTang HK and its subsidiaries as a discontinued operation, as the Company believed that no continued cash flow would be generated by the discontinued component and that the Company would have no significant continuing involvement in the operations of the discontinued component. The total assets of HeDeTang HK were $106.85 million as of February 27, 2020 and the total liabilities of HeDeTang HK were $231.21 million as of February 27, 2020, resulting in a gain on disposal of $123.69 million. There was no income or loss from HeDeTang HK from January 1, 2020 to the close of Sale Transaction.
On March 11, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors passed a resolution to sell the operation of Globalkey Supply Chain Limited and Zhonglian Hengxin Assets Management Co., Ltd (“Zhonglian Hengxin”) and close the operation of Digital Online Marketing Limited, SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited and Chain Future Digital Tech (Beijing) Co., Ltd. Based on the disposal plan and in accordance with ASC 205-20, the Company presented the operating results from these operations as a discontinued operation.
On May 7, 2020, Future Business Management Co., Ltd. completed the transfer of its ownership of Zhonglian Hengxin to an individual third party. On July 24, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors passed a resolution to sale the operation of Hedetang Farm Products Trading Markets (Mei County) Co., Ltd. and close the operation of Chain Cloud Mall Logistics Center (Shaanxi) Co., Ltd, a subsidiary located in the national kiwifruit Industrial Park of Baoji City (“CCM Logistics”). On July 27, 2020, Skypeople Foods Holdings Limited was dissolved; On July 28, 2020, Digital Online Marketing Limited was dissolved;
On November 12, 2020, CCM Tianjin, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company entered into an Equity Transfer Agreement with Xi’an Yishengkang Information Technology, Ltd. (“Xi’an Yishengkang”), an unrelated third party, pursuant to which CCM Tianjin agreed to sell 90% of total issued and outstanding capital stock of in Hedetang Farm Products Trading Markets (Mei county) Co., Ltd. that it owns to Xi’an Yishengkang for RMB9,000 (approximately $1,324). On the same date, CCM Logistics entered into another Equity Transfer Agreement with an individual and unrelated third party, Liyuan Ying, pursuant to which CCM Tianjin agreed to sell 10% of total issued and outstanding capital stock of in Hedetang Farm Products Trading Markets (Mei county) Co., Ltd. that it owns to Liyuan Ying for RMB1,000 (approximately $147).
On April 9, 2021, FT Commercial Management (Beijing) Co., Ltd. was dissolved and deregistered.
On August 2, 2021, the Company sold Guangchengji (Guangdong) Industrial Co., Ltd. to an unrelated third party.
On September 2, 2021, Future Supply Chain Co., Ltd. discontinued its operations, and on November 4, 2021, it completed the transfer of its ownership to Shaanxi Fu Chen Venture Capital Management Co. Ltd. .
Segment Information Reclassification
The Company’s businesses mainly are CCM Shopping Mall, Coal and Aluminum Ingots Supply Chain Financing Service and Trading and Asset Management Services.
Use of Estimates
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and this requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure at contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The significant areas requiring the use of management estimates include the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable, estimated useful life and residual value of property, plant and equipment, impairment of long-lived assets, provision for staff benefit, valuation of change in fair value of warrant liability, recognition and measurement of deferred income taxes and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. Although these estimates are based on management’s knowledge of current events and actions management may undertake in the future, actual results may ultimately differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
On January 1, 2009, the Company adopted FASB Accounting Standard Codification Topic on Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”), which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in GAAP, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. ASC 820 does not require any new fair value measurements, but provides guidance on how to measure fair value by providing a fair value hierarchy used to classify the source of the information. In February 2008, FASB deferred the effective date of ASC 820 by one year for certain non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except those that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). The Company adopted the provisions of ASC 820, except as it applies to those non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities for which the effective date has been delayed by one year.
ASC 820 establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy of valuation techniques based on observable and unobservable input, which may be used to measure fair value and include the following:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Input other than Level 1 that is observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other input that is observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Unobservable input that is supported by little or no market activity and that is significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities. Classification within the hierarchy is determined based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, from January 1, 2018. The adoption had no impact on the Company’s retained earnings as of January 1, 2018 as well as the Company’s financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019. To achieve that core principle, we apply the five steps defined under Topic 606: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We assess its revenue arrangements against specific criteria in order to determine if it is acting as principal or agent. Revenue is recognized upon the transfer of control of promised goods or services to a customer. Historically, the Company has not had any returned products. Accordingly, no provision has been made for returnable goods. The Company is not required to rebate or credit a portion of the original fee if it subsequently reduces the price of its products.
Foreign Currency and Other Comprehensive Income
The financial statements of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries are measured using the local currency as the functional currency; however, the reporting currency of the Company is the United States dollar (“USD”). Assets and liabilities of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries have been translated into USD using the exchange rate at the balance sheet date, while equity accounts are translated using historical exchange rate. The average exchange rate for the period has been used to translate revenues and expenses. Translation adjustments are reported separately and accumulated in a separate component of equity (cumulative translation adjustment).
Other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 represented foreign currency translation adjustments and were included in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
There is no guarantee the RMB amounts could have been, or could be, converted into USD at rates used in translation.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided on an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. Any tax paid by subsidiaries during the year is recorded. Current tax is based on the profit or loss from ordinary activities adjusted for items that are non-assessable or disallowable for income tax purpose and is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted at the balance sheet date. Deferred income tax liabilities or assets are recorded to reflect the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the financial reporting amounts at each period end. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
ASC 740 provides guidance for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions, and it prescribes a threshold condition that a tax position must meet for any of the benefits of the uncertain tax position to be recognized in the financial statements. ASC 740 also provides accounting guidance on derecognizing, classification and disclosure of these uncertain tax positions.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the FASB ASC 360-10, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment and purchased intangibles subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. It is reasonably possible that these assets could become impaired as a result of technological or other industrial changes. Determination of recoverability of assets to be held and used is by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to future net undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the assets.
If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
Comparison of Operation Results of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The following table presents our consolidated revenues for our main products and services for the fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, (in thousands):
Revenue increased from $0.37 million in 2020 to $25.05 million in 2021, increase of $24.68 million or 6,688.89%. The increase in overall revenue was mainly due to an increase in asset management services and supply chain financing service and trading business.
CCM Shopping Mall Membership fees decreased from $0.34 million for the year ended 2020 to $86 for the year ended 2021, because there was no new membership enrollment during the year of 2021 and the Company has transformed its business model of CCM Shopping Mall from a member-based platform to a sales agent based eCAAS platform. Due to COVID-19 related restriction on large gathering for meetings and conference which primarily used by us before the pandemic for marketing and business development of new members, we were unable to attract new member enrollment during the year ended 2021 and have transformed business model for the platform.
Coal and Aluminum Ingots Supply Chain Financing Service and Trading business increased from $0 for year ended 2020 to $19.73 million for the year ended 2021. This is a new business we started during the second quarter of 2021 which did not exist in 2020.
Sale of goods decreased from $1,675 for the year ended 2020 to $0 for the year ended 2021 as no sale of goods during the same period of 2021.
Asset management service fee increased from $0 for the year ended 2020 to $5.32 million for the year ended 2021. This is a new business we acquired during the third quarter 2021 which did not exist in 2020.
Gross Margin
(in thousands)
Overall gross margin as a percentage of revenue was 7.19% for the year ended 2021, a decrease of 83.31% compared to 90.5% for the same period of last fiscal year, mainly due to less revenues from the membership fee which has a much higher margin than that of coals and aluminum ingots financial service and trading and asset management business.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents consolidated operating expenses and operating expenses as a percentage of revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively, (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.6 million, or 88.42%, from $4.1million to $7.7 million for the year ended 2021, compared to the same period of last fiscal year. The increase in general and administrative expenses was mainly due to new business development and new subsidiaries established by the Company during the year ended 2021 comparing to the same period of 2020.
Selling expenses increased by $0.33 million to $0.37 million in 2021 as compared to $0.04 million in 2020, mainly due to an increase in selling expenses from our new business.
Stock compensation expense decreased by $0.5 million during the year ended 2021, compared to the same period of last fiscal year as the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of the Company granted certain shares of common stock of the Company to certain officers and employees in July 2021 which had less value than the shares we granted to the officers, employees and director of the Company in 2020.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations decreased by $1.84 million to $13.21 million for 2021 from $15.05 million for 2020, mainly due to in the increase in revenue.
Noncontrolling Interests
As of December 31, 2021, Shaanxi Chunlv Ecological Agriculture Co., Ltd. (“Shaanxi Chunlv”) holds 20.0% interest in CCM logistics, Nature Worldwide Resources Ltd. holds 40% interest in DCON DigiPay Limited (“DCON Digipay”).
Loss per Share
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations were $0.17 and $0.17 in fiscal 2021, as compared to $0.8 and $0.7 in fiscal 2020, respectively. Basic and diluted loss per share attributable to discontinued operations was $0.04 and $0.04 for fiscal year 2021 as compared to basic and diluted income per share $3.13 and $2.76 for fiscal year 2020 respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $50.27 million, an increase of $40.85 million, from $9.43 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was mainly due to financing from the issuance of shares of common stock.
Our working capital has historically been generated from our operating cash flows, advances from our customers and loans from bank facilities. Our working capital was positive $65.49 million as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $56.80 million from positive $8.69 million as of December 31, 2020, mainly due to an increase in current assets.
In 2021, net cash used in our operating activities was $18.74 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1.97 million in 2020. The increase in net cash used by operating activities was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2021.
In 2021, net cash used in our investing activities was $11.18 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $2,944 in 2020 mainly due to payment for loan receivable.
In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $69.27 million as compared to cash used in financing activities $16.42 million in 2020. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was mainly due to financing from the issuance of shares of common stock.
Goodwill
On August 6, 2021, Future FinTech Group Inc., through its wholly owned subsidiary Future FinTech (Hong Kong) Limited., acquired of 90% of the issued and outstanding shares of Nice Talent Asset Management Limited (NTAM) from Joy Rich Enterprises Limited for HK$144,000,000, goodwill arises from the acquisition amounting to HK$127,618,555. As of December 31, 2021, the Company engaged a third party professional to reassess the valuation of NTAM by using discounted cash flow model to estimate its fair value. The Company’s evaluation of goodwill for impairment involves the comparison of the fair value of NTAM to its carrying value. The fair value of NTAM decreases by 4.56% of its original value, which resulted a write down of goodwill of 4.56%.
The Company uses discounted cash flow model to estimate fair value of NTAM, which requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions related to forecasts of future revenue and operating margin. In addition, the discounted cash flow model requires the Company to select an appropriate weighted average cost of capital based on current market conditions as of December 31, 2021. A high degree of auditor judgment and an increased extent of effort were required when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s estimates and assumptions related to the forecasts. The main factor that causes the changes in the estimation attributable to uncertainty of the future economic growth when the Omicron variant circulating globally.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.