Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes, and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Fathom Holdings Inc. (the “Company”, “Corporate”, “Our”, “We”), headquartered in Cary, North Carolina, is a national, technology-driven, end to end real estate services company integrating residential brokerage, mortgage, title, insurance and SaaS offerings for brokers and agents. Our primary operation, Fathom Realty (as defined below), operates as a real estate brokerage company, working with real estate agents to help individuals purchase and sell residential and commercial properties, primarily in the South, Atlantic, Southwest, and Western parts of the United States, with the intention of expanding into all states.
Fathom Realty Holdings, LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“Fathom Realty”), is a wholly owned subsidiary of Fathom Holdings Inc. Fathom Realty owns 100% of 35 subsidiaries, each an LLC representing the state in which the entity operates (e.g. Fathom Realty NJ, LLC).
Corporate Developments During 2020 and 2021
On August 4, 2020, the Company completed an IPO of its common stock, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 3,430,000 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share, generating net proceeds of $31.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs.
On November 24, 2020, the Company completed its acquisition of Verus Title Inc (“Verus”). Verus partners with real estate brokerage firms and lender institutions to offer title and settlement solutions, as well as insurance premium services, associated with real estate transactions. Verus operates as a technology enabled title agency offering a client-focused approach to real estate transactions in the South, Atlantic and Northeast parts of the United States.
In March 2021, the Company completed its acquisitions of Red Barn Real Estate, LLC (“Red Barn”) and Naberly Inc. (“Naberly”). The acquisition of Red Barn, a real estate brokerage business, is expected to help us to expand our reach in the Atlanta region real estate market. The acquisition of Naberly is facilitating our further development of our proprietary intelliAgent platform to enhance offerings and improve operational efficiency.
In April 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of E4:9 Holdings, Inc. (“E4:9). The acquisition of E4:9 is part of our vision to build a vertically integrated, end-to-end real estate operation by offering mortgage and insurance services to our agents to further serve our customers.
Also in April 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of LiveBy, Inc. (“LiveBy”). We believe the acquisition of LiveBy and its hyperlocal data and technology platform builds credibility for our real estate agents in their respective geographic areas by showcasing their local expertise and helping customers discover the best locations in which to live.
In June 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of Epic Realty (“Epic”). The acquisition of Epic, a real estate brokerage business, should help us to expand our reach in the Idaho real estate market. We further augmented our realty presence in Idaho with the addition of Woodhouse Group Realty (“Woodhouse”) in November 2021.
In November 2021, the Company, completed an offering of common stock, which resulted in the issuance and sale by the Company of 1,750,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $25.00 per share, generating gross proceeds of approximately $35 million, of which the Company received approximately $32.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs (the “2021 Equity Offering”).
COVID-19
Our business is dependent on the economic conditions within the markets in which we operate. Changes in these conditions can have a positive or negative impact on our business. The economic conditions influencing the housing markets primarily include economic growth, interest rates, unemployment, consumer confidence, mortgage availability, and supply and demand.
In periods of economic growth, demand typically increases resulting in increasing home sales transactions and home sales prices. Similarly, a decline in economic growth, increasing interest rates and declining consumer confidence generally decreases demand. Additionally, regulations imposed by local, state, and federal government agencies, and geopolitical instability, can also negatively impact the housing markets in which we operate.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified in Wuhan, China. This new coronavirus has caused a global health emergency and was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 (“COVID-19’’ or the “Pandemic”). In an effort to contain and slow the spread of COVID-19, governments implemented various measures, such as, ordering non-essential businesses to close, issuing travel advisories, cancelling large scale public events, ordering residents to shelter in place, and requiring the public to practice social distancing. In most states, real estate has been considered an essential business. The recent spread of the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19, which are more transmissible than other variants to date, may extend the impact of COVID-19 on our business.
We are continually monitoring the affects COVID-19 could have on our business. We believe that in the states and regions in which we operate the social and economic impacts, which include, but are not limited to, the following, could have a significant bearing on our future financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations: (i) restrictions on in-person activities associated with residential real estate transactions arising from shelter-in-place, or similar isolation orders; (ii) decline in consumer demand for in-person interactions and physical home tours; and (iii) deteriorating economic conditions, such as increased unemployment rates, recessionary conditions, lower yields on individual investment portfolios, and more stringent mortgage financing conditions. In response to COVID-19, the Company implemented cost-saving measures early on to include the elimination of non-essential travel and in-person training activities, and deferral of certain planned expenditures.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, due in part to the widespread availability of multiple COVID-19 vaccines, the effects of the COVID-19 on business worldwide lessened. However, the full magnitude and duration of the impact from COVID-19 are not fully known and cannot be estimated as the global economy continues to recover and adapt. While the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing and lowering of interest rates could offset some of the negative impacts on housing demand, it is too early to determine whether the lower interest rates can overcome the current economic concerns and rising uncertainty. According to the NAR housing statistics, existing home sales rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.5 million in 2021, an increase of 6.7% from the prior year, with sales up in all regions. We believe these trends were driven by declining mortgage rates, a decline in inventory, and an increasing demand for remote workspace, among other factors.
The impact of COVID-19 to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 has been minimal. Despite the ongoing Pandemic, the Company’s transactions and base of agents increased during 2021. However, while the Company believes it is well positioned in times of economic uncertainty, it is not able to estimate the effects of COVID-19 on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for the year ending December 31, 2022 and beyond. If the Pandemic continues, it might have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations.
Real Estate Agents
Due to our low-overhead business model, which leverages our proprietary technology, we can offer our agents the ability to keep significantly more of their commissions compared to traditional real estate brokerage firms. We believe we offer our agents some of the best technology, training, and support available in the industry. We believe our business model and our focus on treating our agents well will attract more agents and higher-producing agents.
We had the following number of agents as of:
Agent Equity Ownership
Effective January 1, 2019, agents can receive stock grants, which vest in three years based on continued affiliation with the Company, in two ways: 1) when the agent closes a sale of a property for the Company; and 2) when the agent refers another agent to join the Company. These stock grants are granted quarterly.
Reportable Segments
As of December 31, 2020, as we primarily operated as a cloud-based real estate brokerage and management did not make operating decisions nor assess performance based on geographic locations, we identified one reportable segment. We aggregated our real estate brokerage services segment and its affiliated services (e.g., title insurance and technology) segment as the profits and losses and assets of the affiliated services segment were not material.
Subsequent to completing its acquisitions of LiveBy and E4:9 in the second quarter of 2021, the Chief Operating Decision Maker began making operating decisions and assessing performance based on the services of identified operating segments and has identified three reportable segments: Real Estate Brokerage; Mortgage; and Technology.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue primarily consists of commissions generated from real estate brokerage services. We also have other service revenue, including mortgage lending, title insurance, home and other insurance, and SaaS revenues.
Gross commission income
We recognize commission-based revenue on the closing of a transaction, less the amount of any closing-cost reductions. Revenue is affected by the number of real estate transactions we close, the mix of transactions, home sale prices, and commission rates.
Other Services Revenue
Mortgage Lending
We recognize revenue streams for our mortgage lending services business which are primarily comprised of loans sold, origination and other fees.
The gain on sale of mortgage loans represents the difference between the net sales proceeds and the carrying value of the mortgage loans sold and includes the servicing rights release premiums.
Servicing rights release premiums represent one-time fee revenues earned for transferring the risk and rewards of ownership of servicing rights to third parties.
Retail origination fees are principally revenues earned from loan originations and recorded in the statement of operations in other service revenue. Direct loan origination costs and expenses associated with the loans are charged to expenses when the loans are sold. Interest income is interest earned on originated loans prior to the sale of the asset.
Insurance Agency Service Revenues
The revenue streams for the Company’s home and other insurance agency services business are primarily comprised of new and renewal commissions paid by insurance carriers. The transaction price is set as the estimated commissions to be received over the term of the policy based upon an estimate of premiums placed, policy changes and cancellations, net of restraint. The commissions are earned at the point in time upon effective date of the associated policies when control of the policy transfers to the client.
The Company is also eligible for certain contingent commissions from insurers based on the attainment of specific metrics (i.e., volume growth, loss ratios) related to underlying polices placed. Revenue for contingent commissions is estimated based on historical and current evidence of achievement towards each insurer’s annual respective metrics and is recorded as the underlying policies that contribute to the achievement are placed. Due to the uncertainty of the amount of contingent consideration that will be received, the estimated revenue is constrained to an amount that is probable to not have a significant negative adjustment. Contingent consideration is generally received in the first quarter of the subsequent year.
Title Service Revenues
Title services revenue includes fees charged for title search and examination, property settlement and title insurance services provided in association with property acquisitions and refinance transactions.
SaaS Revenues
The Company generates revenue from subscription and services related to the use of the LiveBy platform. The SaaS contracts are generally annual contracts paid monthly in advance of service and cancellable upon 30 days’ notice after the first year. The Company’s subscription arrangements do not provide customers with the right to take possession of the software supporting the platform. Subscription revenue, which includes support, is recognized on a straight-line basis over the non-cancellable contractual term of the arrangement, generally beginning on the date that the Company’s service is made available to the customer and is recorded as other service revenue in the statement of operations.
Operating Expenses
Commission and other agent-related costs
Commission and other agent-related costs consists primarily of agent commissions, less fees paid to us by our agents, order fulfillment, share-based compensation for agents, title searches, and direct cost to fulfill the services provided. We expect commission and other agent-related costs to continue to rise in proportion to the expected growth in our operations.
Operations and support
Operations and support consist primarily of direct cost to fulfill the services from our mortgage lending, title services, insurance services and other services provided. We expect operations and support to continue to rise in proportion to the expected growth in our operations.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses primarily include personnel costs, including base pay, bonuses, benefits, and share based compensation, related to ongoing development and maintenance of our proprietary software for use by our agents, customers, and support staff. Technology and development expenses also include amortization of capitalized software and development costs, data licenses, other software, and equipment costs, as well as infrastructure and operational expenses, such as, for data centers, communication, and hosted services.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including base pay, bonuses, benefits, and share based compensation, and fees for professional services. Professional services principally consist of external legal, audit, and tax services. In the short term, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due to the anticipated growth of our business and to meet the increased compliance requirements associated with operation as a public company. However, in the long term, we anticipate general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time, if and as we are able to increase revenue.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of expenses for online and traditional advertising, as well as costs for marketing and promotional materials. Advertising costs are expensed as they are incurred. We expect marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our advertising programs, including promotion of our newly acquired business lines and we anticipate marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time, if and as we are able to increase revenue.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization represent the depreciation charged on our fixed assets and intangible assets other than capitalized software. Depreciation expense is recorded on a straight-line method, based on estimated useful live of five years for computer hardware, seven years for furniture and equipment and seven years for vehicles. Leasehold improvements are depreciated over the lesser of the life of the lease term or the useful life of the improvements. Amortization expense consists of amortization recorded on acquisition-related intangible assets, excluding purchased software. Customer relationships are amortized on an accelerated basis, which coincides with the period of economic benefit we expect to receive. All other finite-lived intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the expected benefit. Purchased software and capitalized software development costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the expected benefit and the respective amortization expense is included in technology and development expense. In accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), we do not amortize goodwill.
Income Taxes
U.S. federal and state income tax benefits for all the historical net losses and a portion of the current net losses generated has been recognized in the period ended December 31, 2021. Previously the tax benefits had not been recognized due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As a result of certain acquisitions this period, we realized the pre-existing and a portion of currently generated deferred tax assets due to the reversal of taxable temporary differences. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $24.3 million and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $12.8 million. Losses will begin to expire, if not utilized, in 2032. Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation according to Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended, and similar state law provisions.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amount in thousands)
Revenue
* - Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2021, gross commission income increased by approximately $137.7 million or 78%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase in transaction volume and to an increase in average revenue per transaction due to rising home prices. During the year ended December 31, 2021, transaction volume increased by 53% to approximately 39,200 transactions compared to approximately 25,700 transactions for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our transaction volume increased primarily due to the organic growth in the number of agents contracted with us and agents acquired through the acquisitions of Red Barn and Epic in 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, average revenue per transaction increased by 17% to $8,018 from $6,873 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other service revenue was approximately $15.9 million. This other service revenue was generated from the Company’s acquisition of Verus in 2020, and E4:9 and LiveBy in 2021. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for information about these acquisitions. We generated an immaterial amount of other service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 following the acquisition of Verus in November 2020.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, commission and other agent-related costs increased by approximately $134.2 million, or 81%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. Commission and other agent-related costs primarily includes costs related to agent commissions; net of fees paid to us by our agents. These costs generally correlate with recognized revenues. As such, the increase in commission and other agent-related costs compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in agent commissions paid due to higher transaction volume and rising home prices.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operations and support expenses were approximately $5.5 million and were attributable to the Company’s newly acquired Verus, E4:9 and LiveBy businesses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, technology and development expenses increased by approximately $3.5 million, or 951%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to our ongoing investment in the intelliAgent platform and the newly acquired LiveBy business, which accounted for $1.4 million of the technology and development expenses during 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $22.4 million, or 217%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to our growth and to costs attributable to becoming a public company. The Company’s acquisitions contributed approximately $12.0 million in general and administrative expenses plus approximately $0.5 million in transaction and acquisition costs during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses excluding acquisitions included a $4.6 million increase in payroll salaries and benefits, a $1.6 million increase in professional fees, a $1.3 million increase in non-cash share-based compensation expense, a $0.8 million increase in subscription support services, a $0.7 million increase in recruiting and training expenses due to continued effort to recruit new agents organically, a $0.6 million increase in rent primarily due to our new headquarter lease, a $0.2 million increase in board expenses, and approximately $0.1 million increase in each of utilities, bad debts and travel expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, marketing expenses increased by approximately $0.9 million, or 95%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to an increase in direct advertising costs primarily related to the Company’s expansion in new regions and markets and to promoting its newly acquired businesses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation and amortization expenses increased by approximately $1.8 million compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense is due to the amortization of the intangible assets (other than capitalized software for which amortization is included in technology and development expense) acquired in connection with the acquisition of Red Barn, E4:9, LiveBy, and Epic as well as an increase in depreciation expense due to an increase in our depreciable asset base.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded an income tax benefit of $3.2 million and $8,471 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily the result of the release of the valuation allowance against historical deferred tax assets and recognition of benefit from the current year loss. Net deferred tax liabilities of $3.3 million recorded in connection with the E4:9 Holdings, Inc. and LiveBy, Inc acquisitions provide a source of taxable income to support the realizability of $1.6 million of pre-existing deferred tax assets, as well as currently generated deferred tax assets from the loss for the year. The taxable temporary differences relating to the depreciable fixed assets and amortizable intangible assets support the realization of the net operating loss carryforwards. As a result of the transactions, the Company released the historical valuation allowance and recognized a deferred tax benefit on a portion of current year losses. The Company maintains a valuation allowance on the remaining net deferred tax assets at year-end due to historical operating losses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources (amount in thousands)
Capital Resources
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the public offerings and private sales of our common stock, as well as proceeds from loans. As of December 31, 2021, our available cash totaled $37.8 million, which represented an increase of $9.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cash was primarily attributable to our 2021 Equity Offering, net of cash paid for acquisitions and cash used in operating activities. As of December 31, 2021, we had net working capital of $33.4 million, which represented an increase of $5.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We anticipate that our existing balances of cash and cash equivalents and future expected cash flows generated from our operations will be sufficient to satisfy our operating requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including potential acquisitions, our level of investment in technology, and our rate of growth into new markets. Our capital requirements might also be affected by factors which we cannot control such as the residential real estate market, interest rates, and other monetary and fiscal policy changes , any of which could adversely affect the manner in which we currently operate. Additionally, as the impact of COVID-19 and other world events, such as the recent crisis in Ukraine, on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continuously assess our liquidity needs. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, we may need or seek advantageously to obtain additional funding through equity or debt financing, which might not be available on favorable terms or at all and could hinder our business and dilute our existing shareholders.
Cash Flows
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amount in thousands)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of a net loss of $12.5 million, net negative non-cash charge of $2.0 million, including $4.0 million of share-based compensation, $2.7 million of depreciation and amortization, and $0.25 million of bad debt and other, partially offset by $5.2 million of gain on sale of mortgages, $3.3 million of deferred income taxes and $0.4 million of gain on debt extinguishment. Changes in assets and liabilities were primarily driven by $3.5 million net effect of sale and payment of mortgage loans held for sale, $1.7 million increase in accounts payable, $1.1 million increase in accrued liabilities, and $0.7 million decrease in operating lease right of use asset, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in accounts receivable, $1.3 million increase in prepaid and other assets and $0.6 million decrease in lease liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a net loss of $1.3 million, non-cash charges of $1.0 million, including $0.7 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.1 million of bad debt, and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. Changes in assets and liabilities were primarily driven by a $1.5 million increase in accounts payable due primarily to the increase in agent transaction volume, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in accounts receivable, a $0.8 million increase in prepaid and other current assets, a $0.7 million decrease in accrued liabilities, and a $0.1 million increase in agent annual fees receivable due primarily to an increase in the number of agents.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $11.0 million for the purchase of Redbarn, E4:9, LiveBy, Epic and Woodhouse, net of cash acquired, $0.9 million for the purchase of property and equipment, and $2.6 million for the purchase of the Naberly intangible assets.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $0.5 million for purchases of capitalized software as well as computers and equipment, $0.3 million for the purchase of Verus, net of cash acquired, and $0.2 million for the issuance of a loan to Naberly.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $35.0 million of gross proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Company’s 2021 Equity Offering, $1.6 million of net proceeds from borrowing on warehouse lines of credit and $1.1 million proceeds from notes payable attributable to financing our director and officer insurance, which was offset by $2.5 million in payments of offering costs in connection with issuance of common stock in connection with the public offering and $0.7 million in principal payments on an outstanding loan.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $34.3 million of gross proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Company’s IPO, $0.5 million in proceeds from notes payable, and $0.1 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock, which was offset by $3.2 million in payments of offering costs in connection with issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, $0.5 million payments on the note payable, purchase of treasury stock, and our principal payments on an outstanding loan.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we use Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to understand and evaluate our core operating performance. This non-GAAP financial measure, which may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies, is presented to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our financial performance and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We define the non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), excluding other expense, income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, and transaction-related cost.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information about our financial performance, enhances the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allows for greater transparency with respect to a key metric used by our management for financial and operational decision-making. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that otherwise could be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in Adjusted EBITDA. In particular, we believe the exclusion of share-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards and stock options and transaction-related costs associated with our acquisition activity provides a useful supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our operations and provides better transparency into our results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes other income and expense, net which primarily includes nonrecurring items, such as, gain on debt extinguishment and severance costs, if applicable.
We are presenting the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EBITDA to assist investors in seeing our financial performance through the eyes of management, and because we believe this measure provides an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our core financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA compared to net income (loss), the closest comparable GAAP measure. Some of these limitations are that:
● Adjusted EBITDA excludes share-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards and stock options, which have been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, significant recurring expenses in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
● Adjusted EBITDA excludes transaction-related costs primarily consisting of professional fees and any other costs incurred directly related to acquisition activity, which is an ongoing part of our growth strategy and therefore likely to occur; and
● Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and capitalized software costs, however, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented (amount in thousands):
Critical Accounting Estimates
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue, and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for its business combinations under the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805-10, Business Combinations (“ASC 805-10”), which requires that the purchase method of accounting be used for all business combinations. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. For transactions that are business combinations, the Company evaluates the existence of goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair value of the tangible net assets and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. ASC 805-10 also specifies criteria that intangible assets acquired in a business combination must meet to be recognized and reported apart from goodwill. Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combinations and are expensed as incurred.
The estimated fair value of net assets acquired, including the allocation of the fair value to identifiable assets and liabilities, was determined using established valuation techniques. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the context of purchase accounting, the determination of fair value often involves significant judgments and estimates by management, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The estimated fair values reflected in the purchase accounting rely on management’s judgment and the expertise of a third-party valuation firm engaged to assist in concluding on the fair value measurements. For each business combination completed during the year ended December 31, 2021, the estimated fair value of identifiable intangible assets, primarily consisting of agent relationships, tradenames, customer relationships and technology, was determined using the relief-from-royalty and multi-period excess earnings methods. The most significant assumptions under these methods include the estimated remaining useful life, expected future revenue, annual agent revenue attrition, costs to develop new agents, charges for contributory assets, tax rate, discount rate and tax amortization benefit. Management has developed these assumptions on the basis of historical knowledge of the business and projected financial information of the Company. These assumptions may vary based on future events, perceptions of different market participants and other factors outside the control of management, and such variations may be significant to estimated values.
The determination and allocation of fair values to the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on various assumptions and valuation methodologies requiring considerable management judgment. The most significant variables in these valuations are discount rates and the number of years on which to base the cash flow projections, as well as other assumptions and estimates used to determine the cash inflows and outflows. Management determines discount rates based on the risk inherent in the acquired assets, specific risks, industry beta and capital structure of guideline companies. The valuation of an acquired business is based on available information at the acquisition date and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. However, a change in facts and circumstances as of the acquisition date can result in subsequent adjustments during the measurement period, but no later than one year from the acquisition date.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting standards, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
JOBS Act Transition Period
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we may rely on certain other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Certain of these exemptions are, including without limitation, from the requirements of (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the effectiveness of this registration statement, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.