Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Executive Summary
Flotek Industries, Inc. (“Flotek” or the “Company”) creates solutions to reduce the environmental impact of energy on air, water, land and people. A technology-driven, specialty green chemistry and data technology company, Flotek helps customers across industrial, commercial, and consumer markets improve their ESG performance. The Company serves specialty chemistry needs for both domestic and international energy markets as well as applications of U.S. manufactured surface cleaners, disinfectants for industrial, commercial and consumer use.
The Company has two operating segments, CT and DA, which are both supported by the Company’s continuing Research and Innovation advanced laboratory capabilities.
The Company’s CT segment develops, manufactures, packages, distributes, delivers, and markets green, specialty chemicals that help their customers meet their ESG and operational goals, enhancing the profitability of hydrocarbon producers and supplying professional chemistries that clean surfaces in both commercial and personal settings to help reduce the spread of bacteria, viruses and germs.
The Company’s DA segment enables users to maximize the value of their hydrocarbon associated processes by providing real-time data and analytics associated with the streams in seconds rather than minutes or days. These real-time data and analytics prevent waste, reduces reprocessing, and allows users to pursue automation of their hydrocarbon streams to maximize their profitability, thereby improving ESG performance. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company acquired 100% ownership of JP3 in a cash-and-stock transaction. JP3’s real-time data platforms combine the energy industry’s only field-deployable, inline optical analyzer with proprietary cloud visualization and analytics, delivers increased profitability for its customers. In conjunction with the acquisition of JP3, the Company created the DA segment.
Company Overview
Chemistry Technologies
The Company’s CT segment provides sustainable, optimized chemistry solutions that maximize our customer’s value by elevating their ESG performance, lowering operational costs, and delivering improved return on invested capital. The Company’s proprietary green chemistries, specialty chemistries, logistics, and technology services enable its customers to pursue improved efficiencies and performance throughout the life cycle of its desired chemical applications program. The Company designs, develops, manufactures, packages, distributes and markets optimized chemistry solutions that accelerate existing sustainability practices to reduce the environmental impact of energy on the air, water, land and people.
Customers of the CT segment include those of energy related markets as well as consumer and industrial applications. Major integrated oil and gas companies, oilfield services companies, independent oil and gas companies, national and state-owned oil companies, geothermal energy companies, solar energy companies and advanced alternative energy companies benefit from best-in-class technology, field operations, and continuous improvement exercises that go beyond existing sustainability practices.
Data Analytics
The DA segment delivers real-time information and insights to our customers to enable optimization of operations and reduction of emissions and their carbon intensity. Real-time composition and physical properties are delivered simultaneously on their refined fuels, NGLs, natural gas, crude oil, and condensates using the industry’s only field-deployable, in-line optical near-infra-red spectrometer that generates no emissions. The instrument's response is processed with advanced chemometrics modeling, artificial intelligence, and machine learning algorithms to deliver these valuable insights every 15 seconds.
Customers using this technology have obtained significant benefits including additional profits by enhancing operations in crude/condensates stabilization, blending operations, reduction of transmix, increasing efficiencies and optimization of gas plants, and ensuring product quality while reducing giveaways i.e., providing higher value products at the lower value products prices. More efficient operations has the benefit of reducing their carbon footprint e.g., less flaring and reduction in energy expenditure for compression and re-processing. Our customers in North America include the supermajors, some of the largest midstream companies and large gas processing plants. We have developed a new line of Verax analyzers for deployment internationally which was recently certified for compliance in hazardous locations and harsh weather conditions.
Research & Innovation
R&I supports the acceleration of ESG solutions for both segments through green chemistry formulation, specialty chemical formulations, FDA and EPA regulatory guidance, technical support, basin and reservoir studies, data analytics and new technology projects. The purpose of R&I is to supply the Company’s segments with enhanced products and services that generate current and future revenues, while advising Company management on opportunities concerning technology, environmental and industry trends. The R&I facilities support advances in chemistry performance, detection, optimization and manufacturing.
Outlook
Our business is subject to numerous variables which impact our outlook and expectations given the shifting conditions of the industry and weather volatility. We have based our outlook on the market and weather conditions we perceive today. Changes often occur.
Energy
We expect North American and International onshore activity to continue to improve throughout 2022 from fourth quarter 2021 levels for the next twelve months provided that commodity prices remain at or above current levels. The strongest potential growth throughout 2022 will likely comes from private, rather than publicly traded exploration and production companies. Private exploration and production companies operate the majority of U.S. land rigs and react quickly to changing commodity prices. In the current commodity price environment, we expect the private companies to increase activity and publicly traded companies to have modest spending increases in the year ahead. Additionally, we have reestablished our ability to sell product through other service companies and believe sales through indirect channels should accelerate in 2022.
Industrial
In 2020, the Company launched a diversified line of EPA and FDA compliant products that target industrial, agricultural and consumer markets with particular focus on customers that are seeking to accelerate their focus on sustainability and minimized impact on the environment. The Company’s product line includes adjuvants, disinfectants, surface cleaners, degreasers, solvents and a multitude of proprietary chemistries for industrial, commercial and consumer use. The Company believes these adjacent markets provide an opportunity to diversify and expand the Company’s portfolio of chemistry solutions to meet the growing demand. We have signed four manufacturing sales representation groups with 150+ sales personnel covering 48 states. We will be training and educating their representatives during the next two quarters. The leverage sales effort is anticipated to accelerate sales in the second half of 2022.
Digital Analytics
The use of data and digital analytics is a growing trend in all industries where technology is leveraged to analyze large datasets of operational information to improve performance, as well as for predictive maintenance, advanced safety measures and reduced environmental impact of operations. Verax has gained a foothold in NA markets for critical applications where compositional information is needed in real-time. The technology delivers real-time insight on valuable operations data like vapor pressure, boiling point, flash point, octane level, API gravity, viscosity, BTU and more, simultaneously. We continue to work with our customers to identify further facilities and applications where our technology has the highest value. We expect to open and establish our international customer base with our new generation of internationally certified online analyzers. The new analyzers are specifically designed to withstand routine exposure to extreme outdoor environments, ambient temperatures up to 55°C/131°F and sandstorm pollution common to important international environments. We anticipate international sales to increase over the next twelve months because of the newly certified equipment. To drive recurring revenue, we continue to build on the modular nature of our sensor and analysis packages with new data processing techniques that enhance the value of our installations. AIDA (Automated Interface Detection Algorithm) provides real-time detection of interfaces in a liquids pipeline without the need for additional sampling or chemometric modeling. The application can identify products such as refined fuels, crude and NGLs with its advanced machine learning algorithms and detect interfaces within 60 seconds. This allows operators to cut batches quickly and accurately, reduce transmix and minimize off-spec product that requires downgrades.
ESG
ESG-focused solutions continue to be an emphasis for the Company as the energy, industrial and consumer markets are seeking to accelerate their focus on sustainability and minimized impact on the environment. The Company’s products and services offer a significant benefit to businesses seeking to improve their ESG performance, including improving safety, reliability and efficiency of their operations. The Company offers sustainable chemistry solutions, tailoring product selection to enable operational efficiencies, improve water management and reduce greenhouse gas emissions for its customers in the exploration and production sector of the oil and gas industry. Further, the Company’s patented line of Complex nano-Fluid® (also known as CnF®) products are formulated with highly effective, plant-based solvents offering safer, renewable and sustainable alternatives to toxic BTEX-based (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene) chemicals. Benzene is a carcinogenic chemical that can cause acute physical damage, chronic blood disorders, reproductive disorders, leukemia and when exposed to the atmosphere, benzene creates smog, which can be carried to the ground through rain and contaminates water bodies and soil. Additionally, the Company’s real-time sensor technology helps to enable process and operational efficiencies, minimize waste and processing and reduce emissions.
The Company believes the industry focus on maintaining a “social license to operate” provides the platform to accelerate the adoption of our greener practices and chemistries. We believe the performance-driven ESG focus of the Company assists in reducing environmental liabilities and improving returns for our customers.
Supply Chain
During 2020 and 2021 challenging supply chain issues emerged that “will continue into 2022” according to Secretary of Transportation Peter Buttigieg. The anticipated activity increases will strain supply chains generally. The principal supply issues facing our industry for the next twelve months will include:
•Rising Freight Costs;
•Delays due to Port Congestion;
•Labor Shortages and
•Demand Forecasting.
All bidding will require the risk of shipping costs and delays be factored into proposals. Trucking availability and pricing will impact North American opportunities while sea-freight costs will impact sales of North American manufactured goods being delivered internationally for the foreseeable future. The import of raw materials from China will also incur price increases. Accelerating tensions between China and the U.S. could also result in supply disruption.
Weather
During 2021, Hurricane Ida and other weather related events caused significant disruptions to the energy industry in the US. The Company was able to maintain consistent operations throughout the year and provide support to our partners in Louisiana and surrounding areas during Hurricane Ida. The Company’s operations, as well as those of our primary customer base, are periodically subjected to potential weather related disruptions. The Company monitors and carefully evaluates guidance from authoritative sources including the National Weather Service and other agencies. We currently do not anticipate weather related events to have a material impact on first quarter results.
COVID-19
The impacts of COVID-19 continue to affect the U.S. and global economy. The protocols and processes established to maintain business continuity with COVID-19 have proven robust enough to diminish concern about business disruption unless new variants emerge. The resumption of travel while often onerous has begun to accelerate and in person customer visits that began in earnest during the third quarter will continue to accelerate.
Consolidated Results of Operations (in thousands)
Consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $9.9 million, or 18.6%, versus the same period of 2020. Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected a loss of revenue in the CT segment associated with two major customers changing ownership during 2021, losses related to the normalization and decline of market demand for sanitizers and non-recurring citrus terpenes sales. Current year revenue decreases were partially offset by the incremental post acquisition JP3 revenues generated in the second, third, and fourth quarter of 2021.
Consolidated cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $41.8 million, or 51.1% versus the same period of 2020. In 2020 cost of goods sold included $11.7 million purchase commitment and excess terpene reserve of which $7.6 million was reversed in 2021. This resulted in a $19.3 million decrease year on year. Additionally, both segments had non-recurring product rationalization expenses in 2020 of an aggregate $9.6 million. In 2021, the decline in revenues in addition to cost reduction initiatives including reducing personnel and facility costs also contributed to the year on year decrease.
Selling general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are not directly attributable to products sold or services provided. SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $2.6 million, or 11.4%, versus the same period of 2020. SG&A expenses decreased as a result of a reduction in compensation costs including severance partially offset by an increase in non-recurring legal related costs related to litigation and investigations.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $2.4 million, or 70.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the same period of 2020, primarily due to impairments of property and equipment and other intangible assets recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and development (“R&D”) costs decreased $1.7 million, or 23.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the same period of 2020 due to lower personnel costs as a result of our reduction in workforce from 2020 to 2021.
Loss from operations improved by $112.2 million, or 78.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus the same periods in 2020. The loss from operations improvement is primarily a result of the improvement to gross loss and reductions of expenses for SG&A, depreciation and amortization and R&D described above, and the impairment expenses of $81.7 million recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to impairment expenses of $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021, was also impacted by an $0.9 million gain from the forgiveness of the JP3 Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan, and for the year ended December 31, 2020 by a $0.6 million gain from lease termination.
The Company’s income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was minimal. The Company recorded an income tax benefit of $6.2 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the extended net operating loss carryback provisions included in the CARES Act.
Results by Segment (in thousands):
Chemistry Technologies Results of Operations:
CT revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $11.4 million compared to 2020. The decrease in revenue during 2021 compared to 2020 was driven by impacts from industry consolidation and international activity. While the pandemic continued to weigh on economic activity in 2021, global supply and demand has steadily normalized through the second half of 2021. Revenue from two major customers was reduced temporarily as a result of market consolidation in the Permian basin in addition the normalization and decline of market demand for sanitizers and non-recurring citrus terpenes sales. Additionally, international activity, primarily in the Middle East, decreased year over year. CT also granted price concessions in our effort to maintain and obtain market share.
Loss from operations for the CT segment for the year ended December 31, 2021, improved $83.0 million, or 93.9% compared to 2020. The improvement in loss from operations is due to significantly lower expenses, primarily the result of impairment charges of property and equipment of $54.7 million in 2020. Secondly, expenses during 2020 included an $11.7 million charge to reserve for terpene purchase commitment losses, while expenses during 2021 were reduced by a $7.6 million gain as a result of reaching a settlement agreement for terpene purchase commitment. Certain cost reduction initiatives to optimize our cost structure contributed to the current decrease in operating losses by reducing personnel, office costs, equipment and facilities costs as the Company continues to consolidate its physical facilities and equipment rentals to align with activity.
Data Analytics Results of Operations:
On May 18, 2020, the Company purchased JP3 and formed the DA segment. DA revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $1.5 million compared to revenue for 2020, which was only the post-acquisition partial period revenues between May 18, 2020 to December 31, 2020. Loss from operations for the DA segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 improved $24.2 million or 66.6% compared to 2020. The improvement in loss from operations is primarily the result of impairment charges of property and equipment, other intangible assets and goodwill of $24.2 million in 2020 compared to a goodwill impairment charge of $8.1 million in 2021. Additionally, operating expenses in 2020 were impacted by $3.9 million related to product rationalization and also by the change in fair value of the contingent consideration for the JP3 acquisition. A portion of the stock performance earn-out provision was triggered in 2020 resulting in $2.7 million of charges to cost of goods
sold in 2020, while the revaluations of the contingent consideration in 2021 resulted in reductions to cost of goods sold of $0.8 million. Operating margins in 2021 were positively impacted by increased revenue and margins.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Overview
The Company’s ongoing capital requirements relate to the acquisition and maintenance of equipment and funding working capital requirements. During 2021, the Company funded capital requirements primarily with cash on hand.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had available cash and cash equivalents of $11.5 million, as compared to $38.7 million at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had an operating loss of $31.5 million, $25.8 million of cash used for operating activities and $0.4 million of cash used for financing activities. Cash provided by investing activities was minimal.
Liquidity
The Company currently funds its operations and growth primarily from cash on hand. The ability of the Company to grow and be competitive in the marketplace is dependent on the availability of adequate capital. Access to capital is dependent, in large part, on the Company’s cash flows and the availability of and access to debt and equity financing. The Company has a history of losses and negative cash flows from operations and expects to utilize a significant amount of cash in operations in the following year. Uncertainty surrounding the long- term stability and strength of the oil and gas markets, or reduced spending by our customers could have a further negative impact on our liquidity
On February 2, 2022, the Company completed a Private Investment in Public Equity (PIPE) transaction with a consortium of investors, including with related parties, through the issuance of $21.2 million aggregate of convertible notes that resulted in net cash proceeds of approximately $19.5 million. Also, on February 2, 2022, the Company entered into a long-term supply agreement with ProFrac Services, LLC (the “ProFrac Agreement”) upon issuance of $10 million of convertible notes. Under the ProFrac Agreement, ProFrac Services, LLC is obligated to order chemicals from the Company at least equal to the greater of (a) the chemicals required for 33% of their hydraulic fracturing fleets and (b) a baseline measured by the first ten hydraulic fracturing fleets deployed by ProFrac Services, LLC. If minimum volumes are not achieved, the Company receives 25% of the difference between (i) the aggregate Purchase Price of the quantity of Products comprising the Minimum Purchase Obligation during such calendar year. The term of the ProFrac Agreement is three years starting on April 1, 2022.
The Company also committed to plans to sell its warehouse facility in Monahhans, Texas and its manufacturing facility in Waller, Texas. These facilities were classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2021. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, the Company executed a contract to sell its Waller facility for $4.2 million of cash proceeds. The sale is expected to close in April 2022.
Based on our cash and liquid assets, including the transactions subsequent to year end described above and in Note 22 Subsequent Events, we believe that our cash and liquid assets will provide us with sufficient financial resources to fund operations and meet our capital requirements and anticipated obligations as they become due. However the Company cannot guarantee a sufficient level of cash flows in the future.
Cash Flows
Consolidated cash flows by type of activity are noted below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $25.8 million and $47.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Consolidated net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $30.6 million and $136.5 million, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, non-cash adjustments to net income totaled $4.2 million as compared to $112.8 million for the same period of 2020.
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-cash adjustments included a $7.6 million benefit related to the ADM settlement and $8.1 million of impairment charges. The non-cash adjustment for the provision of excess and obsolete inventory was $0.6 million and depreciation was $1.0 million. Other non-cash adjustments included stock based compensation of $3.8 million, JP3 PPP loan forgiveness of $0.9 million and $0.8 million related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, contributory non-cash adjustments consisted primarily of $81.7 million of impairment charges, $9.4 million of inventory purchase commitment reserve charges, $12.3 million for the provision of excess and obsolete inventory, $3.0 million for stock compensation expense, $3.4 million for depreciation and amortization and $2.7 million related to the change in fair value consideration.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, changes in working capital provided $0.5 million of cash as compared to using $24.2 million for the same period of 2020.
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, changes in working capital resulted primarily from increases in accounts receivable and other current assets of $2.0 million and accounts payable of $1.8 million. This has been offset by decreases in inventories and income taxes receivable of $2.1 million and accrued liabilities of $1.4 million.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020 the use of working capital primarily resulted from a reduction in accrued liabilities and accounts payable of $33.0 million, which included two one-time payments made in 2020: one payment of $15.8 million to amend a long-term supply agreement and one to pay $4.1 million for the final post-closing working capital adjustment related to the 2019 sale of the CICT segment. Decreases in accounts receivable, inventories and other current assets provided cash of $8.5 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negligible. Net cash used in investing activities was $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities included $26.3 million from purchase of JP3 offset by cash provided of $9.9 million due to the release of escrow amounts in 2020 from the 2019 sale of the Florida Chemical Company.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily for purchases of common stock related to tax withholding requirements. Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from the proceeds received from the PPP.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There have been no transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as “structured finance” or “special purpose entities” (“SPEs”), established for the purpose of facilitating off balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was not involved in any unconsolidated SPEs.
The Company has not made any guarantees to customers or vendors nor does the Company have any off-balance sheet arrangements or commitments that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, change in financial condition, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that would be material to investors other than the long term terpene agreement discussed in Note 15 in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements of this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of these statements requires management to make judgments, estimates, and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Significant accounting policies are described in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in Part II, Item 8 - “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report. The Company believes the following accounting policies are critical due to the significant subjective and complex judgments and estimates required when preparing the consolidated financial statements. The Company regularly reviews judgments, assumptions and estimates related to the critical accounting policies.
Reserve for Excess and Obsolete Inventory
Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost, or market determined using the weighted-average cost method, or net realizable value. Finished goods inventories include raw materials, direct labor and production overhead.
The Company reviews inventories on hand and current market conditions to determine if the cost of raw materials and finished goods inventories exceed current market prices and impairs the cost basis of the inventory accordingly. Obsolete inventory or inventory in excess of management’s estimated usage requirement is written down to its net realizable value if those amounts are determined to be less than cost. Write-downs or write-offs of inventory are charged to cost of goods sold.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the reserve for excess and obsolete inventory was $10.1 million and $11.1 million, or 51.8% and 48.3% of inventory, respectively. Significant or unanticipated changes to our estimates and forecasts could impact the amount and timing of any additional provisions for excess and obsolete inventory.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of cost of an acquired entity over the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested for impairment annually on October 1 or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate a potential impairment. These circumstances may include an adverse change in the business climate or a change in the assessment of future operations of a reporting unit.
When performing the annual impairment test, the Company has the option to assess whether a goodwill impairment exists using either a qualitative or quantitative assessment. The qualitative assessment involves determining whether events or circumstances exist that indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill.
If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or if the Company elects not to perform a qualitative assessment, a quantitative impairment test is performed to determine whether goodwill impairment exists at the reporting unit.
The quantitative impairment test, used to identify both the existence of impairment and the amount of impairment loss, compares the estimated fair value of each reporting unit with goodwill to its carrying amount, including goodwill. To determine fair value estimates, the Company uses the income approach based on discounted cash flow analyses, combined, when appropriate, with a market-based approach. The market-based approach considers valuation comparisons of recent public sale transactions of similar businesses and earnings multiples of publicly traded businesses operating in industries consistent with the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
In performing the annual quantitative impairment test and consistent with our prior practice, we determined the fair value of the DA reporting unit using an income approach. Under the income approach, the fair value of the reporting unit was determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. We used our internal forecasts, updated for recent events, to estimate future cash flows with cash flows beyond the specific operating plans estimated using a terminal value calculation, which incorporates historical and forecasted trends, including an estimate of long-term future growth rates, based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for the DA reporting unit. Our internal forecasts include assumptions about future commodity pricing and expected demand for our goods and services. For the DA reporting unit, production growth is still anticipated to be lower in the near term as operators continue to show an abundance of fiscal discipline in development spending. Midstream thru-out volumes have remained well below capacity levels. While we are expecting production growth to increase, it is likely to do so at a more conservative pace. These factors have precipitated our impairment decision for Data Analytics goodwill. Due to the inherent uncertainties involved in making estimates and
assumptions, actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. We derived our discount rate using a capital asset pricing model and analyzing published rates for industries relevant to the DA reporting unit to estimate the cost of equity financing. We used a discount rate that are commensurate with the risks and uncertainties inherent in the respective business and in our internally developed forecasts.
Our estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain, and actual results may differ from those assumed in our analysis.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary differences between financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the differences reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized related to the anticipated future tax effects of temporary differences between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of the Company’s assets and liabilities using statutory tax rates at the applicable year end. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The establishment of a valuation allowance requires significant judgment and is impacted by various estimates. Both positive and negative evidence, as well as the objectivity and verifiability of that evidence, is considered in determining the appropriateness of recording a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. Except for a state jurisdiction, the Company maintains a full valuation allowance on its deferred tax assets.
The Company has performed an evaluation and concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment, including ROU assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Indicative events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, matters such as a significant decline in market value or a significant change in business climate. If events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable, the Company first compares the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset or asset group exceeds the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the asset, the Company will determine the fair value of the asset or asset group. The amount of impairment loss recognized is the excess of the asset or asset group’s carrying amount over its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values, and third party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
The determination of whether property and equipment, including ROU assets is impaired involved a significant level of judgement in these assumptions, and changes in our forecasts, business strategy, or economic and market conditions could significantly impact these judgements. Any resulting impairment charges could have a material impact on our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements which may impact the Company are described in Note 2, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” in Part II, Item 8 - “Financial Statements” of this Annual Report.