Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on December 18, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our initial public offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a Business Combination after the Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $183,703, which consisted of $1,453,025 non-operating gain resulting from the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and $19,865 of income from investments held in Trust Account, offset by approximately $1,134,293 in general and administrative expenses and $522,300 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
For the period from December 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,503, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs prior to the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase the Founder Shares, the loan of approximately $67,000 from the Sponsor under the Note (as defined in Note 5 to the financial statements), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the Note in full on March 16, 2021. Subsequent to the repayment, the facility was no longer available to us.
On March 16, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 Units, which included the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 690,000 Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Placement Unit in a private placement to our Sponsor and Millennium, generating gross proceeds of $6,900,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Placement Units, a total of $250,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act and that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. We incurred $522,300 in transaction costs, including $4,400,000 of underwriting fees, $10,600,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $527,366 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31,2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,255,754. Net loss of $183,703 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $19,865, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,453,025, transaction costs attributable to warrant liabilities of $522,300, and general and administrative expenses paid under the promissory note of $875. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $122,336 of cash for operating activities. We used $249,975,000 in investing activities to fund our Trust Account, and we generated $252,041,759 in financing activities from our Initial Public Offering, sale of Placement Units, which was offset by the repayment of the Promissory Notes - related party.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $1,503 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,503 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, investments and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $250,019,865 (including $19,865 of interest). We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Going Concern
We have until March 16, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Management intends to complete a Business Combination prior to March 16, 2023. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 16, 2023.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $811,005 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Placement Units. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. As of December 31, 2021, no such loans were outstanding.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on March 12, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation. On June 8, 2021, the administrative services agreement was amended and restated to increase the monthly charge payable from $20,000 to $27,500. We incurred approximately $245,000 related to this agreement in the accompanying statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not have an outstanding balance related to this agreement as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In addition, we have an agreement to pay the underwriter a deferred fee of $10,600,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the representative of the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering were estimated using a binomial lattice model in a risk-neutral framework. The fair value of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the Placement Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. As part of the Private Placement, the Company issued 690,000 shares of Class A common stock (“Private Placement Shares”). These Private Placement Shares will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination, as such are considered non-redeemable and presented as permanent equity in the Company’s balance sheet. Excluding the Private Placement Shares, our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of the Initial Public Offering, 25,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. There were no Class A shares issued or outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the over-allotment option, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit (see note 2).
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the over-allotment) and the placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 6,422,500 shares of Class A common stock, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.