Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the “Selected Financial Data” and our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, and our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those discussed under Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Selected Financial Data
The selected consolidated financial and other data of the Company set forth below does not purport to be complete and should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the more detailed information, including the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes, appearing elsewhere herein.
DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS
First US Bancshares, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Bancshares” and, together with its subsidiaries, the “Company”), is a bank holding company formed in 1983 registered under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended (the “BHCA”). Bancshares operates one banking subsidiary, First US Bank, an Alabama banking corporation (the “Bank”). Prior to its name change on October 11, 2016, Bancshares was known as United Security Bancshares, Inc. Bancshares and the Bank are headquartered in Birmingham, Alabama.
The Bank conducts a general commercial banking business and offers banking services such as demand, savings, individual retirement account and time deposits, personal and commercial loans, safe deposit box services and remote deposit capture. The Bank operates and serves its customers through 15 full-service banking offices located in Birmingham, Butler, Calera, Centreville, Gilbertown, Grove Hill, Harpersville, Jackson, Thomasville, Tuscaloosa and Woodstock, Alabama; Knoxville and Powell, Tennessee; and Rose Hill, Virginia; as well as loan production offices in Mobile, Alabama and the Chattanooga, Tennessee area. The Bank provides a wide range of commercial banking services to small- and medium-sized businesses, property managers, business executives, professionals and other individuals. The Bank also performs indirect lending through third-party retailers and currently conducts this lending in 12 states, including Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company closed four banking offices located in Bucksville, Columbiana and south Tuscaloosa, Alabama, as well as Ewing, Virginia.
The Bank has two wholly owned subsidiaries: Acceptance Loan Company, Inc. (“ALC”) and FUSB Reinsurance, Inc. (“FUSB Reinsurance”). As used herein, unless the context suggests otherwise, references to the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Bancshares, as well as the Bank, ALC, and FUSB Reinsurance, collectively.
The Bank owns all of the stock of ALC. ALC is a finance company headquartered in Mobile, Alabama. During the third quarter of 2021, ALC ceased new business development and permanently closed its 20 branch lending locations in Alabama and Mississippi to the public.
Delivery of the best possible financial services to customers remains an overall operational focus of the Company. The Company recognizes that attention to detail and responsiveness to customers’ desires are critical to customer satisfaction. The Company continues to upgrade technology, both in its financial services and in the training of its 175 full-time equivalent employees (as of December 31, 2021), to ensure customer satisfaction and convenience.
The following discussion and financial information are presented to aid in an understanding of the Company’s consolidated financial position, changes in financial position, results of operations and cash flows and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included herein. The emphasis of the discussion is on the years 2021 and 2020. All yields and ratios presented and discussed herein are recorded and presented on the accrual basis and not on the tax-equivalent basis, unless otherwise indicated.
RECENT MARKET CONDITIONS: COVID-19 PANDEMIC
The COVID-19 pandemic and its associated impacts on trade (including supply chains and export levels), travel, employee productivity and other economic activities have had, are currently having, and may for some time continue to have a destabilizing effect on financial markets and economic activity. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s operational and financial performance is currently uncertain, cannot be predicted and will depend on certain developments, including, among others, the spread of COVID-19 and its variants, the success of vaccination and containment efforts, the duration of the pandemic, its impact on our customers, employees and vendors, and the continued governmental, regulatory and private sector responses, which may be precautionary, to COVID-19.
The Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations generally rely upon the ability of the Company’s borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral underlying those loans, and demand for loans and other products and services that the Company offers, which are highly dependent on the business environment in the Company’s primary markets and the United States economy as a whole.
In light of the changing economic outlook as a result of COVID-19, in March 2020, the Federal Reserve reduced the target federal funds rate by 150 basis points. This reduction in interest rates and other economic uncertainties that have arisen as a result primarily of the COVID-19 pandemic have and are likely to continue to negatively impact net interest income, provisions for loan losses and noninterest income. Additional negative financial impacts could occur; however, the ultimate potential impact is not known at this time.
Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic and the CARES Act
Loan Deferments and Credit Risk Identification
In accordance with section 4013 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act and interpretive guidance from banking regulators, in 2020, the Company implemented initiatives to provide short-term payment relief to borrowers who were negatively impacted by COVID-19. As of December 31, 2021, loans that continued to be in pandemic-related deferment totaled $0.4 million, compared to $8.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and $95.2 million as of June 30, 2020, at the height of deferment activity. Management believes that the decrease in deferred loans over the past six quarters is indicative of the strength of the credit quality within the portfolio.
In addition, at the onset of the pandemic, management identified certain categories of loans that it believed to be at “high-risk” of potential default or credit loss due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The “high-risk” category, which includes loans collateralized by hotels/motels and dine-in restaurants, decreased to $11.4 million, or 1.3% of the loan portfolio, as of December 31, 2021, compared to $13.5 million, or 2.1% of the loan portfolio, as of December 31, 2020.
The spread of COVID-19 has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in widespread volatility and deterioration in household, business, economic and market conditions. Although loans in deferment status and loans in the “high-risk” category have decreased, the Company will continue to closely monitor the impact of changing economic circumstances on the Company’s loan portfolio.
Paycheck Protection Program
Sections 1102 and 1106 of the CARES Act added a new program administered by the SBA entitled the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP was intended to provide economic relief to small businesses throughout the United States that were adversely impacted by COVID-19. An Interim Final Rule related to the PPP was issued on April 2, 2020, and additional clarifications to the Interim Final Rule were provided subsequently by the SBA. Loans originated under the PPP are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and are forgivable in whole, or in part, if the loan proceeds were used by the borrower for payroll and other permitted purposes in accordance with the requirements of the PPP. If not forgiven in whole or in part, the loans carry a fixed interest rate of 1.00% per annum with payments deferred for a period of time under criteria prescribed in the PPP. As compensation for originating a PPP loan, the Company received lender processing fees from the SBA ranging from 1% to 5% of the original loan balance, depending on the size of the loan. Processing fees, net of origination costs, are deferred and amortized as interest income over the contractual life of the loan. Upon forgiveness of a PPP loan by the SBA, any unrecognized net deferred fees are recognized as interest income in the period of forgiveness. In March 2021 a bill was signed by the President that extended the deadline to apply for a PPP loan to May 31, 2021.
During 2020 and 2021, the Company originated and funded 267 PPP loans with an aggregate balance of $20.4 million at origination. PPP loans were initially originated by the Company for a term of two years as prescribed by the CARES Act; however, a June 5, 2020 amendment to the CARES Act (i) provided for a five-year minimum loan term for loans originated beginning on that date and (ii) permitted lenders to amend loans previously issued under two-year terms to terms of five to ten years if mutually agreed upon by both lender and borrower. As of December 31, 2021, 37 of the PPP loans originated by the Company remained outstanding with a total outstanding balance remaining of $1.7 million. All remaining outstanding loans as of December 31, 2021 were under five-year terms. Processing fees that were amortized as interest income totaled $504 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $161 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $83 thousand in remaining net deferred PPP loan fees.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements requires management to make subjective judgments associated with estimates. These estimates are necessary to comply with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and general banking practices. The estimates include accounting for the allowance for loan losses, goodwill and other intangible assets, other real estate owned, valuation of deferred tax assets and fair value measurements.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
The Company maintains the allowance for loan and lease losses at a level deemed adequate by management to absorb probable losses from loans and leases in the portfolio at the balance sheet date. In determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses, management considers numerous factors, including, but not limited to, management’s estimate of: (a) loan and lease loss experience; (b) the financial condition and liquidity of certain loan customers; and (c) collateral values of property securing certain loans and leases. Because these factors and others involve the use of management’s estimation and judgment, the allowance for loan and lease losses is inherently subject to adjustment at future dates. Unfavorable changes in the factors used by management to determine the adequacy of the allowance, including increased loan or lease delinquencies and subsequent charge-offs, or the availability of new
information could require additional provisions in excess of normal provisions to the allowance for loan and lease losses in future periods. No allowance for loan and lease losses is carried over or established at acquisition for purchased loans acquired in business combinations. Loans acquired in business combinations that are deemed impaired at acquisition, purchased credit impaired (“PCI”) loans, are grouped into pools and evaluated separately from the non-PCI portfolio. The estimated cash flows to be collected on PCI loans are discounted at a market rate of interest. Subsequent to the acquisition of PCI loans, estimates of cash flows expected to be collected are updated each reporting period based on updated assumptions regarding default rates, loss severities and other factors that are reflective of current market conditions. Subsequent decreases in expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses. Subsequent increases in expected cash flows will generally result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges. There can be no assurance that loan and lease losses in future periods will not exceed the allowance for loan and lease losses or that additions to the allowances will not be required. See “Summary of Loan Loss Experience” for additional analysis of the activity in the allowance for loan and lease losses.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill arises from business combinations and is generally determined as the excess of cost over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is determined to have an indefinite useful life and is not amortized, but is tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or circumstances exist that indicate that a goodwill impairment test should be performed. The Company performs its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1. Impairment exists when a reporting unit’s carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. In testing goodwill for impairment, U.S. GAAP permits the Company to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In this qualitative assessment, the Company evaluates events and circumstances that may include, but are not limited to, the general economic environment, banking industry and market conditions, the overall financial performance of the Company, the performance of the Company’s common stock, the key financial performance metrics of the Company’s reporting units and events affecting the reporting units to determine if it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the quantitative impairment test is required or the decision to bypass the qualitative assessment is elected, the Company performs the goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. A recognized impairment loss cannot be reversed in future periods even if the fair value of the reporting unit subsequently recovers. Goodwill impairment was neither indicated nor recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. As of October 1, 2021, the date of our most recent impairment test, the Bank reporting unit had a fair value that was in excess of its carrying value.
Other intangible assets consist of core deposit intangible assets arising from acquisitions. Core deposit intangibles have definite useful lives and are amortized on an accelerated basis over their estimated useful lives. The Company’s core deposit intangibles have estimated useful lives of 7 years. In addition, these intangibles are evaluated for impairment whenever events or circumstances exist that indicate that the carrying amount should be reevaluated. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $0.6 million in other intangible assets, and there was no indication of impairment.
Other Real Estate Owned
Other real estate owned (“OREO”) consists of properties obtained through foreclosure or in satisfaction of loans, as well as closed Bank and ALC branches. It is reported at the net realizable value of the property, less estimated costs to sell. Estimates of fair value are generally based on third-party appraisals of the property and are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The appraisals are sometimes discounted based on management’s knowledge of the property and/or changes in market conditions from the date of the most recent appraisal. Such discounts are typically unobservable inputs for determining fair value.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation
Income tax expense and current and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Deferred tax assets may also arise from the carryforward of operating loss or tax credit carryforwards as allowed by applicable federal or state tax jurisdictions. In addition, there may be transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax outcomes are uncertain and the Company’s tax returns are subject to audit by various tax authorities. Although we believe that estimates related to income taxes are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be materially different than that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets in the tax jurisdictions from which they arise, management considers all available positive and negative evidence, including the Company’s historical earnings and, in particular, the results of recent operations, expected reversals of temporary differences, the ability to utilize tax planning strategies and the expiration dates of any operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. A valuation allowance is recognized for a deferred tax asset if, based on the weight of all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion of or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. The assumptions about the amount of future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates that management uses in the underlying business. At this time, management considers it to be more likely than not that the Company will have sufficient taxable income in the future to allow all deferred tax assets to be realized. Accordingly, a valuation allowance was not established for deferred tax assets as of either December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Fair Value Measurements
Portions of the Company’s assets and liabilities are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value recorded either in earnings or accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). These include securities available-for-sale, impaired loans and derivatives. Additionally, other real estate and certain other assets acquired in foreclosure are reported at the lower of the recorded investment or fair value of the property, less estimated cost to sell. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between willing market participants at the measurement date. While management uses judgment when determining the price at which willing market participants would transact when there has been a significant decrease in the volume or level of activity for the asset or liability in relation to “normal” market activity, management’s objective is to determine the point within the range of fair value estimates that is most representative of a sale to a third party under current market conditions. The value to the Company if the asset or liability were held to maturity is not included in the fair value estimates.
A fair value measure should reflect the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including the assumptions about the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique, the effect of a restriction on the sale or use of an asset and the risk of nonperformance. Fair value is measured based on a variety of inputs that the Company utilizes. Fair value may be based on quoted market prices for identical assets or liabilities traded in active markets (Level 1 valuations). If market prices are not available, we may use quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model-based valuation techniques for which all significant assumptions are observable in the market (Level 2 valuations). Where observable market data is not available, the valuation is generated from model-based techniques that use significant assumptions not observable in the market, but that are observable based on Company-specific data (Level 3 valuations). These unobservable assumptions reflect the Company’s own estimates for assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Other Significant Accounting Policies
Other significant accounting policies, not involving the same level of measurable uncertainties as those discussed above, are nevertheless important to an understanding of the consolidated financial statements. Policies related to the right of use asset and lease liability, revenue recognition, investment securities and long-lived assets require difficult judgments on complex matters that are often subject to multiple and recent changes in the authoritative guidance. Certain of these matters are among topics currently under re-examination by accounting standard setters and regulators. Specific conclusions have not been reached by these standard setters, and outcomes cannot be predicted with confidence. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discusses accounting policies that we have selected from acceptable alternatives.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company earned net income of $4.5 million, or $0.66 per diluted common share, compared to net income of $2.7 million, or $0.40 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Summarized condensed consolidated statements of operations are included below for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Strategic Initiatives
In 2021, the Company made significant progress on strategic initiatives aimed at improving operating efficiency, focusing the Company’s loan growth activities, and fortifying asset quality. Two significant initiatives were implemented in the third quarter of 2021 as described below.
ALC Dissolution Strategy
On September 3, 2021, ALC ceased new business development and permanently closed its 20 branch lending locations in Alabama and Mississippi to the public. This initiative resulted in the reduction of personnel primarily during the third quarter of 2021, and is expected to reduce the Company’s expense structure significantly on a prospective basis. As of December 31, 2021, ALC employed eight full-time equivalent employees, compared to 81 as of December 31, 2020. In addition, all but two of ALC’s branch leases were terminated by December 31, 2021, and one of the two remaining leases is expected to be terminated in the first quarter of 2022. ALC’s remaining staff continues to collect payments on loans through its Mobile, Alabama headquarters office. Management expects that the majority of ALC’s loans will be paid off by the end of 2023.
The dissolution strategy resulted in significant expense savings for the Company in the fourth quarter of 2021 that is expected to continue in future periods. However, interest income earned on ALC’s loans will also continue to decline in future periods as the loans pay down. Accordingly, the Company’s focus remains on continued loan growth in other areas of the Bank’s portfolio, as well as efforts to continue to simplify the Company’s ongoing operations and reduce expenses.
Over time, the reduction of loans at ALC is expected to improve the Company’s asset quality significantly. ALC’s loans, and in particular, its direct consumer portfolio, have historically had the Company’s highest level of losses. Approximately 66.1% and 92.8% of the Company’s net charge-offs were related to loans in ALC’s portfolio in 2021 and 2020, respectively. As ALC’s portfolio is reduced, additional management effort will be focused on building the Company’s other loan portfolios, including commercial and consumer portfolios that are aligned with the Company’s long-term strategy for growth in assets of strong credit quality.
Banking Center Closures
Effective September 3, 2021, the Bank also closed four of its previously existing banking centers. The decision to close these offices was based on analysis of banking center activity, profitability and Community Reinvestment Act assessment. The closures included banking centers located in Bucksville, Columbiana and south Tuscaloosa, Alabama, as well as Ewing, Virginia. These closures are expected to further reduce the Company’s operating expenses on an ongoing basis. Deposits associated with the closed branches were reduced by approximately $6.6 million between the date of closure and December 31, 2021. The reduction in deposits helped improve the efficiency of the Company’s balance sheet during the latter part of 2021.
Significant Impacts on Earnings
The discussion that follows summarizes the most significant activity that impacted changes in the Company’s operations during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased $1.2 million comparing the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020, The interest rate environment continued to be challenging in 2021 due to interest rate margin compression that began in early 2020 following decreases in the federal funds rate at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s improvement in net interest income in 2021 compared to 2020, resulted from a decrease in interest expense of $1.7 million as deposit liabilities continued to reprice at lower rates throughout the course of the year. The reduction in interest expense was partially offset by a decrease in interest income of $0.5 million, comparing 2021 to 2020, also driven by the interest rate environment. Interest income was bolstered by strong loan growth in the Bank’s indirect consumer portfolio, construction, commercial real estate, and commercial and industrial (“C&I”) loan categories.
Provision for Loan and Lease Losses
The provision for loan and lease losses was $2.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduction in loan loss provisions in 2021 was due primarily to overall improvement in the economic outlook comparing the two years, as well as the reduced volume of loans in ALC’s portfolio which has historically carried the Company’s highest level of losses. While ALC’s provision for loan and lease losses decreased comparing 2021 to 2020, subsequent to initiation of the ALC dissolution strategy, ALC’s loan loss reserve was increased to account for the inherent uncertainty associated with ALC’s branch closures.
Non-interest Income
Non-interest income decreased to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduction was due to decreases in a number of revenue streams, including mortgage fees from secondary market loans, gains on sale of assets and investment securities, service charges on deposits, and credit insurance commissions and fees. These reductions were generally consistent with the general impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Company’s initiatives to reduce expense by discontinuing certain service lines.
Non-interest Expense
Non-interest expense decreased to $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $34.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense reduction was primarily driven by the impact of the Company’s strategic initiatives to reduce expense, and drive efficiency through simplification of the Company’s business and processes. Of the total expense reduction comparing 2021 to 2020, $1.4 million was associated with reductions in salaries and employee benefits as the Company reduced employment levels through the ALC dissolution strategy, Bank branch closures and other efficiency efforts. As a result of these efforts, the Company’s full time equivalent employees totaled 175 as of December 31, 2021, compared to 270 as of December 31, 2020.
Balance Sheet Trends
The Company’s asset base increased by 7.6% during 2021. As of December 31, 2021, assets totaled $958.3 million, compared to $890.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The discussion below presents significant balance sheet components comparing December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020.
Loan Growth
Total loans increased by $61.7 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was most pronounced in indirect lending which grew by $64.4 million. The Company’s indirect portfolio is comprised of loans secured by collateral that generally includes recreational vehicles, campers, boats and horse trailers. Since early 2020, the Bank has experienced substantial growth in indirect lending as consumers sought alternatives to more traditional travel and leisure activities in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, and as the Bank expanded its lending platform into additional states. As of December 31, 2021, indirect lending was operated in a 12-state footprint primarily in the southeastern United States.
Commercial lending efforts in 2021 led to growth in the Bank’s construction, commercial real estate (secured by non-farm, non-residential properties), and C&I categories of $29.8 million, $13.4 million, and $2.5 million, respectively, for the year. The growth in these portfolios was consistent with the commercial lending team’s focus areas and is indicative of continued improvement in economic activity in larger metropolitan markets, primarily in the southeast, that the Bank serves.
Growth in the aforementioned loan categories was partially offset by decreases during 2021 in other loan categories including 1-4 residential family, multifamily residential, PPP loans, direct consumer and branch retail. The reduction in PPP loans was anticipated given the nature of these loans which are administered by the SBA in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. PPP loans are no longer being originated by the Bank, and the reduction in loan balances during 2021 represented loans that were forgiven by the SBA. In addition, the reduction in 1-4 family residential loans included $9.2 million in 1-4 family rental investment properties, a loan category that management has generally sought to reduce exposure in the recent environment. The direct consumer and branch retail categories are primarily comprised of loans in ALC’s consumer portfolio. Accordingly, these categories are expected to decrease as the ALC dissolution strategy continues.
Asset Quality
The Company’s non-performing assets, including loans in non-accrual status and OREO, totaled $4.2 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $4.0 million as of December 31, 2020. During 2021, increases in the total amount of nonperforming assets resulted primarily from banking centers that were closed during the year and reclassified into OREO. As a percentage of total assets, non-performing assets were reduced to 0.43% as of December 31, 2021, compared to 0.45% as of December 31, 2020. As a percentage of average loans, net charge-offs were reduced to 0.16% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 0.20% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investment Securities
The investment securities portfolio continues to provide the Company with additional liquidity and allows management to fund a portion of loan growth from the maturity and payoff of securities within the portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, the investment securities portfolio totaled $134.3 million, compared to $91.4 million as of December 31, 2020. Management monitors its liquidity position, including forecasted expectations related to loan growth, when making determinations about whether to re-invest in the securities portfolio.
Deposit Growth
Deposits totaled $838.1 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $782.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The deposit growth during 2021 reflected the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both business and consumer deposit holders, including preferences for liquidity, loan payment deferments, tax payment deferments, stimulus checks and lower consumer spending. Of the total increase in deposits, $22.6 million represented non-interest-bearing deposits, while $33.3 million represented interest-bearing deposits. The Company’s deposit growth slowed during the latter months of 2021 due, in part, to the banking center closures initiated in September 2021, as well as continued reductions in deposit pricing, particularly term deposits. Total deposits decreased by $8.7 million during the fourth quarter of 2021, representing the first quarter of deposit reduction since March 31, 2020, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Subordinated Debt Issuance
On October 1, 2021, the Company completed a private placement of $11.0 million in aggregate principal amount of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes that will mature on October 1, 2031 (the “Notes”). The Notes bear interest at a rate of 3.50% per annum for the first five years, at which time the interest rate will be reset quarterly to a benchmark interest rate per annum which, subject to certain conditions provided in the Notes, will be equal to the then current three-month term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) plus 275 basis points. The Company expects to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, which may include the repurchase of the Company’s common stock, and to support organic growth plans, including the maintenance of capital ratios. Following receipt of the net proceeds of the Notes, the Company invested $5.0 million into capital surplus of the Bank.
Liquidity and Capital
The Company continues to maintain excess funding capacity to provide adequate liquidity for loan growth, capital expenditures and ongoing operations. The Company benefits from a strong deposit base, a liquid investment securities portfolio and access to funding from a variety of sources, including federal funds lines, Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances and brokered deposits.
During 2021, the Bank maintained capital ratios at higher levels than the ratios required to be considered a “well-capitalized” institution under applicable banking regulations. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank’s common equity Tier 1 capital and Tier 1 risk-based capital ratios were each 11.36%. Its total capital ratio was 12.44%, and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 9.17%.
Cash Dividend
The Company declared a cash dividend of $0.03 per share on its common stock in each quarter of 2021, resulting in dividends totaling $0.12 per share for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.12 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Share Repurchases
During 2021, the Company completed share repurchases totaling 45,748 shares of its common stock at a weighted average price of $11.47 per share. The share repurchases were completed under the Company’s existing share repurchase program, which was amended in April 2021 to allow the repurchase of additional shares through its date of expiration on December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, a total of 1,009,213 shares remained available for repurchase under the program.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is calculated as the difference between interest and fee income generated from earning assets and the interest expense paid on deposits and borrowed funds. Fluctuations in interest rates, as well as volume and mix changes in earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, can materially impact net interest income. The Company’s earning assets consist of loans, taxable and tax-exempt investments, Federal Home Loan Bank stock, federal funds sold by the Bank and interest-bearing deposits in banks. Interest-bearing liabilities consist of interest-bearing demand deposits and savings and time deposits, as well as borrowings.
The following table shows the average balances of each principal category of assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Additionally, the table provides an analysis of interest revenue or expense associated with each category, along with the accompanying yield or rate percentage. Net interest margin is calculated for each period presented as net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Note A - For the purpose of these computations, non-accruing loans are included in the average loan amounts outstanding. The loans averaged $1.8 million and $3.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Note B - The annualized rate on total average funding costs, including total average interest-bearing liabilities and average non-interest-bearing demand deposits, was 0.35% and 0.62% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Note C - Loan fees are included in the interest amounts presented. Loan fees totaled $1.7 million and $2.0 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table summarizes the impact of variances in volume and rate of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on components of net interest income.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net interest income comparing the two periods resulted from a decrease in interest expense of $1.7 million, partially offset by a decrease of $0.5 million in interest income. Both interest income and interest expense were impacted by the prevailing low interest rate environment that has persisted since the first quarter of 2020. Average yield on interest-earning assets was reduced to 4.57% in 2021, compared to 5.29% in 2020, while aggregate funding costs, including noninterest-bearing deposits, decreased to 0.35% in 2021, compared to 0.62% in 2020. Net interest margin decreased by 46 basis points to 4.23% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 4.69% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
It is expected that net interest income will continue to be impacted significantly by the interest rate environment. Management’s interest rate risk modeling generally indicates that both net interest margin and net interest income would benefit in a rising interest rate environment and would decrease in a reducing interest rate environment. In addition, the Company’s strategy to cease new business development at ALC is expected to reduce average yields on loans in the near term until the ALC portfolio has paid down to nominal levels. Management expects that growth in loan volume with loans of sufficient credit quality will enhance net interest income over time as earning assets are shifted from lower earning cash and federal funds sold balances into loan assets. However, the environment for both loan and deposit generation is highly competitive and subject to the interest rate environment. Reductions in either loan volume or deposit levels could result in downward pressure on net interest income.
Based on recent statements by the Federal Reserve chair, it is expected that the Federal Open Market Committee will begin raising interest rates to address inflationary pressures, and may continue monetary tightening throughout much of 2022. Although, as described above, the Company’s interest margin generally will benefit from rising interest rates, rates may rise in an uneven manner causing unpredictable effects, and higher rates could negatively affect the economy, loan demand and borrowers’ financial position.
Provision for Loan and Lease Losses
The provision for loan and lease losses was $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net charge-offs totaled $1.2 million, or 0.16% of average loans, in 2021, compared to $1.2 million, or 0.21% of average loans, in 2020.
The reduction in loan loss provisions in 2021 was attributable to overall improvement in the economic outlook in the Company’s service territories, as well as reduced loan volume in ALC’s loan portfolio which has historically carried the Company’s highest level of losses. In accordance with regulatory guidance, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, over 1,900 of the Company’s borrowers requested and were granted COVID-19 pandemic-related loan payment deferments. As of December 31, 2021, loans that continued to be in pandemic-related deferment totaled only $0.4 million, compared to $95.2 million as of June 30, 2020, in the early stages of the pandemic. The decrease in deferred loans over the past six quarters is indicative of the strength of the credit quality of the portfolio, as well as the overall general improvement in the economic outlook. While ALC’s provision for loan and leases losses decreased
comparing 2021 to 2020, subsequent to initiation of the ALC dissolution strategy, ALC’s loan loss reserve was increased to account for the inherent uncertainty associated with ALC’s branch closures.
Management believes that the allowance for loan and lease losses as of December 31, 2021, which was calculated under an incurred loss model, was sufficient to absorb losses in the Company’s loan portfolio based on circumstances existing as of the balance sheet date. Furthermore, we believe that continued pay off of ALC’s direct consumer loans will continue to lead to reduced provisions over time. However, uncertainty continues to exist related to various economic factors, including, but not limited to, the ultimate impact on the Company’s borrowers of supply chain disruption, geopolitical activities, and any future impacts of the pandemic. Accordingly, management will continue to monitor circumstances associated with the loan portfolio. Should economic circumstances deteriorate, additional loan loss provisioning may be required.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income represents fees and income derived from sources other than interest-earning assets. The following table presents the major components of non-interest income for the periods indicated:
NM: Not Meaningful
The Company’s non-interest income was reduced in 2021 due to decreases in a number of revenue streams, including mortgage fees from secondary market loans, gains on sale of assets and investment securities, service charges on deposits, and credit insurance commissions and fees. The reduction in mortgage fees resulted from the Company’s decision to discontinue its mortgage division beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. The reduction in mortgage fee income was offset by commensurate reductions in non-interest expense, primarily salaries and benefits, associated with the mortgage division. The reduction in credit insurance commissions and fees resulted from the general decline in ALC’s loan volume during 2021, as well as the cessation of new business during the latter part of the year. Revenue reductions associated with credit insurance income were partially offset by commensurate reductions in non-interest expense that are expected to continue over time.
Certain of the Company’s non-interest revenue sources, including gains on sale of investments and assets are largely dependent on facts and circumstances at a given point in time, and accordingly, revenues from these sources cannot be forecasted with any certainty. Non-interest revenues earned from service charges and other fees on deposit accounts have generally declined during recent years based on changes in depositor preferences for liquidity, particularly during the pandemic. Management will continue to evaluate opportunities to add new non-interest revenue streams or to grow existing streams; however, significant growth in non-interest income is not expected in the near term.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense represents expenses incurred from sources other than interest-bearing liabilities. The following table presents the major components of non-interest expense for the periods indicated:
NM: Not Meaningful
The decrease in non-interest expense in 2021 compared to 2020 is consistent with management’s strategic initiatives intended to improve operating efficiency, focus the Company’s loan growth activities, and fortify asset quality. The most significant initiative introduced was the decision, effective September 3, 2021, to cease all new business development at ALC and to close all 20 of ALC’s branch lending locations in Alabama and Mississippi to the public. This initiative resulted in pre-tax expense reductions netting to $1.3 million in the fourth quarter of 2021. The fourth quarter expense reductions were partially offset by one-time pre-tax charges totaling approximately $0.4 million associated with the initiative. Including costs incurred in both the third and fourth quarters of 2021, one-time charges totaled $0.9 million in 2021 and included severance and related personnel costs, lease termination costs, fixed asset valuation adjustments, termination of technology contracts, and other costs to administer the branch closures. This amount represents the majority of one-time charges that are currently expected. Future non-interest expenses at ALC are expected to consist primarily of ongoing personnel and operating expenses associated with collection of ALC’s remaining loan portfolio.
In addition to the ALC dissolution strategy, on September 3, 2021, the Bank closed four of its previously existing banking offices. The decision to close these offices was based on analysis of banking center activity, profitability and Community Reinvestment Act assessment. The closures included banking centers located in Bucksville, Columbiana and south Tuscaloosa, Alabama, as well as Ewing, Virginia.
Implementation of the ALC dissolution strategy, combined with the Bank’s branch closures and other operational efficiency efforts, led to significant reductions in the Company’s personnel levels, and resulted in reduced salaries and employee benefits expense comparing 2021 to 2020. Of the $1.4 million in net salary and benefits expense reduction in 2021, $0.9 million was realized in the fourth quarter. As of December 31, 2021, the Company employed 175 full-time equivalent employees (including 167 at the Bank and eight at ALC), compared to 270 full-time equivalent employees (189 at the Bank and 81 at ALC) as of December 31, 2020.
The ALC dissolution strategy also impacted net occupancy and equipment expense in 2021. One-time lease termination costs and fixed asset valuation adjustments associated with the strategy totaled $0.5 million (included in the $0.9 million total one-time charges total described above). As of December 31, 2021, all but two of ALC’s branch leases had been terminated and all expenses associated with the terminations had been incurred. Of the two remaining leases, one was expected to terminate during the first quarter of 2022 and one represents ALC’s headquarters office that continues to house the remaining ALC staff.
Other significant changes in non-interest expense included insurance expense and assessments that increased by $0.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to growth in the Company’s total assets which resulted in increased regulatory assessments. In addition, net other real estate/foreclosure expense was reduced due to $0.5 million in gains on sale of three OREO properties, including two of the Bank’s branches that were closed in the third quarter of 2021.
The strategic initiatives implemented in 2021 are expected to continue to reduce the Company’s expense structure in the near term. One of management’s primary focuses continues to be business simplification and process improvements in an effort to continue improving the Company’s overall efficiency levels.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $1.3 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate was 22.3% and 23.4%, respectively, for the same periods.
The effective tax rate is impacted by recurring items, such as changes in tax-exempt interest income earned from bank-qualified municipal bonds and loans and the cash surrender value of bank-owned life insurance. Management makes decisions about whether to invest in tax-exempt instruments on a case-by-case basis after considering a number of factors, including investment return, credit quality and the consistency of such investments with the Company’s overall strategy. The Company’s effective tax rate is expected to fluctuate commensurate with the level of these investments as compared to total pre-tax income.
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Investment Securities
The investment securities portfolio is used by management to provide liquidity, to generate interest income and for use as collateral for public deposits and wholesale funding. Risk and return can be adjusted by altering the duration, composition and/or balance of the portfolio. The expected average life of securities in the investment portfolio was 3.7 years and 2.2 years as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Available-for-sale securities are recorded at estimated fair value, with unrealized gains or losses recognized, net of taxes, in accumulated other comprehensive income, a separate component of shareholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2021, available-for-sale securities totaled $130.9 million, or 97.4% of the total investment portfolio, compared to $85.0 million, or 93.0% of the total investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2020. Available-for-sale securities consisted of residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, U.S. Treasury securities, corporate bonds and obligations of state and political subdivisions.
Held-to-maturity securities are recorded at amortized cost and represent securities that the Company both intends and has the ability to hold to maturity. As of December 31, 2021, held-to-maturity securities totaled $3.4 million, or 2.6% of the total investment portfolio, compared to $6.4 million, or 7.0% of the total investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2020. Held-to-maturity securities consisted of commercial mortgage-backed securities, obligations of U.S. government-sponsored agencies and obligations of states and political subdivisions.
Investment Securities Maturity Schedule
The following tables summarize the carrying values and weighted average yield of the available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities portfolios as of December 31, 2021, according to contractual maturity. Available-for-sale securities are stated at fair value. Held-to-maturity securities are stated at amortized cost.
Condensed Portfolio Maturity Schedule
Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses
The tables below summarize loan balances by portfolio category at the end of each of the most recent five years as of December 31, 2021:
The tables below summarize changes in the allowance for loan and lease losses for each of the most recent five years as of December 31, 2021:
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets at the end of the five most recent years as of December 31, 2021 were as follows:
The increase in nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020, resulted from Bank and ALC branches that were closed and transferred to OREO. The increase in OREO was partially offset by a decrease in nonaccrual loans during 2021.
Summarized below is information concerning income on those loans with deferred interest or principal payments resulting from deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
While no portion of the allowance is in any way restricted to any individual loan or group of loans and the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any and all loans, the following table shows an allocation of the allowance for loan and lease losses as of the end of the five years indicated.
Summary of Loan Loss Experience
The following table summarizes the Company’s loan loss experience for each of the two years indicated.
Deposits
Total deposits increased by 7.1% to $838.1 million as of December 31, 2021, from $782.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Core deposits, which exclude time deposits of $250 thousand or more, provide a relatively stable funding source that supports earning assets. Core deposits totaled $775.1 million, or 92.5% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2021, compared to $726.9 million, or 92.9% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2020. The deposit growth during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both business and consumer deposit holders, including preferences for liquidity, loan payment deferrals, tax payment deferrals, stimulus checks and lower consumer spending. Of the total increase in deposits, $22.6 million represented non-interest-bearing deposits, while $33.3 million were interest-bearing deposits. The Company’s deposit growth slowed during the latter months of 2021 due, in part, to the banking center closures initiated in September 2021, as well as continued reductions in deposit pricing, particularly term deposits. Total deposits decreased by $8.7 million during the fourth quarter of 2021, representing the first quarter of deposit reduction since March 31, 2020, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Deposits, in particular core deposits, have historically been the Company’s primary source of funding and have enabled the Company to successfully meet both short-term and long-term liquidity needs. Management anticipates that such deposits will continue to be the Company’s primary source of funding in the future. We will continue to monitor deposit levels closely to help ensure an adequate level of funding for the Company’s activities. However, various economic and competitive factors could affect this funding source in the future, including increased competition from other financial institutions in deposit gathering, national and local economic conditions and interest rate policies adopted by the Federal Reserve and other central banks.
Average Daily Amount of Deposits and Rates
The average daily amount of deposits and rates paid on such deposits are summarized for the periods indicated in the following table:
As of December 31, 2021, uninsured demand and savings deposits (deposits in excess of $250 thousand, which is the maximum amount for federal deposit insurance) totaled $93.9 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, uninsured time deposits totaled $63.0 million. Maturities of time deposits of greater than $250 thousand outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Maturities of time certificates of deposit of greater than $100 thousand and less than $250 thousand outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Other Interest-Bearing Liabilities
Other interest-bearing liabilities consist of federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, FHLB advances and subordinated debt. These liabilities continue to be utilized by the Company as alternative sources of funds. As of December 31, 2021, these liabilities represented 2.4% of interest-bearing liabilities, compared to 1.3% as of December 31, 2020.
Shareholders’ Equity
The Company has historically placed significant emphasis on maintaining its strong capital base and continues to do so. As of December 31, 2021, shareholders’ equity totaled $90.1 million, or 9.4% of total assets, compared to $86.7 million, or 9.7% of total assets, as of December 31, 2020. Management believes that this level of equity is an indicator of the financial soundness of the Company and the Company’s ability to sustain future growth and profitability. Growth in retained earnings during the year ended December 31, 2021 was offset by an increase in accumulated other comprehensive loss associated with decreases in the fair value of the available-for-sale investment portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2021. The fair value of the available-for-sale investment portfolio fluctuates based on changes in interest rates. Accordingly, the negative fair value of the portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2021 is not necessarily indicative of future performance of the portfolio.
Bancshares’ Board of Directors evaluates dividend payments based on the Company’s level of earnings and the desire to maintain a strong capital base, as well as regulatory requirements relating to the payment of dividends. During both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Bancshares declared dividends of $0.12 per common share, or approximately $0.7 million in aggregate amount.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company retained $22.3 million and $21.9 million, respectively, in treasury stock. Under a program initiated in 2006, on an annual basis, Bancshares’ Board of Directors has continued to authorize management to repurchase shares of the Company’s common stock. As of December 31, 2020, 54,961 shares remained available for repurchase under this program. On April 28, 2021, the Board of Directors approved the repurchase of an additional 1,000,000 shares under the program and extended the expiration of the share repurchase program to December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, 1,009,213 shares remained available for purchase under the program. During the year ended December 31, 2021, a total of 45,748 shares were repurchased at a weighted average price of $11.47 per share, or $0.5 million, in total. During the year ended December 31, 2020, a total of 38,604 shares were repurchased under the program at a weighted average price of $11.70 per share, or $0.5 million, in total. Under the program, share repurchases may be made through open market and privately negotiated transactions at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate, subject to applicable regulatory requirements. The repurchase program does not obligate the Company to acquire any particular number of shares and may be suspended at any time at the Company’s discretion.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, a total of 117,825 and 111,419 shares of stock, respectively, were deferred in connection with Bancshares’ Non-Employee Directors’ Deferred Compensation Plan. The plan permits non-employee directors to invest their directors’ fees and to receive the adjusted value of the deferred amounts in cash or shares of Bancshares common stock. All deferred fees, whether in the form of cash or shares of Bancshares common stock, are reflected as compensation expense in the period earned. The Company classifies all deferred directors’ fees allocated to be paid in shares of stock as additional paid-in capital. The Company may use issued shares or shares of treasury stock to satisfy these obligations when due.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The asset portion of the balance sheet provides liquidity primarily from the following sources: (1) excess cash and interest-bearing deposits in banks, (2) federal funds sold, (3) principal payments and maturities of loans and (4) principal payments and maturities from the investment portfolio. Loans maturing or repricing in one year or less amounted to $102.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and $105.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Investment securities forecasted to mature or reprice in one year or less were estimated to be $9.5 million and $11.3 million of the investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Although some securities in the investment portfolio have legal final maturities exceeding 10 years, a substantial percentage of the portfolio provides monthly principal and interest payments and consists of securities that are readily marketable and easily convertible into cash on short notice. As of December 31, 2021, the investment securities portfolio had an estimated average life of 3.7 years. However, management does not rely solely upon the investment portfolio to generate cash flows to fund loans, capital expenditures, dividends, debt repayment and other cash requirements. These activities are also funded by cash flows from loan payments, as well as increases in deposits and short-term borrowings.
The liability portion of the balance sheet provides liquidity through interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposit accounts, which represent the Company’s primary sources of funds. In addition, federal funds purchased, FHLB advances, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and short-term and long-term borrowings are additional sources of available liquidity. Liquidity management involves the continual monitoring of the sources and uses of funds to maintain an acceptable cash position. Long-term liquidity management focuses on considerations related to the total balance sheet structure. The Bank manages the pricing of its deposits to maintain a desired deposit balance.
As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $10.0 million of outstanding short-term borrowings under FHLB advances. In addition, on October 1, 2021, the Company completed a private placement of $11.0 million in aggregate principal amount of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes that will mature on October 1, 2031. Net of unamortized debt issuance costs, the subordinated notes were recorded as long-term borrowings totaling $10.7 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company did not have any long-term borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The Company had up to $237.0 million and $225.8 million in remaining unused credit from the FHLB (subject to available collateral) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, the Company had $46.0 million and $46.4 million in unused established federal funds lines as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company believes that these potential funding sources will continue to be available.
Management believes that the Company has adequate sources of liquidity to cover its contractual obligations and commitments over the next twelve months.
Regulatory Capital
The Bank is subject to the revised capital requirements as described in the section captioned “Supervision and Regulation - Capital Adequacy” included in Part I, Item I of this report. Under these requirements, the Bank is subject to minimum risk-based capital and leverage capital requirements, which are administered by the federal banking regulatory agencies. These capital requirements, as defined by federal regulations, involve quantitative and qualitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet instruments. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the financial statements of Bancshares and the Bank, and could impact Bancshares’ ability to pay dividends. As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank exceeded all applicable minimum capital standards, and met applicable regulatory guidelines to be considered well-capitalized. No significant conditions or events have occurred since December 31, 2021 that management believes would affect the Bank’s classification as well-capitalized for regulatory purposes.
Refer to the section captioned “Regulatory Capital” included in Note 15, “Shareholders’ Equity,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for an illustration of the Bank’s actual regulatory capital amounts and ratios under regulatory capital standards in effect at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Additionally, refer to the section captioned “Dividend Restrictions” included in Note 15 for a discussion regarding restrictions that could materially influence the Bank’s, and therefore Bancshares’, ability to pay dividends.
Asset/Liability Management
Market risk reflects the potential risk of loss arising from adverse changes in interest rates and market prices. The Company has risk management policies and procedures in place to monitor and limit exposure to market risk. The Company’s primary market risk is interest rate risk created by core banking activities. Interest rate risk is the potential variability of the Company’s income that results from changes in various market interest rates. The Bank’s Asset/Liability Committee routinely reassesses the Company’s strategies to manage interest rate risk in accordance with policies established by the Company’s Board of Directors. A key objective of the
asset/liability management program is to quantify, monitor and manage interest rate risk and to assist management in maintaining stability in net interest margin under varying interest rate environments.
As part of interest rate risk management, the Company may use derivative instruments in accordance with policies established by the Board of Directors. The Asset/Liability Committee, in its oversight role, approves the use of derivatives, which include interest rate swaps, caps and floors. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank held five forward interest rate swap contracts. The interest rate swap contracts, which are designated as either cash flow hedges or fair value hedges, are intended to mitigate risk associated with rising interest rates by converting floating interest rate payments to a fixed rate or by converting a pool of fixed rate loans to a variable rate. See Note 17, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to these derivative instruments.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has contractual obligations to make future payments under debt and lease agreements. Long-term debt and operating lease obligations are reflected on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company has not entered into any unconditional purchase obligations or other long-term obligations, other than as included below. These types of obligations are further discussed in Note 10, “Borrowings,” and Note 16, “Leases,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Many of the Bank’s lending relationships, including those with commercial and consumer customers, contain both funded and unfunded elements. The unfunded component of these commitments is not recorded in the consolidated balance sheets. These commitments are further discussed in Note 20, “Guarantees, Commitments and Contingencies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(1)
Contractual obligations for the subordinated notes include the contractual fixed interest payments during the first five years of the note, as well as the final principal payment at the end of the 10-year term of the note. The note is callable by the Company after the first five years. If not called, the interest rate becomes variable. Since interest payments under a variable rate cannot be forecasted with certainty, contractual interest during the variable period is not included in the table above.
Off-Balance Sheet Obligations
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on its consolidated financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources other than as described in Note 16 “Leases,” Note 17 “Derivative Financial Instruments” and Note 20 “Guarantees, Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.