Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, should be read together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. Please see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview and 2021 Highlights
Arcimoto’s mission is to catalyze the shift to a sustainable transportation system. Since our incorporation, we have been engaged primarily in the design, development, manufacture, sale and rental of ultra-efficient three-wheeled electric vehicles. Arcimoto’s fundamental thesis: there is a disconnect between the size and efficiency of a car (~4,000 pounds of material that can carry five to seven people) and how people use cars on a daily basis (one or two passengers driving an average of 30 miles a day with cargo). Arcimoto, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated in the State of Oregon on November 21, 2007.
In 2021 we produced 331 vehicles. We sold 190 new and two pre-owned vehicles. We deployed 59 vehicles into rental operations and 54 vehicles into fixed assets for marketing and other purposes. We are currently focused on increasing vehicle production and capacity, improving and developing battery technologies, expanding our rental operations, and increasing the affordability and efficiency of our vehicles.
In 2021, we recognized total revenues of approximately $4.39 million, representing a 102% increase compared to the prior year. We continue to ramp production, build new manufacturing capacity and expand our operations to enable increased deliveries and rental of our products in furtherance of revenue growth.
In 2021, our net loss attributable to common stockholders was approximately $47.56 million, representing an unfavorable change of approximately $29.44 million, compared to the prior year. We continue to focus on improving our profitability through investments in capital equipment and product design to achieve scale production capacity and the associated material volume purchasing discounts.
We ended 2021 with approximately $16.97 million in cash and cash equivalents, representing a decrease of approximately $22.48 million from the end of 2020. Our cash flows used by operating activities during 2021 was approximately $39.29 million, representing an increase of approximately $23.00 million compared to approximately $16.29 million during 2020, and capital expenditures amounted to approximately $17.36 million during 2021, compared to approximately $2.84 million during 2020. We have mainly funded our business through the sale of equity and the issuance of debt on capital equipment. We will continue investing in a number of capital-intensive projects in upcoming periods.
On January 23, 2021, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Tilting Motor Works, Inc. (“TMW”), a Washington corporation (the “Seller”), and its owner. TMW engages in the design, production, sales, and installation of a bolt on kit that converts a two wheeled motorcycle into a tilting three-wheeled motorcycle. TMW was acquired to utilize the tilting technology in new three-wheeled micro-mobility vehicles. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Agreement, the Company paid cash of $1,754,083 and issued 436,339 shares of Company common stock and assumed certain liabilities as consideration for substantially all of TMW’s assets.
The push to volume production continues to be our most important overarching objective, and in 2021 we made significant progress towards that goal. We took possession of our new High-Production Arcimoto Manufacturing Plant (“rAMP”) facility, and began landing new production equipment, including our new automated plastics production cell, as well as began the renovation of the facility that will become general assembly. During the first quarter of 2022 we temporarily paused production as we moved materials, quality, subassembly and the assembly line into the new facility, which we expect will achieve substantially higher unit output for the remainder of 2022 and forward. We also made substantial progress engineering and testing battery packs using the next generation cell from our supplier, offering incremental performance improvements to customers.
Currently, we are dependent on a single supplier for our battery cells. During the third quarter of 2021, we received two types of battery cells, one of which has been discontinued. In order to use these cells, our engineering team is currently developing a module that will enable the utilization of these battery cell types. Upon development, regulatory testing will be conducted for compliance with government safety standards. This development and testing will occur concurrently with the planned pause in production discussed in the paragraph above. We expect these cells to be utilized in our FUVs by the end of April 2022. Until the batteries are able to be used in our FUVs, we may have to extend the pause in production.
With limited FUV production capacity, we are focusing on pilot programs for the Deliverator and Rapid Responder®, performing value engineering and planning for volume manufacture to achieve sustainable profitability, applying to the Federal Department of Energy’s ATVMLP to finance original equipment manufacturing (“OEM”) volume production, engaging sales efforts focused on fleet deployments, building and testing our rental operations, and expanding our service network.
Management Opportunities, Challenges, Risks and 2022 Outlook
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, there has been a trend in many parts of the world of increasing availability and administration of vaccines against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel and government activities and functions. On the other hand, infection rates and regulations continue to fluctuate in various regions and there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including challenges and increases in costs for logistics and supply chains, such as increased port congestion, intermittent supplier delays and a shortfall of semiconductor supply. We have also previously been affected by temporary manufacturing closures, employment and compensation adjustments, and impediments to administrative activities supporting our product deliveries and deployments.
Ultimately, we cannot predict the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to monitor macroeconomic conditions to remain flexible and to optimize and evolve our business as appropriate, and we will have to accurately project demand and infrastructure requirements and deploy our production, workforce and other resources accordingly.
Production
Retail series production has grown from 56 in 2019, to 117 in 2020, to 331 in 2021.
We are focused on ramping our production facilities to their installed production capacities as well as increasing capacity at our new factory. Our current production continues to be affected by the industry-wide semiconductor and other component shortages, requiring additional workaround manufacturing and production design solutions to be implemented which may be difficult to sustain. Moving into the new factory started in late 2021. The next phase of production growth will depend on the lead and installation times for our new paint and battery module manufacturing lines, as well as our ability to add to our available sources of battery cell supply by developing a patent pending 2170 cell module that will have high-volume output, lower capital and production costs and longer range. Our goals are to improve vehicle performance, decrease production costs and increase affordability. However, these plans are subject to uncertainties inherent in establishing and ramping manufacturing operations, which may be exacerbated by the number of concurrent projects, any industry-wide component constraints which may increase the number of manufacturing and production design workaround solutions required, labor shortages and any future impact from events outside of our control such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, we must meet ambitious technological targets with our plans for product cost reduction as well as for iterative manufacturing and design improvements for our vehicles with the new factory.
For portions of all four quarters of 2020, Arcimoto’s production operations were suspended in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company restarted limited production and resumed deliveries to customers in the third quarter of 2020. We have continued to experience supply chain challenges related to extended lead times for delivery of parts and raw materials and may continue to do so in the foreseeable future.
We have contracted Munro & Associates, a lean design consulting company, to evaluate Arcimoto’s manufacturing processes and supply chain management in order to drive down costs and begin high-volume production of Arcimoto ultra-efficient electric vehicles. To date, substantial progress has been made in understanding the cost models for future vehicles based on current and anticipated supply chain conditions, ergonomic studies, planning for failure modes and effects analysis (“FMEA”), baseline ride-drive characteristics, mapping out European Union (“EU”) certification, cost reduction for manufacturing, lean manufacturing analysis, vehicle architecture sourcing-selection for all major subsystems and the technology roadmap for future vehicles and marketing roadmap.
Demand and Sales
The long-term success of this business is dependent upon increasing margins through greater volumes. Our cost reduction efforts are key to our vehicles’ affordability. In addition to a planned ramping of production in 2022 to three times the level achieved in 2021, we will also continue to generate demand and brand awareness by improving our vehicles’ performance and functionality, and by expanding sales and rentals in more states. Moreover, we expect to continue to benefit from a spike in demand in the automotive industry generally, as well as ongoing electrification of the automotive sector and increasing environmental awareness.
However, we operate in a cyclical industry that is sensitive to trade, environmental and political uncertainty, all of which may also be compounded by any future global impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, as additional competitors enter the marketplace and help bring the world closer to sustainable transportation, we will have to continue to execute well to increase our momentum.
Demand for the Retail Series Arcimoto FUV has continued to increase. As of December 31, 2021, we had 5,774 net FUV pre-orders placed with small refundable deposits or fleet order commitments, representing an increase of 1,057, or approximately 22%, from the 4,717 pre-orders as of December 31, 2020.
We consider pre-orders to be strong sales leads, and use these leads as an indicator of market demand. Pre-orders are made up of small refundable cash deposits from individual retail customers and distribution agreements or nonbinding letters of intent from commercial customers that may or may not have deposited cash. The distribution of pre-orders as of December 31, 2021, is presented in the table below:
In the third quarter of 2019, we completed vehicle testing. Arcimoto tested to verify robustness of its vehicle design, to demonstrate compliance with all Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards required for motorcycles, and to demonstrate proper function of voluntarily-added equipment such as the FUV’s 3+3 seat belts. Following completion of compliance testing, we initiated the sales process with our first customers. As sales are completed, pre-order and reservation fees are applied to the purchase price and balances due are collected on delivery.
The average sales price, including custom upgrade options, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20,389, $2,489 or 13.9% above the starting price. We began taking $5,000 non-refundable reservations for the Fun Utility Vehicle in the first quarter of 2019 with a starting price point of $19,900. We secured non-refundable reservations for the first 100 FUVs in anticipation of initial retail production and delivery. In the last week of September 2019, we delivered the first two FUVs. In the third quarter of 2020, we began taking $2,500 non-refundable deposits for the second 100 FUV’s with a starting price point of $17,900. In total, Arcimoto produced 117 model year 2020 FUVs and delivered 96 new and one pre-owned to customers by December 31, 2020. An additional 192 model year 2020 and 2021 FUVs were delivered to customers during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Arcimoto’s test of the Rapid Responder® in a pilot program with the City of Eugene, the Eugene-Springfield Fire Department (“ESFD”) was completed on March 31, 2021, and ESFD has provided us with valuable feedback for future product development and marketing. We are evaluating upfitters and defining the process for installation of new accessories such as lights and sirens and we released pricing and availability for the Rapid Responder® in the first quarter of 2021.
We have several ongoing Deliverator pilot programs with individuals, municipalities, and corporate fleets. We have completed the first phase of tool-up for manufacture and production of the Deliverator, and we continued to build Deliverators in low volume through the remainder of 2021, with the intent to deliver them to new pilot programs.
On February 4, 2021, the Company closed and completed a Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) for the business of Tilting Motor Works, Inc. (“TMW”), including technology patents for tilting three wheeled vehicles and the TRiO motorcycle accessory product line. The TRiO is a bolt-on front end kit that converts a two wheeled motorcycle to a three wheeled tilting reverse trike. The Company believes the TRiO product line will continue to flourish under Arcimoto, as we are able to bring considerable marketing and manufacturing efforts to bear, and the underlying technology will be beneficial to future Arcimoto products. Authorized dealers/installers of the TRiO products are potential partners for providing product support services to FUV owners in certain areas. Arcimoto delivered 19 TRiO kits, generating $261,808 in net revenue with a 32.0% gross margin during the period from February 4, 2021 to December 31, 2021. The Company completed the relocation of TMW to its Eugene, Oregon campus in the second quarter of 2021.
Trends in Cash Flow and Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures are typically difficult to project beyond the short term given the number and breadth of our core projects at any given time and may further be impacted by uncertainties in future market conditions. We are simultaneously ramping new products in the Deliverator and Roadster, micro mobility, ramping manufacturing facilities in the new 10-acre campus and piloting the development and manufacture of new battery module technologies, and the pace of our capital spend may vary depending on overall priority among projects, the pace at which we meet milestones, production adjustments to and among our various products, increased capital efficiencies and the addition of new projects. Owing and subject to the foregoing as well as the pipeline of announced projects under development and all other continuing infrastructure growth, we currently expect our capital expenditures to be between $35,000,000 to $40,000,000 in 2022 and each of the next two fiscal years.
Our business has been consistently generating negative cash flow from operations, some of this is offset with better working capital management resulting in shorter days sales outstanding than days payable outstanding. We are also likely to see heightened levels of capital expenditures during certain periods depending on the specific pace of our capital-intensive projects and rising material prices and increasing supply chain and labor expenses resulting from changes in global trade conditions and labor availability associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, while our stock price was significantly elevated during parts of 2021, we saw higher levels of exercise of investor warrants and options from employee equity plans, which obligates us to deliver shares pursuant to the terms of those derivatives. Overall, we expect our ability to be self-funding to be achieved as we approach a sales volume of approximately 7,500 vehicles per year and as long as macroeconomic factors support growth in our sales, and engineering cost reductions and volume pricing improve materials cost.
Operating Expense Trends
Operating expenses increased by approximately 243%, or $27,538,000, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Operating expenses for 2021, which included a non-cash charge for goodwill impairment, increased primarily due to increased research and development activities, increased hiring within the sales and marketing functions as a result of enhanced marketing initiatives and increased payroll costs with our administrative functions to support our growth. The number of employees increased by approximately 88%, from 133 as of December 31, 2020 to 250 employees as of December 31, 2021. The increase in staff was needed to support the growth and expansion of our business.
As long as we see expanding sales, and excluding the impairment charges on certain assets as explained below, we generally expect operating expenses relative to revenues to decrease as we continue to increase operational efficiency and process automation. We expect operating expenses to grow in 2022 as we are expanding our rental operations and ramp up production.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our critical accounting policies and estimates, please refer to the “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 to the Financial Statements beginning at page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Disclosure About Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any outstanding derivative financial instruments, off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency forward contracts. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, as appropriate, and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. The estimates used for, but not limited to, the collectability of accounts receivable, inventory valuation, fair value of long-lived assets, goodwill, warranty reserves, and fair value of financial instruments could be impacted. We have assessed the impact and are not aware of any specific events or circumstances that required an update to our estimates and assumptions or materially affected the carrying value of our assets or liabilities as of the date of issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Vehicle sales revenue include revenue related to deliveries of new and pre-owned vehicles. We recognize revenue on vehicle sales upon delivery to the customer, which is when the control of a vehicle transfers. Payments are typically received at the point control transfers or in accordance with payment terms customary to the business. Amounts billed to customers related to shipping and handling are classified as vehicle sales revenue, and we have elected to recognize the cost for freight and shipping when control over vehicles, parts or accessories have transferred to the customer as an expense in the cost of vehicle sales revenue. Our policy is to exclude taxes collected from a customer from the transaction price of automotive contracts.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is computed using standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis. We record inventory write-downs for excess or obsolete inventories based upon assumptions about current and future demand forecasts. If our inventory on-hand is in excess of our future demand forecast, the excess amounts are reserved to reduce the carrying value to net realizable value.
We also review our inventory to determine whether its carrying value exceeds the net amount realizable upon the ultimate sale of the inventory. This requires us to determine the estimated selling price of our vehicles less the estimated cost to convert the inventory on-hand into a finished product. Once inventory is written down, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis.
Should our estimates of future selling prices or production costs change, additional and potentially material increases to this reserve may be required. A small change in our estimates may result in a material charge to our reported financial results.
Business Combination
We allocate the fair value of the consideration transferred to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including trade name, proprietary technology, and customer relationships based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The purchase price allocation requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, with respect to intangible assets.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired company and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates used in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
● future expected cash flows from sales, and acquired developed technologies;
● the acquired company’s trade name and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and customer relationships will continue to be used in our products; and
● discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and, if such events occur, we may be required to recognize a loss in the statement of operations due to an overestimation of the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for potential impairment at least annually, or more frequently if an event or other circumstance indicates that we may not be able to recover the carrying amount of the net assets of the reporting unit. In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we bypass the qualitative assessment, or if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then we perform a quantitative impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount.
We calculate the estimated fair value of a reporting unit using a weighting of the income and market approaches. For the income approach, we use internally developed discounted cash flow models that include the following assumptions, among others: projections of revenues, expenses, and related cash flows based on assumed long-term growth rates and demand trends; expected future investments to grow new units; and estimated discount rates. For the market approach, we use internal analyses based primarily on market comparables. We base these assumptions on our historical data and experience, third party appraisals, industry projections, micro and macro general economic condition projections, and our expectations.
Warranties
We provide a manufacturer’s warranty on all new vehicles we sell for the lesser of three years or thirty-six thousand miles. We accrue a warranty reserve for the products sold by us, which includes our best estimate of the projected costs to repair or replace items under warranties and recalls when identified. These estimates are based on actual claims incurred to date and an estimate of the nature, frequency and costs of future claims. These estimates are inherently uncertain given our relatively short history of sales, and changes to our historical or projected warranty experience may cause material changes to the warranty reserve in the future. The warranty reserve does not include projected warranty costs associated with our vehicles subject to operating lease as the costs to repair these warranty claims are expensed as incurred. The portion of the warranty reserve expected to be incurred within the next 12 months is in the current portion of warranty reserve, while the remaining balance is in warranty reserve on the balance sheets. Warranty expense is recorded as a component of cost of revenues in the statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We use the fair value method of accounting for our stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) granted to employees and directors to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for the stock-based awards. The fair value of stock option awards with only service and/or performance conditions is estimated on the grant or offering date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires inputs such as the risk-free interest rate, expected term and expected volatility. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant judgment. The fair value of RSUs is measured on the grant date based on the closing fair market value of our common stock. The resulting cost is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the awards, usually the vesting period, which is generally three years for stock options and on issuance for RSUs as these are issued at the end of each quarter for that quarter’s service. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, net of actual forfeitures in the period.
For performance-based awards, stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the expected performance achievement period of individual performance milestones when the achievement of each individual performance milestone becomes probable.
As we accumulate additional employee stock-based award data over time and as we incorporate market data related to our common stock, we may calculate significantly different volatilities and expected lives, which could materially impact the valuation of our stock-based awards and the stock-based compensation expense that we will recognize in future periods. Stock-based compensation expense is recorded in cost of revenues, research and development expense and selling, general and administrative expense in the statements of operations.
Income Taxes
We are subject to taxes in the U.S. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We make these estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our future plans. Tax laws, regulations and administrative practices may be subject to change due to economic or political conditions including fundamental changes to the tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals. The U.S. is actively considering changes in this regard. As of December 31, 2021, we had recorded a full valuation allowance on our net U.S. deferred tax assets because we expect that it is more likely than not that our U.S. deferred tax assets will not be realized. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 versus year ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes the Company’s results of operations:
Revenues
Total revenue increased approximately $2,210,000 or 102% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period last year. This increase was primarily due to an increase in product sales of approximately $1,914,000 from higher sales volume, an increase of approximately $262,000 of TMW revenue due to the acquisition of TMW in the first quarter of 2021, an increase in rental revenue of approximately $39,000 compared to the same period last year, approximately a $32,000 increase in service and merchandise revenues, partially offset by other revenue of approximately $27,000 and grant revenue of approximately $10,000 recorded in 2020 that was not recurring in 2021.
We had approximately $4,386,000 in revenue, comprising of approximately $3,993,000 in net revenue from the sales of our vehicles, approximately $262,000 in TMW net revenue, approximately $76,000 in net rental revenue, approximately $30,000 in service revenue and approximately $25,000 in net revenue from merchandise and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased by approximately $8,898,000 or 108%, primarily driven by an increase in FUV material costs due to a higher number of FUV units sold, higher payroll costs, and higher manufacturing overhead as a result of ramping up our production operations and higher warranty reserves due to increased sales and recall costs.
We had approximately $17,149,000 in cost of goods sold (“COGS”), comprising approximately $4,027,000 for FUV material and freight costs from the sale of our vehicles, approximately $959,000 in warranty costs, approximately $178,000 in TMW COGS, approximately $1,050,000 from adjustments to inventory for unrecoverable excess costs and purchase price variance as well as loss and scrap, and approximately $10,935,000 in manufacturing labor and overhead for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development (“R&D”) Expenses
R&D expenses increased by approximately $9,095,000 or 302% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period last year primarily due to the development of the 1.X FUV platform that is planned for Original Equipment Manufacturer (“OEM”) volumes. The increase was driven by higher consulting services, higher payroll expenses and additional expenses incurred as a result of our TMW acquisition in the first quarter of 2021.
R&D expenses consist primarily of prototyping new variants of the 1.0 FUV platform, developing the 2.0 platform, and developing new three wheeled tilting micro mobility platforms.
Sales and Marketing (“S&M”) Expenses
S&M expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $7,000,000, reflecting an increase of approximately $4,761,000, or 213%, as compared to the same period last year. The primary reasons for the increase in S&M expenses in 2021 as compared to the prior period was primarily due to increased costs related to logistics and product support resulting from the expansion of the sales department.
These activities reflect higher levels of marketing, road shows and costs in developing positive experiences for our customers and product support. The increased costs were primarily due to higher payroll costs as a result of additional personnel required to perform such activities.
General and Administrative (“G&A”) Expenses
G&A expenses consist primarily of personnel and facilities costs related to executives, finance, human resources, information technology, as well as legal fees for professional and contract services. G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $12,948,000 as compared to approximately $6,091,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of approximately $6,857,000, or 113%. The primary reasons for the increase in the current period was due to costs associated with the integration of TMW, increased lease expenses, increased professional fees, increased personnel costs related to new hires to support our growing operations, and increased legal costs.
Impairment of goodwill
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we concluded, upon a qualitative assessment of the relevant economic factors, that it would be more likely than not that the fair values of our TMW reporting unit was less than the carrying amount. As a result, we proceeded to conduct a quantitative analysis of estimating the reporting unit’s fair value by using a weighted average of both an income approach and a market approach. These valuation approaches consider a number of factors that include, but are not limited to, prospective financial information, growth rates, terminal value, discount rate and comparable multiples from market participants in our industry. These approaches also require us to make certain assumptions and estimates regarding industry economic factors and future profitability of our related business.
These approaches resulted in the conclusion that the fair value of the TMW reporting unit was less than the reporting unit’s carrying value. This was primarily due to, among other things, the unexpected continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic which caused further and unexpected disruptions within our supply chain, a re-tooling of our TRiO product line which delayed production, and a change in strategy toward electric tricycles that required us to change our forecasted net cash flows and the timing of these cash flows as we enter into new markets. Therefore, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $6,824,000 in our Statement of Operation for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain on Forgiveness of PPP Loan
On May 5, 2020, we received a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the amount of approximately $1,069,000, referred to on the balance sheet as Note payable to bank. The loan has an interest rate of 1% and monthly payments of approximately $60,000 for 18 months beginning December 5, 2020. This loan is eligible for the limited loan forgiveness provisions of Section 1102 of the CARES Act, and the SBA Interim Final Rule dated April 2, 2020. On April 27, 2021, all of the outstanding principal and interest of approximately $1,069,000 and $10,000, respectively, were forgiven.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $216,000, as compared to approximately $721,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was due to the payoff of all non-equipment debt financing in June 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have has not achieved positive earnings and operating cash flows to enable us to finance its operations internally. Funding for the business to date has come primarily through the issuance of debt and equity securities. We will require additional funding to continue to operate in the normal course of business. Management believes that current cash reserves and if needed, other external sources of funding will sustain operations for more than 12 months.
Although our objective is to increase our revenues from the sale of our products to sufficiently generate positive operating and cash flow levels, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in this regard. We may need to raise additional capital in order to fund our operations, which if needed, we intend to obtain through debt and/or equity offerings. Funds on hand and any follow-on capital, will be used to invest in our business to expand sales and marketing efforts, including Company-owned and franchise-rental operations and the systems to support them, enhance our current product lines by continuing research and development to enhance and reduce the cost of the FUV and to bring future variants to retail production, continue to build out and optimize our production facility, debt repayment, and fund operations until positive cash flow is achieved. The need for additional capital may be adversely impacted by uncertain market conditions or approval by regulatory bodies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $16,971,000 in cash and cash equivalents, representing a decrease in cash and cash equivalents of approximately $22,480,000 from December 31, 2020. Our cash used from operating activities was approximately $39,291,000, which was primarily due to our net loss of approximately $47,564,000.
On January 25, 2021, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Canaccord Genuity LLC (“Canaccord”) under which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock in connection with its at-the-market (“ATM”) offering in an aggregate amount of up to $80,000,000 from time to time through Canaccord, acting exclusively as our sales agent (the “Offering”). In connection with our ATM, we issued and sold 1,853,181 shares of common stock through December 31, 2021, resulting in proceeds to the Company totaling approximately $33,106,000, net of offering costs. On April 19, 2021, we disbursed $11,500,000 cash for the purchase of the buildings on Chambers Ave.
On January 14, 2022 we replaced the January 25, 2021 Equity Distribution Agreement and entered into a new Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Canaccord, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Agent, as sales agent up to $100,000,000 of our common stock. We intend to use the net proceeds of the Sales Agreement primarily for working capital and general corporate purposes.
We anticipate that our current sources of liquidity, including cash and cash equivalents, together with the Sales Agreement, will provide us with more than 12 months of liquidity. The amount and timing of funds that we may raise is undetermined and could vary based on a number of factors, including our ongoing liquidity needs, our current capitalization, as well as access to current and future sources of liquidity. If circumstances arise where we have to obtain additional funds for our business needs, we will consider obtaining such funds, among other things, through the capital markets and/or refinancing our long-lived assets.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash outflows to support the growth of our business in areas such as R&D, sales and marketing and G&A expenses. Our operating cash flows are also affected by our working capital needs to support personnel related expenditures, accounts payable, inventory purchases and other current assets and liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was approximately $39,291,000, which included a net loss of approximately $47,564,000, non-cash charge related to depreciation and amortization of approximately $2,348,000, gain on forgiveness of Payment Protection Program loan totaling approximately $1,078,000 (including accrued interest), non-cash charge related to stock-based compensation of approximately $3,628,000, an approximately $6,824,000 charge related to goodwill impairment in conjunction with the TMW acquisition, a deferred tax credit of approximately $2,939,000 recorded that was the result of a release in valuation allowance from the acquisition, and changes in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid inventory, other current assets, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, customer deposits, warranty reserve, deferred revenue, and deferred rent of approximately $510,000, of which approximately $2,410,000 relates to inventory.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was approximately $16,294,000, which included a net loss of approximately $18,120,000, non-cash charge related to depreciation and amortization of approximately $930,000, non-cash charge related to the amortization of debt discounts of approximately $311,000, non-cash charge related to stock-based compensation of approximately $1,917,000, and changes in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid inventory, other current assets, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, customer deposits, warranty accrual and deferred revenue of approximately $1,330,000.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, relates to the capital expenditures to support our growth in operations, including investments in manufacturing equipment and tooling. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid approximately $17,356,000 for manufacturing equipment and fixed asset purchases, and approximately $16,000 for security deposits. We also acquired TMW through a combination of cash paid of approximately $1,754,000 and non-cash common stock issuance of approximately $13,038,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid approximately $2,843,000 for manufacturing equipment and fixed asset purchases and approximately $60,000 for security deposits.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $35,937,000, compared to approximately $52,815,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 comprised of proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our registered offerings of approximately $34,238,000, offering costs of approximately $1,132,000, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of approximately $1,707,000, payments on capital lease obligations amounting to approximately $385,000, proceeds from equipment notes of approximately $366,000, repayments of notes payable of approximately $282,000, payments of deferred offering costs of approximately $24,000 and proceeds from the exercise of warrants of approximately $1,728,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $52,815,000. Cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 comprised of proceeds from the issuance of our common stock of approximately $56,751,000, offering costs of approximately $3,804,000, proceeds from note payable to bank of approximately $1,069,000, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of approximately $70,000, repayments of approximately $188,000 on convertible notes payable to related parties, repayments of convertible notes payable of approximately $500,000, repayments of notes payable of approximately $3,000,000, proceeds from the exercise of warrants of approximately $1,660,000, payments on capital lease obligations of approximately $227,000, and approximately $1,220,000 in proceeds from equipment notes payable.
Non-Cash Investing and Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately $13,038,000 in shares of our common stock were issued as part of the purchase price of acquiring TMW, approximately $221,000 in stock was issued for payment of accounts payable, approximately $1,250,000 of notes payable was incurred for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment, approximately $593,000 in insurance expense was financed, and approximately $669,000 of equipment purchases were financed through capital leases.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately $1,419,000 notes payable and accrued interest were converted to common stock, approximately $181,000 in stock was issued for payment of accounts payable, and approximately $146,000 in insurance expense was financed.