ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto contained in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors Associated with Our Business” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are engaged in the research and development of targeted, non-systemic therapies for the treatment of patients with gastrointestinal (“GI”) diseases. Non-systemic therapies are non-absorbable drugs that act locally, i.e. in the intestinal lumen, skin or mucosa, without reaching an individual’s systemic circulation.
We are currently focused on developing our pipeline of gut-restricted GI clinical product candidates, including niclosamide, an oral small molecule which we believe has anti-viral and anti-inflammatory properties, and the biologic adrulipase (formerly MS1819), a recombinant lipase enzyme designed to potentially enable the digestion of fats and other nutrients.
Our niclosamide programs leverage proprietary oral and topical formulations to potentially address multiple GI conditions, including inflammatory bowel diseases (“IBD”) indications and viral diseases. We are currently advancing two separate clinical programs of our niclosamide formulations, which are currently in Phase 2 clinical trials; FW-COV for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (“COVID-19”) GI infections, and FW-UP for ulcerative proctitis (“UP”) and ulcerative proctosigmoiditis (“UPS”).
We are further developing FW-ICI-AC for Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-associated colitis (“ICI-AC”) and diarrhea in advanced stage oncology patients, for which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) cleared our investigational new drug (“IND”) application filed in September 2021, and two pre-IND programs of our niclosamide therapies for potential additional IBD indications, including FW-UC for ulcerative colitis (“UC”) and FW-CD for Crohn’s disease (“CD”).
Our adrulipase programs are focused on the development of an oral, non-systemic, biologic capsule for the potential treatment of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (“EPI”) in patients with cystic fibrosis (“CF”) and chronic pancreatitis (“CP”). Our goal is to provide CF and CP patients with a safe and effective therapy to control EPI that is non-animal derived and offers the potential to dramatically reduce their daily pill burden.
We are developing our product candidates for a host of GI diseases where we believe there are significant unmet clinical needs and limited therapeutic options, resulting in painful, life threatening and discomforting consequences for patients. Our mission is to help protect the health and restore quality of life for the millions of people afflicted by these GI diseases.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus disease, or COVID-19, outbreak a global pandemic. To limit the spread of COVID-19, governments have taken various actions including the issuance of stay-at-home orders and physical distancing guidelines. Accordingly, businesses have adjusted, reduced or suspended operating activities. Beginning in March 2020, the majority of our workforce began working from home. Disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of the stay-at-home orders and work-from-home policies, have impacted productivity, including delayed enrollment of new patients at certain of our clinical trial sites, and may further disrupt our business and delay our development programs and regulatory timelines, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct business in the ordinary course. As a result, our expenses may vary significantly if there is an increased impact from COVID-19 on the costs and timing associated with the conduct of our clinical trials and other related business activities.
We have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. We continue to operate normally with the exception of enabling all of our employees to work productively at home and abiding by travel restrictions issued by federal, state and local governments. Our current plans to return to the office remain fluid as federal, state and local guidelines, rules and regulations continue to evolve.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of our product candidates or otherwise. In the future, we expect that we will seek to generate revenue primarily from product sales, but we may also generate non-product revenue from sources including, but not limited to, research funding, development and milestone payments, and royalties on future product sales in connection with any out-license or other strategic relationships and/or government grants we may establish. Our product candidates are at an early stage of development and may never be successfully developed or commercialized.
Research and Development Expense
Conducting research and development is central to our business. Historically, the majority of our research and development expenses have been focused on the development of adrulipase and the acquisition and development of niclosamide.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of internal and external costs incurred for our development activities, which include, among other things:
●
personnel-related costs, which include salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
●
fees paid to third parties for services directly related to our drug development and regulatory efforts;
●
Expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations (“CROs”), investigative sites and consultants and contractors that conduct or provide other services relating to our clinical trials and research activities;
●
the cost of acquiring drug product, drug supply and clinical trial materials from contract development and manufacturing organization (“CDMOs”) and third-party contractors;
●
costs associated with preclinical and non-clinical activities;
●
payments and other costs in connection with the acquisition our product candidates under licensing agreements; and
●
amortization of intangible assets, including patents, in-process research and development and license agreements.
Costs incurred in connection with research and development activities are expensed as incurred.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we focus our efforts on the clinical development of our product candidates, including niclosamide and adrulipase through late-stage clinical trials, as well as chemistry, manufacturing and controls (“CMC”) efforts. The process of conducting non-clinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. It is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and costs of any non-clinical study or clinical trial that we may conduct. In addition, if our product development efforts are successful, we expect to incur substantial costs to prepare for potential commercialization of any late-stage product candidates and, in the event any of our product candidates receives regulatory approval, to potentially fund the launch and sales and marketing efforts of the product.
The probability of success for any of our current or future product candidates will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate, as well as an assessment of each drug candidate’s commercial potential.
We do not record or maintain information regarding costs incurred in research and development on a program or project specific basis. Our research and development staff, outside consultants, contractors, CROs, and CDMOs are deployed across several programs and/or indications. Additionally, many of our costs are not attributable to individual programs and/or indications. Therefore, we believe that allocating costs on the basis of time incurred by our personnel does not accurately reflect the actual costs of a project.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, related to our executive, finance, business development and support functions, legal fees relating to both intellectual property and corporate matters, insurance, costs associated with operating as a public company, including corporate communications and investor relations expense, information technology, professional fees for accounting, auditing and other professional services, and facility-related costs.
We anticipate our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future to support of our expanded research and development activities, intellectual property, patent and corporate legal expense, insurance, and costs associated with operating as a public company, including corporate communications and investor relations expense. Additional increases in general and administrative expenses are expected in connection with increased business development efforts, including potential partnership and/or collaboration agreements and financing activities, expanding infrastructure, including information technology administration, and the hiring of additional personnel and consultants, among other expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have not generated any revenues and have experienced net losses and negative cash flows from our activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $8.2 million, negative working capital of approximately $2.9 million, and had sustained cumulative losses attributable to common stockholders of approximately $153.9 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we have raised aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $9.0 million from the sale of Common Stock and warrants in a public offering. We have not yet achieved profitability and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses will continue to grow and, as a result, we will need to generate significant product revenues to achieve profitability. We may never achieve profitability. As such, we are dependent on obtaining, and are continuing to pursue, the necessary funding from outside sources, including obtaining additional funding from the sale of securities in order to continue our operations. Without adequate funding, we may not be able to meet our obligations. We believe these conditions may raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our primary sources of liquidity come from capital raises through additional equity and/or debt financings. This may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and other geopolitical events, including war in Ukraine, which are evolving and could negatively impact our ability to raise additional capital in the future.
We have funded our operations to date primarily through the issuance of debt, convertible debt securities, preferred stock, as well as the issuance of Common Stock in various public offerings and private placement transactions. We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development of niclosamide and adrulipase. We will require additional financing to develop our product candidates, run clinical trials, prepare regulatory filings and obtain regulatory approvals, fund operating losses, and, if deemed appropriate, establish manufacturing, sales and marketing capabilities. Our current financial condition raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a material adverse impact on our financial condition, our ability to meet our obligations, and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We will seek funds through additional equity and/or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing.
Although, we are primarily focused on the development of our product candidates, including niclosamide and adrulipase, we are also opportunistically focused on expanding our product pipeline of clinical assets through collaborations, and also through acquisitions of products and companies. We are continually evaluating potential asset acquisitions business combinations, and other partnership opportunities. To finance such acquisitions, we might raise additional equity capital, incur additional debt, or both.
We are able to sell securities on a shelf registration statement pursuant to the ATM Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC. Under current Securities and Exchange Commission regulations, if at any time our public float is less than $75.0 million, and for so long as our public float remains less than $75.0 million, the amount we can raise through primary public offerings of securities in any twelve-month period using shelf registration statements is limited to an aggregate of one-third of our public float, which is referred to as the baby shelf rules. As of March 31, 2022, our calculated public float is below $75.0 million and we will be subject to baby shelf rules for any offerings conducted on our shelf registration statement. As such, we will be restricted from selling more than an aggregate of one-third of our public float pursuant to a shelf registration statement in any twelve-month period, so long as the aggregate market value of our Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $75.0 million.
Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions. Each issuance under the shelf registration statements will require the filing of a prospectus supplement identifying the amount and terms of the securities to be issued.
On September 13, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with FWB. At the effective time of the Merger, the former FWB stockholders received an applicable pro rata share of (i) $3.0 million in cash and (ii) 624,025 shares of the Common Stock. The remaining non-contingent purchase price was payable to the former FWB stockholders on a pro rata basis upon our payment of (i) $8.0 million in cash, payable within 45 days of the Merger and, (iii) $7.0 million in cash, payable by March 31, 2022.
On October 29, 2021, Fortis Advisors LLC, the hired representative (in such capacity, the “Representative”) of the former stockholders of FWB, in connection with the Merger Agreement filed a complaint against us in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, seeking to enforce rights to payment of $8.0 million due October 28, 2021, pursuant to the Merger Agreement and the $2 million milestone payment for initiation of the FW-UP Part 2 trial. On November 15, 2021, we reached an agreement with the Representative to settle the litigation, under terms that, among other things, involve a substantial reduction in immediate payment obligations and deferrals of certain remaining milestone and other payment obligations over time, with an immediate payment of $2.0 million for the milestone and periodic installments of $500,000 per month payable from January 2022 through August 2022 and $1.0 million per month payable from September 2022 through July 2023 until an aggregate of $17.0 million is received.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues
We have not yet achieved revenue-generating status from any of our product candidates. Since inception, we have devoted substantially all of our time and efforts to acquiring and developing our product candidates, including niclosamide and adrulipase. As a result, we did not have any revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses
Total research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $38.3 million, an increase of approximately $19.2 million, or 200% over the approximately $19.1 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding research and development expenses for intellectual property acquired in connection with the acquisition of FWB, research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $17.0 million, an increase of approximately $11.1 million, or 289% over the approximately $5.9 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in research and development expenses, excluding expenses related to the acquired intellectual property, was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $4.4 million in clinical trial related expenses in connection with the FW-COV and FW-UP niclosamide studies and completion of the OPTION 2 and Combination studies for adrulipase, approximately $3.0 million in milestone payments to FWB related to the development of niclosamide, approximately $1.3 million in CMC related costs, approximately $1.1 million in clinical and regulatory related costs, and approximately $0.6 million in other expenses.
The increase in research and development expenses for acquired intellectual property was primarily attributable to $8.1 million of additional expense related to the acquisition of our niclosamide drug candidates through the Merger entered into on September 13, 2021, as compared to the license agreement entered into on December 31, 2020,
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $18.4 million, an increase of approximately $11.5 million, or 158% over the approximately $7.3 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in total general and administrative expenses was due primarily to increases in costs associated with being a publicly reporting company, including investor relations expenses of approximately $5.8 million, legal expenses of approximately $1.8 million, personnel costs of approximately $0.6 million, directors and officer’s insurance of approximately $0.4 million, directors fees of approximately $0.4 million, audit and accounting fees of approximately $0.3 million, and business development related expense of approximately $0.2 million
Impairment
of Intangible Assets
We reviewed our definite-lived intangible assets for impairment as there were indicators that their carrying value of our patents might not be recoverable in December 2021. We used a qualitative approach to compare their carrying value to their fair value, and because this evaluation indicated that the carrying value of our definite-lived intangible assets was not recoverable, we performed an impairment test of these assets. Based on these analyses, we recognized an impairment charge of approximately $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 to reduce the carrying amounts of our patents to their fair value.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expenses (income) for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $(0.5) million, a decrease in expenses of approximately $6.8 million over the approximately $6.3 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense was approximately $0 million and $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decreased interest expense is due to amortization of debt discount and accrued interest related to the convertible debt outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020, that was not outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors above, our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $56.2 million, an increase of approximately $23.5 million, or 72% over the approximately $32.7 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 of approximately $32.3 million was primarily attributable to our net loss of approximately $58.5 million adjusted for addbacks of non-cash expenses of approximately $9.7 million, mostly related to common stock issued for intellectual property acquired of approximately $4.0 million, intangible asset impairment of approximately $2.4 million, Common Stock granted to consultants of approximately $1.6 million, stock-based compensation of approximately $1.4 million, change in fair value of liability of $0.5 million, and depreciation and amortization of approximately $0.5 million, partially offset by a change in asset and liability balances of approximately $17.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $11.2 million was primarily attributable to our net loss of approximately $32.7 million adjusted for addbacks of non-cash expenses of approximately $7.3 million, which includes accretion of debt discount of approximately $4.6 million, loss on debt extinguishment of approximately $0.6 million, amortization of approximately $0.5 million, and stock-based compensation of approximately $0.5 million and a net increase of working capital of approximately $14.2 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $10.3 million, consisting of approximately $10.3 million in cash payments related to the FWB License Agreement and approximately $71,000 related to the purchase of office furniture and equipment
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $87,000 was primarily attributable to the sale of equipment related to the closure of our laboratory in France.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to: (i) the sale of an aggregate of 5,333,345 shares of common stock under our ATM Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $18.5 million; (ii) the sale of an aggregate of 10,666.666 shares of our Series C Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,066,667 shares of Common Stock in a concurrent registered direct offering and private placement in January 2021 for net proceeds of approximately $6.8 million; (iii) the sale of 580,000 shares of Common Stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 205,854 shares of Common Stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 392,927 shares of Common Stock in a registered direct offering in March 2021 for net proceeds of approximately $9.1 million; (iv) the sale of 1,045,454 shares of Common Stock in an underwritten offering in July 2021 for net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million; and (v) cash proceeds from warrant exercises of approximately $4.9 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the net proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt of approximately $3.2 million in January 2020 and the issuance of the preferred stock of approximately $13.2 million in the Series B Private Placement in July 2020 offset by repayments of approximately $0.5 million related to the ADEC Notes and approximately $0.7 million related to the note payable.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and related disclosures during the reporting
periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this document, management has identified the following as “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates”: Stock-Based Compensation, Debt and Equity Instruments, Intangible Assets and Goodwill. We believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in these accounting policies may have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payment awards issued to employees and members of our Board by measuring the fair value of the award on the date of grant and recognizing this fair value as stock-based compensation using a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period. For awards issued to non-employees, the measurement date is the date when the performance is complete or when the award vests, whichever is the earliest. Accordingly, non-employee awards are remeasured at each reporting period until the final measurement date. The fair value of the award is recognized as stock-based compensation over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period.
Debt and Equity Instruments
We analyze debt and equity instruments for various features that would generally require either bifurcation and derivative accounting, or recognition of a debt discount or premium under authoritative guidance.
Detachable warrants issued in conjunction with debt are measured at their relative fair value, if they are determined to be equity instrument, or their fair value, if they are determined to be liability instruments, and recorded as a debt discount.
Conversion features that are in the money at the commitment date constitute a beneficial conversion feature that is measured at its intrinsic value and recognized as debt discount or deemed dividend. Debt discount is amortized as interest expense over the maturity period of the debt using the effective interest method.
Intangible Assets
Our definite-lived intangible assets had a carrying value of approximately $0 and $2.9 million at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. These assets include patents, in-process research and development and license agreements. These intangible assets were recorded at historical cost and are stated net of accumulated amortization.
The patents, in-process research and development and licenses are amortized over their remaining estimated useful lives, ranging from 5 to 12 years, based on the straight-line method. The estimated useful lives directly impact the amount of amortization expense recorded for these assets on a quarterly and annual basis.
In addition, we test for impairment of definite-lived intangible assets when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. Judgment is used in determining when these events and circumstances arise. If we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable, judgment and estimates are used to assess the fair value of the assets and to determine the amount of any impairment loss. In the year ended December 31, 2020, no events or circumstances arose that indicated that the carrying value of any of our definite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable.
In testing for impairment of our definite-lived intangible assets, we determined that the carrying value of our patents exceeded their fair value. Based on this analysis, we recognized an impairment charge of approximately $2.4 million on our patents acquired in the Mayoly APA in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other than the impairment identified above, in the year ended December 31, 2021, no events or circumstances arose that would indicate that the carrying value of any of our definite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable.
Goodwill
Goodwill relates to the acquisition of ProteaBio Europe SAS during 2014 and represents the excess of the total purchase consideration over the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities, using the purchase method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to periodic review for impairment. As a result, the amount of goodwill is directly impacted by the estimates of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
In addition, goodwill will be reviewed annually, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the goodwill might not be recoverable. Judgment is used in determining when these events and circumstances arise. We perform our review of goodwill on our one reporting unit. If we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable, judgment and estimates are used to assess the fair value of the assets and to determine the amount of any impairment loss.
The carrying value of goodwill was approximately $1.9 million and $2.1 million, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Goodwill is denominated in a foreign currency and translated to U.S. dollars at period end exchange rates. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.