ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
GAN Limited is a Bermuda exempted holding company and through its subsidiaries, operates in two lines of business. We are a business-to-business (“B2B”) supplier of enterprise Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) solutions for online casino gaming, commonly referred to as iGaming, and online sports betting applications. Beginning with our January 2021 acquisition of Vincent Group p.l.c., a Malta public limited company (“Coolbet”), we are also a business-to-consumer (“B2C”) developer and operator of an online sports betting and casino platform, which offers consumers in select markets in Northern Europe, Latin America and Canada a digital portal for engaging in sports betting, online casino games and poker. These two lines of business are also the Company’s reportable segments.
The B2B segment develops, markets and sells instances of and GameSTACK technology and iSight Back Office that incorporates comprehensive player registration, account funding and back-office accounting and management tools that enable casino operators to efficiently, confidently and effectively extend their online presence. In 2021, we won three prestigious industry awards from EGR North America - Best Freeplay Gaming Supplier, Best Full-Service Platform Provider and Best White Label Partner of the Year - in recognition of our expertise and commitment for delivering industry-leading gaming solutions to land-based casinos.
Beginning January 1, 2021, the B2C segment includes the operations of Coolbet. Coolbet develops and operates an online sports betting and casino platform that is accessible through its website in markets across Northern Europe, Latin America and Canada. In 2021, Coolbet won two prestigious awards at the International Gaming Awards in London - Mobile Sports Product of the Year and Innovator of the Year - in recognition of our significant impact in the mobile sports betting industry.
To meet this demand and serve our growing number of U.S. casino operator clients, we continue to invest in our software engineering capabilities and expand our operational support. The most significant component of our operating costs generally relate to our employee salary costs and benefits. We have increased our global headcount from 440 employees at January 1, 2021, to 682 employees at December 31, 2021. Also, operating costs include technology and corporate infrastructure related-costs, as well as marketing expenditures with a focus on increasing and retaining B2C end-users.
Our net loss was $30.6 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes the financial results of Coolbet for the entire period, and accordingly, are not directly comparable to our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe that our current technology is highly scalable and can support the launch of our product offerings for new customers and in new jurisdictions. We expect to improve our profitability through increased revenues from:
● organic growth of our existing casino operators,
● expansion into newly regulated jurisdictions with existing and new customers,
● margin expansion driven by the integration of Coolbet’s sports betting technology in our B2B product offerings,
● revenue expansion from the roll-out of our Super RGS content offering to B2C operators who are not already clients, and
● organic growth of our B2C business in existing and new jurisdictions.
We hold a strategic U.S. patent, which governs the linkage of on-property reward cards to their counterpart internet gambling accounts together with bilateral transmission of reward points between the internet gaming technology system and the land-based casino management system present in all U.S. casino properties. In February 2021, we reached an agreement to license our U.S. patent to a second major U.S. casino operator group and we may license our patent to other major U.S. internet gaming operators in the future.
Recent Developments
May 2020 Completion of U.S. IPO and Reorganization with GAN plc
On May 5, 2020, GAN Limited completed a share exchange and reorganization pursuant to a Scheme of Arrangement whereby the shareholders of the previous parent, GAN plc, agreed to exchange their shares, on a basis of four ordinary shares to one ordinary share, for shares in GAN Limited, plus a pro rata portion of an aggregate £2.0 million or 2.32 pence per share in cash. After the reorganization, GAN plc was renamed GAN (UK) Limited and became a wholly-owned subsidiary of GAN Limited.
On May 7, 2020, GAN Limited completed its U.S. initial public offering under which it sold an aggregate of 7,337,000 ordinary shares at a price per share to the public of $8.50 and raised gross proceeds of $62.4 million (net proceeds of $55.3 million).
December 2020 Follow-on Offering of Ordinary Shares
On December 21, 2020, GAN Limited completed a follow-on public offering under which it sold 6,790,956 of ordinary shares at a price per share of $15.50 and raised gross proceeds of $98.5 million (net proceeds of $98.5 million). The net proceeds from the offering were used to fund the cash portion of the purchase price for the acquisition of Coolbet that was paid to the former shareholders pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement, dated November 15, 2020 (“Share Exchange Agreement”).
January 2021 Acquisition of Coolbet
On January 1, 2021, GAN Limited completed its acquisition of Coolbet, in accordance with the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement.
GAN Limited acquired all of the outstanding equity in Coolbet in exchange for a purchase price of $218.1 million, which included a cash payment of $111.1 million, the issuance of 5,260,516 ordinary shares (valued at $106.7 million) and the issuance of replacement equity awards (valued at $0.3 million).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report. As disclosed in Note 3, the preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the use of judgments and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We consider the following to be our most critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment:
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue recognition policies described in Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, require us to make significant judgments and estimates. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 requires that we apply judgments or estimates to determine the performance obligations, the stand-alone selling prices of our performance obligations to customers, allocation of the transaction price, and the timing of transfer of control of the respective performance obligations. The evaluation of each of these criteria considering contract specific facts and circumstances is naturally judgmental, but certain judgments could significantly affect the amount or timing of revenue recognized if we were to reach a different conclusion. The critical judgments we are required to make in our assessment of contracts with customers that could significantly affect the timing or amount of revenue recognized are:
Stand-Alone Selling Price and Allocation of Transaction Price. ASC 606 requires that we determine the stand-alone selling price for our goods and services as a basis for allocating the transaction price to the identified distinct performance obligations in our contracts with customers. Because we often bundle the selling price for hardware or services or we may license systems for which the solutions we provide are highly customized and therefore the prices vary, the determination of a stand-alone selling price requires significant judgment.
For performance obligations that involve multiple products or services, we allocate the transaction price to be applied to each performance obligation based on an estimation of the stand-alone selling price. We typically determine the stand-alone selling price based on the amounts that we charge when sold separately in similar circumstances to similar customers. In instances where the stand-alone selling price cannot be determined using an adjusted market assessment approach, we have used other allocation methods in accordance with ASC 606, including a residual approach to allocate a stand-alone selling price.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. This standard requires the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize all (and only) the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction and establishes the acquisition-date fair value as the measurement objective for all assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives, among other items. These estimates are based on information obtained from management of the acquired company and historical experience and are generally made with the assistance of an independent valuation firm. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. Any changes in the underlying assumptions can impact the estimates of fair value by material amounts, which can in turn materially impact our results of operations. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and, if different estimates were used, the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and, if such events occur, we may be required to record a charge against the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.
If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these fair values, we may have to record impairment charges in the future. In addition, we have estimated the useful lives of certain acquired assets, and these lives are used to compute depreciation and amortization expense. If our estimates of the useful lives change, depreciation and amortization expense may be required to be accelerated or decelerated.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually as of October 1st, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of goodwill impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include, among others: a significant decline in expected future cash flows; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; unanticipated competition; and the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit. Our goodwill impairment analysis also includes a comparison of the aggregate estimated fair value of all reporting units to our total market capitalization. Therefore, our shares may trade below our book value and a significant and sustained decline in our share price and market capitalization could result in goodwill impairment charges. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of these assets and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill impairment testing involves a comparison of the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its respective carrying amount, which may be performed utilizing either a qualitative or quantitative assessment. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. The qualitative assessment evaluates various events and circumstances, such as macro-economic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, relevant events and financial trends that may impact a reporting unit’s fair value. If it is determined that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is more-likely-than-not less than the carrying amount, including goodwill, a quantitative assessment is required. Otherwise, no further analysis is necessary.
In a quantitative assessment, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined and then compared to its carrying value. A reporting unit’s fair value is determined based upon consideration of various valuation methodologies, including the income approach, which utilizes projected future cash flows discounted at rates commensurate with the risks involved, and multiples of current and future earnings. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a goodwill impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
The income approach used to test our reporting units includes the projection of estimated operating results and cash flows, discounted using a weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”) that reflects current market conditions appropriate to each reporting unit. Those projections involve management’s best estimates of economic and market conditions over the projected period, including growth rates in revenues and costs and best estimates of future expected changes in operating margins and cash expenditures. Other significant assumptions and estimates used in the income approach include terminal value growth rates, future estimates of capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. In addition, the WACC utilized to discount estimated future cash flows is sensitive to changes in interest rates and other market rates in place at the time the assessment is performed. Future changes in our estimates or assumptions or in interest rates could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of reporting units and result in a goodwill impairment charge that could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Share-Based Compensation
Management measures equity-classified share-based awards at fair value at the date of grant and expenses the cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the entire award, generally defined as the vesting period, along with a corresponding increase in equity. Forfeitures are recorded in the period in which they occur with the impact, if any, recognized in the consolidated statements of operation with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
The fair value of share options is determined using a Black-Scholes model, taking into consideration management’s best estimate of the expected life of the option and the estimated number of shares that will eventually vest. Application of the option-pricing model involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective and are outlined below as they pertain to grants subsequent to our initial public offering.
Expected Term - represents the period of time that awards granted are expected to be outstanding. In determining the expected term of the award, future exercise and forfeiture patterns are estimated from historical employee exercise behavior. These patterns are also affected by the vesting conditions of the award. Changes in the future exercise behavior of employees or in the vesting period of the award could result in a change in the expected term. An increase in the expected term would result in an increase to our expense.
Volatility - a measure of the amount by which the price of our ordinary shares is expected to fluctuate each year during the expected term of the award. Our expected volatility is determined by reference to volatility of certain identified peer groups, share trading information and share prices on the Nasdaq. The implied volatilities from traded options are impacted by changes in market conditions. An increase in the volatility would result in an increase in our expense.
Expected Dividend Yield - is based on our historical dividend yield, which is zero - as we have not historically paid dividends. If we were to begin paying dividends, the dividend yield would increase and result in a decrease in our expense.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at time of grant. As the risk-free interest rate increases, the expected term increases, resulting in an increase in our expense.
Where the Company has decided to cover the social taxes and income taxes related to equity-classified share-based awards for the option holders, we recognize a tax expense for the future cash payment as a liability-classified share-based compensation expense. At each reporting period, management measures tax liabilities associated with our share-based compensation based on the intrinsic value of the options using our share price at each date of measurement. The impact of the revision of the original estimates, if any, is recognized in profit or loss with a corresponding increase or reduction to the corresponding liability. Where the Company does not cover employee social taxes and income taxes, we recognize employer tax expenses in the period when the respective holder exercises their options.
Capitalization and Impairment of Internally Generated Intangible Assets
Management reviews expenditures, including wages and benefits for employees, incurred on development activities and, based on their judgment of the costs incurred, assesses whether the expenditure meets the capitalization criteria set out in ASC 350 and the intangible assets accounting policy within the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management specifically considers if additional expenditure on projects relates to maintenance or new development projects. In addition, the useful life of capitalized development costs is determined by management at the time the software is brought into use and is regularly reviewed for appropriateness. For unique software products we control and develop, the life is based on historical experience with similar products as well as anticipation of future events, which may impact their useful economic life, such as changes in technology.
Management reviews intangible assets at each reporting period to determine potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an intangible asset may not be fully recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset with the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. Management must make estimates related to future cash flows and discount rates that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted. If such assets are considered impaired, an impairment loss would be measured by comparing the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the intangible asset.
Income Taxes
We operate in a number of jurisdictions and our effective tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, tax planning opportunities and transfer pricing policies in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Judgment is required in respect of the interpretation of state, federal and international tax law and practice as e-commerce and tax continues to evolve. Our income tax rate is significantly affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings.
Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable in future years. Such assets arise from temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probable future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilized. This assessment of future taxable profits relies heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including historical results and future business forecasts. To the extent deferred tax assets are not expected to be realized, we record a valuation allowance.
Research and development tax relief is recognized as an asset once there is sufficient evidence that any amount we may claim will be received. A key judgement arises with respect to the likelihood of a claim being successful when a claim has been quantified but has not been received. In making this judgement, we consider the nature of the claim and in particular the track record of success of previous claims.
We are subject to income taxes in numerous jurisdictions and there are transactions for which the ultimate tax determination cannot be assessed with certainty in the ordinary course of business. We recognize a provision for situations that might arise in the foreseeable future based on an assessment of the probabilities as to whether additional taxes will be due. An uncertain tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. Penalties and interest incurred related to underpayment of income tax are classified as income tax expense in the period incurred.
Consolidated Results of Operations
On January 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Coolbet which was accounted for as a business combination under ASC 805, Business Combinations. The following discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes the financial results of Coolbet for the entire period. Our B2B segment results for the year ended December 31, 2020 are comprised of our legacy business operations prior to the acquisition of Coolbet.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
(1) Excludes depreciation and amortization expense
n.m. = not meaningful
Geographic Information
The following table sets forth our consolidated revenue by geographic region, for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue was $124.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $89.0 million from the comparable period in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to revenue from our B2C operations of $78.6 million in 2021. The remaining increase in revenue was primarily driven by real-money gaming growth, of which $9.3 million related to increases in platform and content license fees in the U.S. and $2.2 million related to similar increases in Italy, combined with an increase in simulated gaming revenue of $2.3 million due to new customer launches. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in sportsbook revenue of $2.5 million primarily from FanDuel’s migration to its own player wallet during the third quarter of 2020.
Revenue increased across our international markets primarily as a result of the Coolbet acquisition, which accounted for $40.1 million of the increased revenues in Europe, the full $32.4 million in Latin America, and substantially all of our revenues in all other non-U.S. markets. The increase in revenue in the United States as compared to the prior period was the result of increased RMiG revenues within the B2B segment primarily driven by the expansion into newly regulated U.S. states and the annualized impact of clients launched in 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue was $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $30.9 million from the comparable period in 2020. The increase was attributable to our B2C operations’ cost of gaming of $29.8 million. Cost of revenue for our B2B segment increased $1.1 million due to an increase in content license fees of $1.9 million driven by higher RMiG revenues in Italy, increased simulated gaming revenues and a $0.5 million increase in processing fees due to an increase in the number of instances of our platform and end users. These increases were partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in cost of development services and other revenues, primarily as a result of decreased hardware sales and a $0.6 million decrease in regulatory fees and gaming duties as compared to the prior year. The extent to which we engage in hardware sales is driven by individual operator circumstances and are not necessarily consistent from period to period.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense was $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase $17.2 million from the comparable period in 2020. Of the increase, $14.9 million was attributable to our B2C operations’ sales and marketing. We expect sales and marketing expense to continue to increase in our B2C segment as we seek to attract additional end-users. Sales and marketing expenses related to our B2B business increased $2.3 million primarily due to an increase in personnel costs of $1.4 million, excluding increases in related share-based compensation expenses of $0.3 million, driven by increased headcount within our sales and marketing functions.
Product and Technology
Product and technology expense was $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $11.5 million from the comparable period in 2020, due to higher net salaries and related employee costs of $11.7 million (excluding a decrease in related share-based compensation of $2.4 million) as we ramped up our team and invested in our platform to serve our new and existing customers for the B2B segment and $1.9 million from the inclusion of Coolbet in our operating results.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $24.1 million of which $16.6 million was attributable to Coolbet. Exclusive of Coolbet, the remaining increase was driven by an increase of $2.8 million in professional fees related to legal fees, recruiting costs, professional consulting costs, and public company compliance costs, a $2.1 million increase in personnel and related costs (excluding a decrease in related share-based compensation expense of $1.1 million) in functions such as management, legal, human resources and finance to enhance our back-office infrastructure, a $1.2 million increase relating to unfavorable currency fluctuations, a $1.3 million increase relating to insurance costs reflecting the 2021 full year impact of directors and officers and business insurance, and a $1.0 million increase in software-related costs to support the Company’s growth. These increases were partially offset by other immaterial changes totaling $0.2 million.
Within our operating expenses, share-based compensation and related expenses across sales and marketing, product and technology, and general and administrative expenses decreased by $2.0 million to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to expenses of $7.3 million recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 in relation to (i) the acceleration of vesting of outstanding grants at the time of our initial public filing in May 2020 of $3.9 million and (ii) the recognition of cash-settled share-based compensation expense in relation to taxes associated with U.K. options during the same period of $3.4 million (as compared to a benefit of $0.5 million in the current year period). The decrease was primarily offset by expenses of $4.2 million related to new awards issued in 2021, an expense $0.9 million related to a change in the incentive compensation structure made effective in 2021 which allowed for certain executives to receive their incentive compensation in the form of share-based compensation. In addition, we incurred share-based compensation expenses of $0.6 million related replacement share option awards to continuing employees of Coolbet and restricted shares issued in the acquisition of Silverback.
Impairment
We recorded an impairment charge of $3.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the termination notice we served to a content provider in January 2022 as certain conditions precedent associated with the certification of their remote gaming server had not been satisfied pursuant to the terms of the agreement in the period ended December 31, 2021. In accordance with the agreement, termination for cause results in a return of the initial payment of $3.5 million, however in response to our termination notice, the content provider responded with a notice to the Company of its material breach of the agreement, disputing the validity of the termination.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $13.6 million from the comparable period in 2020. The increase was due to the amortization expense on intangible assets recorded in the acquisition of Coolbet on January 1, 2021.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded income tax benefit of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting an effective tax rate of 0.7%, compared to income tax expense of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting an effective tax rate of (1.8)%. Our country of domicile is Bermuda, which effectively has a 0% statutory tax rate as it does not impose taxes on profits, income, dividends, or capital gains. The difference between this 0% tax rate and the effective income tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was due primarily to a mix of earnings in foreign jurisdictions that are subject to current tax, taking into account foreign loss carryforwards in certain jurisdictions that are not expected to be recognized.
Segment Operating Results
We report our operating results by segment in accordance with the “management approach.” The management approach designates the internal reporting used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”), who is our Chief Executive Officer, for making decisions and assessing performance of our reportable segments.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our segment results for the periods indicated:
(1) Excludes depreciation and amortization expense
n.m. = not meaningful
B2B Segment
B2B revenue increased $10.4 million primarily due to an increase in platform and content fee revenue of $10.7 million. Of this increase, RMiG jurisdictions in the United States contributed an increase of $9.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, including new U.S. states which launched in 2021 such as in Michigan following the launch of RMiG in January 2021, in addition to contributions beginning in May 2021 in West Virginia and October 2021 in Connecticut. Further contributing to the increase was an increase of $2.2 million in RMiG revenues in Italy and an increase of $2.0 million in simulated gaming revenue as compared to the prior year period. The increases were partially offset by a $2.5 million decrease in sportsbook revenue primarily as a result of FanDuel’s migration to its own player wallet during the third quarter of 2020.
Additionally, B2B development services and other revenue decreased $0.3 million, of which $2.2 million related to a decrease in development revenue, primarily related to prior year revenues associated with FanDuel’s migration to its own player wallet platform in 2020 and a $1.0 million decrease primarily related to lower hardware sales. The decrease was partially offset by $3.0 million in revenues attributable to patent licensing fee revenue recognized during the year ended December 31,
B2B cost of revenue increased $1.1 million primarily due to a $1.9 million increase in content license fees due to higher sales in Italy and simulated gaming revenue and a $0.5 million increase in processing fees due to an increase in the number instances of our platform and end users. This increase was partially offset by decrease in costs of development services and other revenues of $1.4 million, primarily as a result of lower hardware sales compared to the prior year period.
Segment gross profit margin for B2B, which excludes depreciation and amortization expense, increased by 37.6% primarily driven by an increase in platform and content fee revenue and an increase in the gross margin for development services and other revenue from 70.0% in 2020 to 85.3% in 2021. The increase in gross margin for development services and other revenue was due to patent revenue of $3.0 million which did not occur in the prior year period and lower cost of hardware relative to its sales in the current period when compared to the prior year period.
B2C Segment
Segment gross profit for B2C, which excludes depreciation and amortization expense, was $48.8 million, or 62.1% as a percentage of segment revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021. Prior year revenue and costs of revenue are not included in our financial results due to the timing of the Coolbet acquisition, which closed January 1, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Management uses the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EBITDA to measure its financial performance. Specifically, it uses Adjusted EBITDA (i) as a measure to compare our operating performance from period to period, as it removes the effect of items not directly resulting from our core operations, and (ii) as a means of assessing our core business performance against others in the industry, because it eliminates some of the effects that are generated by differences in capital structure, depreciation, tax effects and unusual and infrequent events.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before other (income) loss, net, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization, impairments, share-based compensation expense and related expense, initial public offering related costs and other items which our Board of Directors considers to be infrequent or unusual in nature. The presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be used in isolation or as a substitute for any measure prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and Adjusted EBITDA may exclude financial information that some investors may consider important in evaluating our performance. Because Adjusted EBITDA is not a U.S. GAAP measure, the way we define Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in the industry.
Below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure, as presented in the consolidated statements of operations for the years specified:
(1) Includes $7.9 million and $6.8 million in equity-classified expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $0.4 million and $3.4 million in liability-classified (benefit) expense, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such amounts excluded capitalized amounts. Refer to Note 11 - Share-based Compensation for further details.
Key Performance Indicators
Our management uses the following key performance indicators (“KPIs”) as indicators of trends and results of the business. These KPIs give our management an indication of the level of engagement between the player and the Company’s platforms. No estimation is necessary in quantifying these KPIs, nor do they represent U.S. GAAP based measurements. These KPIs are subject to various risks such as customer concentration, competition, licensing and regulation, and macroeconomic conditions. Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for further risks associated with our business which would affect these KPIs.
(1) B2C operating results of Coolbet have been included in the consolidated financial statements beginning on January 1, 2021.
B2B Gross Operator Revenue
We define B2B Gross Operator Revenue as the sum of our B2B corporate customers’ gross revenue from SIM, gross gaming revenue from RMiG, and gross sports win from sportsbook offerings. B2B Gross Operator Revenue, which is not comparable to financial information presented in conformity with U.S. GAAP, gives management and users of our financial statements an indication of the extent of transactions processed through our B2B corporate customers’ platforms and allows management to understand the extent of activity that our platform is processing.
The increase in Gross Operator Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven primarily by expanded legalization of RMiG and sports betting in additional U.S. states and our launch of RMiG solutions for new and existing customers in those jurisdictions, the most significant of which was Michigan in January 2021. Additional increases in Europe of RMiG and SIM were driven by organic growth from new and existing customers.
B2B Take Rate
We define B2B Take Rate as a quotient of B2B net revenue retained by the Company over the total gross revenue generated by our B2B corporate customers. B2B net revenue is calculated by deducting from gross revenue, the statutory taxes, promotional bonuses, and our B2B customer’s share defined by commercial agreements. B2B Take Rate gives management and users of our financial statements an indication of the impact of the statutory terms and the efficiency of the commercial terms on the business.
The decrease in B2B Take Rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven by a shift in revenue from SIM to RMiG that inherently has a lower take rate; an increase in RMiG and sports betting revenue from U.S. states with higher taxes, specifically Pennsylvania and Michigan; and increased promotional bonuses by certain B2B customers in new jurisdictions, such as Wynn in Michigan and FanDuel in Michigan, West Virginia, and Connecticut.
B2C Active Customers
We define B2C Active Customers as a user that places a wager during the period. This metric allows management to monitor the customer segmentation, growth drivers, and ultimately creates opportunities to identify and add value to the user experience. This metric allows management and users of the financial statements to measure the platform traffic and track related trends.
B2C Marketing Spend Ratio
We define B2C Marketing Spend Ratio as the total B2C direct marketing expense for the period divided by the total B2C revenues. This metric allows management to measure the success of marketing costs during a given period. Additionally, this metric allows management to compare across jurisdictions and other subsets, as an additional indication of return on marketing investment.
B2C Sports Margin
We define B2C Sports Margin as the ratio of wagers minus winnings to total amount wagered, adjusted for open wagers at period end. Sports betting involves a user placing a bet on the outcome of a sporting event with the chance to win a pre-determined amount, often referred to as fixed odds. Our B2C sportsbook revenue is generated by setting odds that are intended to provide a built-in theoretical margin in each sports bet offered to our users. This metric allows management to measure sportsbook performance against its expected outcome.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Material Cash Commitments
Our primary uses of cash include funding our ongoing working capital needs, content licensing discussed below, developing and maintaining our proprietary software platforms.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we entered into Content Licensing Agreements (the “Agreement”) with a third-party gambling content provider specializing in developing and licensing interactive games. The Agreement grants us exclusive right to use and distribute the online gaming content in North America. The content provider is committed to developing a minimum number of games for our exclusive use over the five-year term, subject to extensions. In exchange, we are required to pay fixed fees, totaling $30.0 million, of which $5.0 million was due upon execution of the Agreement, and the remaining fixed fees are paid systematically over the initial five-year term. Additional payments could be required if our total revenue generated from the licensed content exceed certain stipulated thresholds. In the event that the Agreement is terminated, actual cash outlays could be less than currently contemplated.
We expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase in the immediate future, as we seek to expand our business through organic growth and potential business acquisitions. Specifically, the key elements of our growth strategy include, but are not limited to, the expansion of our gaming content on our platform, primarily through the Agreements, our anticipated launch of the integrated B2B sportsbook technology solution in North America in the fourth quarter of 2022, the continued integration of Coolbet’s sports betting technology and international B2C operations, the launch of regulated gaming in new U.S. states and potential business acquisitions.
The execution of our growth strategy will require continued significant capital expenditures. We expect to continue investing in our products and technologies as we seek to scale our business.
We incurred capital expenditures of $14.0 million and $5.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Of these expenditures, purchases related to internally developed capitalized software represented $11.6 million and $4.4 million, respectively, property and equipment (including licenses for internal use software) represented $1.9 million and $1.2 million, respectively, and intangible assets (including licenses to operate in related jurisdictions) represented $0.4 million and $0.2 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Sources of Liquidity
We have primarily funded our operations through cash generated from operations and cash on hand. In May 2020, we completed our U.S. initial public offering under which we sold an aggregate of 7,337,000 ordinary shares for net proceeds of $57.4 million and in December 2020, we conducted a follow-on offering under which we sold 6,790,956 ordinary shares for net proceeds of $98.5 million. In January 2021, we completed the acquisition of Coolbet for a purchase price of $218.1 million, including the issuance of 5,260,516 ordinary shares, replacement equity-based awards valued at $0.3 million and cash of $111.1 million, which was funded from the follow-on offering proceeds and available cash on hand.
Our primary source of liquidity for our working capital is cash flows generated from operations and our cash on hand of $39.5 million at December 31, 2021.
We believe cash generated from operations and cash on hand will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. We may also seek to enhance our competitive position through additional complementary acquisitions in both existing and new markets. Therefore, from time to time, we may access the equity or debt markets to raise additional funds to finance potential acquisitions.
In the longer term, to the extent that our current resources, including our ability to generate operating cash flows, are insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements, we may seek additional equity or debt financing. Our ability to do so depends on prevailing economic conditions and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
We do not currently have any credit facilities or similar debt arrangements in place and cannot provide any assurance as to the availability or terms of any future financing that we may require to support our operations. If the needed financing is not available, or if the terms of financing are less desirable than we expect, we may be forced to decrease our level of investment in new products and technologies, discontinue further expansion of our business, or scale back our existing operations, any of which could have an adverse impact on our business and financial prospects.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
n.m. = not meaningful
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased $1.3 million primarily resulting from a decrease in net loss after adjustments to reconcile net loss to cash flows from operations of $8.1 million. The decrease in cash used in operating activities was offset by an unfavorable change in operating assets and liabilities, primarily due to payments totaling $8.5 million to third-party gambling content providers for the rights to use and distribute their online gaming content in North America.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $100.8 million primarily as a result of $92.7 million cash paid for the acquisition of Coolbet, net of cash acquired and a $7.2 million increase in spend for capitalized software development costs primarily related to $4.3 million invested in relation to new B2B customer launches, product enhancements, and new features, $1.6 million for the B2B sportsbook technology solution in North America, and $1.3 million invested in relation to new B2C product enhancements and features.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $154.5 million primarily due to $57.4 million in proceeds from our U.S. initial public offering in May 2020 and $99.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of ordinary shares in a follow-on public offering in December 2020 that did not recur during the year ended December 31, 2021, and a decrease in cash proceeds on the exercise of employee share options of $1.6 million. The decrease was partially offset by decreased payments of offering costs of $1.4 million and cash consideration paid to the previous shareholders of GAN plc pursuant to the May 2020 Scheme of Arrangement of $2.5 million.