Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Marblegate Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 10, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from December 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence and other expenses in connection with searching for and completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $267,638, which consists of formation and operating costs of $503,572, an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in the trust account of $16,895, and transaction costs associated with the initial public offering of $42,344, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $35,823 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $259,350.
For the period from December 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,000, which consisted of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 5, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 910,000 private placement units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit in a private placement to the sponsor and Cantor, generating gross proceeds of $9,100,000.
Following the initial public offering and the private placement, a total of $301,500,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $42,630,587 in initial public offering related costs, including $6,000,000 of underwriting fees, $15,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $1,015,137 of other offering costs including $509,600 for the fair value of the private warrants included in the private placement units, and $505,537 of offering costs, and $20,615,450 for the fair value of the founder shares attributable to certain anchor investors.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $739,303. Net loss of $267,638 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $35,823, unrealized loss in marketable securities held in the trust account of $16,895, transaction costs associated with the initial public offering of $42,344 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $259,350. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $235,731 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from December 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $1,000 was offset by the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $301,518,928 (including approximately $18,928 of interest income, net of unrealized losses) consisting of U.S. Treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $380,160. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private placement units.
We may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and the sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. In instances of working capital deficits, the Sponsor has agreed to fund cash shortfalls up to $600,000. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor a total of up to $10,000 per month for secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on September 30, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of 5.0% of the gross proceeds of the initial 30,000,000 units sold in the initial public offering, or $15,000,000. The deferred fee will be paid in cash upon the closing of a Business Combination from the amounts held in the trust account, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40-15-7D
under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until the Private Placement Warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in our statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income Per Common Share
Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company applies the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06
effective on June 30, 2021. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06
did not have an impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.