Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to provide a more comprehensive review of the Company’s operating results and financial condition than can be obtained from reading the Consolidated Financial Statements alone. The discussion is expected to provide investors an enhanced view of the Company from managements’ perspective. The information includes material information relevant to the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, material events and uncertainties that are reasonably likely to cause reported information not to be indicative of future operating results or future financial condition, and material financial and statistical information that the Company believes will enhance the investors’ understanding of the Company and its financial results. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about the Company’s plans, objectives, expectations and intentions that are not historical facts, and other statements identified by words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “should,” “projects,” “seeks,” “estimates” or the negative version of those words or other comparable words or phrases of a future or forward-looking nature. These forward-looking statements are based on current beliefs and expectations of management and are inherently subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. In addition, these forward-looking statements are subject to assumptions with respect to future business strategies and decisions that are subject to change. The following factors, among others, could cause actual results to differ materially from the anticipated results (express or implied) or other expectations in the forward-looking statements, including those factors set forth under “Risk Factors” and in other sections in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or the documents incorporated by reference:
•the risks associated with lending and potential adverse changes on the credit quality of loans in the Company’s portfolio;
•changes in trade, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Reserve Board, which could adversely affect the Company’s net interest income and margin and overall profitability;
•legislative or regulatory changes, such as the those signaled by the Biden Administration, as well as increased banking and consumer protection regulation that adversely affect the Company’s business;
•ability to complete pending or prospective future acquisitions;
•costs or difficulties related to the completion and integration of acquisitions;
•the goodwill the Company has recorded in connection with acquisitions could become impaired, which may have an adverse impact on earnings and capital;
•reduced demand for banking products and services;
•the reputation of banks and the financial services industry could deteriorate, which could adversely affect the Company's ability to obtain and maintain customers;
•competition among financial institutions in the Company's markets may increase significantly;
•the risks presented by continued public stock market volatility, which could adversely affect the market price of the Company’s common stock and the ability to raise additional capital or grow the Company through acquisitions;
•the projected business and profitability of an expansion or the opening of a new branch could be lower than expected;
•consolidation in the financial services industry in the Company’s markets resulting in the creation of larger financial institutions who may have greater resources could change the competitive landscape;
•dependence on the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), the senior management team and the Presidents of Glacier Bank (the “Bank”) divisions;
•material failure, potential interruption or breach in security of the Company’s systems and technological changes which could expose us to new risks (e.g., cybersecurity), fraud or system failures;
•natural disasters, including fires, floods, earthquakes, and other unexpected events;
•the Company’s success in managing risks involved in the foregoing; and
•the effects of any reputational damage to the Company resulting from any of the foregoing.
Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” Please take into account that forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (or documents incorporated by reference, if applicable). Given the described uncertainties and risks, the Company cannot guarantee its future performance or results of operations and you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The Company does not undertake any obligation to publicly correct, revise, or update any forward-looking statement if it later becomes aware that actual results are likely to differ materially from those expressed in such forward-looking statement, except as may be required under federal securities laws.
FIVE YEAR SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to the results presented in accordance with GAAP, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain non-GAAP financial measures in the selected financial data below. The Company believes that providing these non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with information useful in understanding and comparing the Company’s financial performance, performance trends, and financial position. While the Company uses these non-GAAP measures in its analysis of the Company’s performance, this information should not be considered an alternative to measurements required by GAAP. The following table provides a reconciliation of certain GAAP financial measures to non-GAAP financial measures.
The reconciling item between the GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures was due to the one-time tax expense of $19.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2017. The one-time tax expense was driven by The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”) and the change in the federal marginal corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent for 2018 and future years, which resulted in the revaluation of its deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities (“net deferred tax asset”). The Company believes the financial results are more comparable excluding the impact of the revaluation of the net deferred tax asset.
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing net income by average outstanding shares and diluted earnings per share is calculated by dividing net income by diluted average outstanding shares. The one-time tax expense of $19.7 million was included in determining income for both the GAAP basic earnings per share and the GAAP diluted earnings per share. Conversely, the one-time tax expense of $19.7 million was excluded in determining income for both the non-GAAP basic earnings per share and the non-GAAP diluted earnings per share. Average outstanding shares of 77,537,664 was used in the GAAP and non-GAAP basic earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2017. Diluted average outstanding shares of 77,607,605 was used in the GAAP and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2017.
The return on average assets ratio is calculated by dividing net income by average assets and the return on average equity ratio is calculated by dividing net income by average equity. The one-time tax expense of $19.7 million was included in determining income for both the GAAP return on average assets and the GAAP return on average equity. Conversely, the one-time tax expense of $19.7 million was excluded in determining income for both the non-GAAP return on average assets and the non-GAAP return on average equity. Average assets of $9.678 billion was used in the GAAP and non-GAAP return on average assets ratios for the year ended December 31, 2017. Average equity of $1.188 billion was used in the GAAP and non-GAAP return on average equity ratios for the year ended December 31, 2017.
The dividend payout ratio is calculated by dividing dividends declared per share by basic earnings per share. The non-GAAP dividend payout ratio uses the non-GAAP basic earnings per share for calculating the ratio.
The effective income tax rate is calculated by dividing federal and state income tax expense by income before income taxes. The non-GAAP effective income tax rate uses the non-GAAP federal and state income tax expense of $44.9 million for calculating the rate.
Selected Financial Data
The selected financial data of the Company is derived from the Company’s historical audited financial statements and related notes. The information set forth below should be read in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
______________________________
1 Excludes a one-time revaluation of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities as a result of the Tax Act for the year ended December 31, 2017. For additional information on the revaluation, see the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” discussion.
2 Non-interest expense before OREO expenses, core deposit intangibles amortization, goodwill impairment charges, and non-recurring expense items as a percentage of tax-equivalent net interest income and non-interest income, excluding gains or losses on sale of investments, OREO income, and non-recurring income items.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO DECEMBER 31, 2020
Highlights and Overview
The Company continued to diligently work through the COVID-19 pandemic during the year, meeting both customers’ and employees’ on-going needs. The Company continued providing Small Business Association (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) funding to its customers during the first half of 2021 with a total of $555 million in originated PPP loans. The majority of the PPP loans were forgiven by the end of 2021, with only $169 million remaining as of December 31, 2021. In addition, the credit quality of the loan portfolio has remained strong during the year with our customers showing signs of economic strength. The Company continued to take measures to protect the health and safety of the employees and customers and remained flexible with the ever changing environment.
During 2021, the Company acquired all the outstanding stock of Altabancorp, the holding company for Altabank (“Alta”) , a community bank based in American Fork, Utah with total assets of $4.132 billion. Alta provides banking services to individuals and businesses primarily in the state of Utah with twenty-five locations from Preston, Idaho south to St. George, Utah. Upon closing of the transaction, Alta became the seventeenth division of the Company and significantly enhanced the Company’s presence in Utah. Alta is the largest community bank in Utah and was the largest acquisition in the Company’s history. See Note 23 in the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information regarding this acquisition.
The Company ended the year at $25.941 billion in assets, which was a 40 percent increase over the prior year and was driven primarily by the 2021 acquisition of Alta along with increases from the debt securities purchased as a result of excess liquidity. Organic loan growth, excluding PPP loans, was $1.160 billion, or 11 percent, during 2021 with the majority of the growth in the second half of the year. The Company experienced another great year in core deposit growth which organically increased $3.278 billion, or 22 percent, with non-interest bearing deposits increasing $1.123 billion, or 21 percent, during the year.
Tangible stockholders’ equity increased $402 million, or $1.12 per share, as a result of earnings retention and Company stock issued in connection with the acquisition of Alta in 2021. The Company increased its total regular quarterly dividends declared from $1.18 per share during 2020 to $1.27 per share in 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company transferred the listing of its common stock to the New York Stock Exchange from the NASDAQ Global Select Market.
The Company had record net income for the year of $285 million, which was an increase of $18.4 million, or 7 percent, over the prior year net income of $266 million. Diluted earnings per share for the year was $2.86, an increase of 2 percent, from the 2020 diluted earnings per share of $2.81. The improvement in net income for 2021 was due to recent acquisitions, organic growth, the significant increase in debt security interest income. This record in net income was achieved even with the decrease in gain on sale of loans from the record highs in 2020, the continuing pressure from the low interest rate environment, and increasing business costs. The Company's net interest margin for 2021 was 3.42 percent, a 67 basis points decrease from the net interest margin of 4.09 percent from 2020 which was primarily driven by the low rate environment and the shift in the earning asset mix from higher yielding loans to lower yielding debt securities.
Looking forward, the Company’s future performance will depend on many factors including economic conditions in the markets the Company serves, interest rate changes, increasing competition for deposits and loans, loan quality and growth, the impact and successful integration of acquisitions, and managing regulatory requirements.
Financial Highlights
Recent Acquisitions
The Company completed the following acquisitions during the last two years:
•Altabancorp and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Altabank; and
•State Bank Corp. and its wholly-owned subsidiary, State Bank of Arizona (“SBAZ”).
The business combinations were accounted for using the acquisition method with the results of operations included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of the acquisition dates. For additional information regarding acquisitions, see Note 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The following table discloses the preliminary fair value of selected classifications of assets and liabilities acquired:
Financial Condition Analysis
Assets
The following table summarizes the Company’s assets as of the dates indicated:
Excluding the $1.623 billion of cash received from the Alta acquisition that was invested in 2021, total debt securities at December 31, 2021 increased $3.220 billion, or 58 percent, from the prior year end. The Company continues to selectively purchase debt securities with excess liquidity from the increase in core deposits and SBA forgiveness of PPP loans. Debt securities represented 40 percent of total assets at December 31, 2021 compared to 30 percent of total assets at December 31, 2020.
The loan portfolio of $13.432 billion at December 31, 2021 increased $2.309 billion, or 21 percent, from the prior year end. Excluding the PPP loans and loans from the Alta acquisition, the loan portfolio increased $1.160 billion, or 11 percent, from the prior year end with the largest increase in commercial real estate loans which increased $912 million, or 14 percent.
Liabilities
The following table summarizes the Company’s liabilities as of the dates indicated:
Excluding the Alta acquisition, core deposits increased $3.278 billion, or 22 percent, from the prior year end. Non-interest bearing deposits of $7.779 billion as of December 31, 2021 organically increased $1.123 billion, or 21 percent, from the prior year end. The unprecedented increase in deposits over the prior two years resulted from a number of factors including the PPP loan proceeds deposited by customers, federal stimulus deposits and increases in customer savings. Non-interest bearing deposits were 37 percent of total core deposits at December 31, 2021 compared to 37 percent at December 31, 2020.
The low levels of borrowings, including wholesale deposits and Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances, reflected the significant increase in core deposits which funded the asset growth.
Stockholders’ Equity
The following table summarizes the stockholders’ equity balances as of the dates indicated:
Tangible stockholders’ equity of $2.140 billion at December 31, 2021 increased $402 million, or 23 percent, from the prior year, which was the result of $840 million of Company common stock issued for the acquisition of Alta and earnings retention. The increase was partially offset by the increase in goodwill and core deposit intangible associated with the Alta acquisition and a decrease in other comprehensive income. Tangible book value per common share of $19.33 at December 31, 2021 increased $1.12 per share, or 6 percent, from a year ago.
Results of Operations
In this section, the Company’s results of operations are discussed for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Summary
The following table summarizes income for the time periods indicated:
Net Interest Income
Net-interest income of $663 million for 2021 increased $62.8 million, or 10 percent, over the same period in 2020 and included a $25.6 million increase from the acquisition of Alta. Interest income of $681 million for 2021 increased $54.0 million, or 9 percent, from the prior year and was primarily attributable to a $26.9 million increase from the Altabank division and a $22.5 million increase in interest income on debt securities. Interest income on debt securities increased $22.5 million, or 23 percent, over the prior year which resulted from the increased volume of debt securities. Interest expense of $18.6 million during 2021 decreased $8.8 million, or 32 percent over the prior year primarily as a result of a decrease in the cost of deposits. The total funding cost (including non-interest bearing deposits) for 2021 was 10 basis points, which decreased 9 basis points compared to 19 basis points in 2020.
The net interest margin as a percentage of earning assets, on a tax-equivalent basis, during 2021 was 3.42 percent, a 67 basis points decrease from the net interest margin of 4.09 percent for the same period in the prior year. The core net interest margin, excluding 4 basis points of discount accretion, 2 basis point of non-accrual interest and 12 basis points increase from the PPP loans, was 3.24 percent which was an 81 basis point decrease from the core margin of 4.05 percent in the prior year. Although the Company was successful in reducing the total cost of funding, it was not enough to outpace the lower yields on core loans and debt securities driven by the current interest rate environment and the shift in the earning asset mix to lower yielding debt securities.
Non-interest Income
Non-interest income of $145 million for 2021 decreased $28.0 million, or 16 percent, over the same period last year. Gain on the sale of loans of $63.1 million for 2021 decreased $36.4 million, or 37 percent, compared to the same period last year which was the result of the anticipated slowing of purchase and refinance activity after the historically high levels in the prior year. Service charges and other fees of $59.3 million for 2021 increased $6.8 million, or 13 percent, from the prior year as a result of additional fees from increased customer accounts and transaction activity and the acquisition of Alta. Miscellaneous loan fees and charges of $12.0 million increased $4.7 million, or 64 percent, driven by increases in loan servicing income and credit card interchange fees due to increased activity. Other income of $11.0 million decreased $1.4 million, or 11 percent, from the prior year.
Non-interest Expense
The following table summarizes non-interest expense for the periods indicated:
Total non-interest expense of $435 million for 2021 increased $30.0 million, or 7 percent, over the prior year same period. Excluding the Alta bank division and acquisition-related expenses, non-interest expense increased $11.0 million, or 3 percent, over the prior year. Included in the current year was $9.8 million of acquisition-related expenses and $17.0 million of expenses from the Alta bank division. Compensation and employee benefits for 2021 increased $17.6 million, or 7 percent, from last year due to the increased number of employees from acquisitions and organic growth. Advertising and promotions for 2021 increased $1.7 million, or 17 percent, from the prior year. Data processing expense increased $2.3 million, or 11 percent, from the prior year primarily from the acquisition of Alta. Regulatory assessment and insurance for 2021 increased $3.6 million from the prior year as a result of organic growth, the State of Montana waiving the first semi-annual regulatory assessment of 2020 and Small Bank assessment credits applied by the FDIC in the first quarter of 2020. Other expenses of $70.6 million increased $3.8 million, or 6 percent, from the prior year. Current year other expenses included acquisition-related expenses of $9.8 million compared to $7.8 million in the prior year.
Provision for Credit Losses
The following table summarizes the provision for credit losses on the loan portfolio, net charge-offs and select ratios relating to the provision for credit losses on loans for the previous eight quarters:
The provision for credit loss expense was $23.1 million for 2021 compared to $39.8 million in 2020. The current year credit loss expense included $18.1 million of provision for credit loss on loans and $4.2 million of provision for credit loss on unfunded loan commitments from the acquisition of Alta. The 2020 credit loss expense included only $4.8 million of provision for credit loss on loans from the acquisition of State Bank of Arizona. The credit loss expense due to the acquisitions reflects the requirement to fully fund an allowance for credit losses on loans and unfunded commitments post-acquisition.
Excluding the impact from the Alta and State Bank of Arizona acquisitions, the current year provision for credit loss expense on unfunded loan commitments was $2.5 million compared to a credit loss expense of $2.1 million in the prior year. Excluding the impact from the acquisitions, the current year provision for credit loss benefit on loans was $1.7 million compared to a credit loss expense of $32.8 million in the prior year which was primarily attributable to changes in the economic forecast related to the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Net charge-offs during the current year were $2.3 million compared to $7.7 million during the prior year.
Efficiency Ratio
The efficiency ratio was 51.35 percent for 2021 compared to 49.97 percent for the same period last year. Excluding acquisition-related expenses, the efficiency ratio was 50.16 in 2021 compared to 48.98 in 2020 and the increase was primarily driven by the reduction in gain on sale of loans.
ADDITIONAL MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Investment Activity
The Company’s investment securities primarily consist of debt securities classified as either available-for-sale or held-to-maturity. Non-marketable equity securities consist of capital stock issued by the FHLB of Des Moines.
Debt Securities
Debt securities classified as available-for-sale are carried at estimated fair value and debt securities classified as held-to-maturity are carried at amortized cost. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company transferred $404 million of available-for-sale securities with an unrealized net gain of $3.8 million into the held-to-maturity portfolio after determining it had the intent and ability to hold such securities until maturity. The Company transferred an additional $440 million of available-for-sale securities with an unrealized net gain of $40.6 million into held-to-maturity portfolio during the second quarter of 2021. Unrealized gains or losses, net of tax, on available-for-sale debt securities are reflected as an adjustment to other comprehensive income. The Company’s debt securities are summarized below:
In 2021, the Company’s debt securities were primarily comprised of U.S. government and federal agency and mortgage-backed securities. In 2020, the Company’s debt securities were primarily comprised of state and local government securities and mortgage-backed securities. State and local government securities are largely exempt from federal income tax and the Company’s federal statutory income tax rate of 21 percent is used in calculating the tax-equivalent yields on the tax-exempt securities. Mortgage-backed securities largely consists of short, weighted-average life U.S. agency guaranteed residential and commercial mortgage pass-through securities and to a lesser extent, short, weighted-average life U.S. agency guaranteed residential collateralized mortgage obligations. Combined, the mortgage-backed securities provide the Company with ongoing liquidity as scheduled and pre-paid principal is received on the securities.
State and local government securities carry different risks that are not as prevalent in other security types. The Company evaluates the investment grade quality of its securities in accordance with regulatory guidance. Investment grade securities are those where the issuer has an adequate capacity to meet the financial commitments under the security for the projected life of the investment. An issuer has an adequate capacity to meet financial commitments if the risk of default by the obligor is low and the full and timely
payment of principal and interest are expected. In assessing credit risk, the Company may use credit ratings from Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (“NRSRO”) entities such as S&P and Moody’s as support for the evaluation; however, they are not solely relied upon. There have been no significant differences in the Company’s internal evaluation of the creditworthiness of any issuer when compared with the ratings assigned by the NRSROs.
The following table stratifies the state and local government securities by the associated NRSRO ratings. The highest issued rating was used to categorize the securities in the table for those securities where the NRSRO ratings were not at the same level.
State and local government securities largely consist of both taxable and tax-exempt general obligation and revenue bonds. The following table stratifies the state and local government securities by the associated security type.
The following table outlines the five states in which the Company owns the highest concentrations of state and local government securities.
The following table presents the carrying amount and weighted-average yield of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity debt securities by contractual maturity at December 31, 2021. Weighted-average yields are based upon the amortized cost of securities and are calculated using the interest method which takes into consideration premium amortization, discount accretion and mortgage-backed securities’ prepayment provisions. Weighted-average yields on tax-exempt debt securities exclude the federal income tax benefit.
______________________________
1 Mortgage-backed securities, which have prepayment provisions, are not assigned to maturity categories due to fluctuations in their prepayment speeds.
Based on an analysis of its available-for-sale debt securities with unrealized losses as of December 31, 2021, the Company determined their decline in value was unrelated to credit loss and was primarily the result of interest rate changes and market spreads subsequent to acquisition. The fair value of the debt securities is expected to recover as payments are received and the debt securities approach maturity. In addition, the Company determined an insignificant amount of credit losses is expected on the held-to-maturity debt securities portfolio; therefore, no ACL has been recognized at December 31, 2021.
For additional information on debt securities, see Notes 1 and 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Lending Activity
The Company focuses its lending activities primarily on the following types of loans: 1) first-mortgage, conventional loans secured by residential properties, particularly single-family; 2) commercial lending, including agriculture and public entities; and 3) installment lending for consumer purposes (e.g., home equity, automobile, etc.). Supplemental information regarding the Company’s loan portfolio and credit quality based on regulatory classification is provided in the section captioned “Loans by Regulatory Classification” included in “Part I. Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” The regulatory classification of loans is based primarily on the type of collateral for the loans. Loan information included in “Part I. Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” is based on the Company’s loan segments, which are based on the purpose of the loan, unless otherwise noted as a regulatory classification. The following table summarizes the Company’s loan portfolio as of the dates indicated:
The stated maturities or first repricing term (if applicable) for the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021 was as follows:
Residential Real Estate Lending
The Company’s lending activities consist of the origination of both construction and permanent loans on residential real estate. The Company actively solicits residential real estate loan applications from real estate brokers, contractors, existing customers, customer referrals, and online applications. The Company’s lending policies generally limit the maximum loan-to-value ratio on residential mortgage loans to 80 percent of the lesser of the appraised value or purchase price. Policies allow for higher loan-to-values with appropriate risk mitigation such as documented compensating factors, credit enhancement, etc. For loans held for sale, the Company complies with each investor’s loan-to-value guidelines. The Company also provides interim construction financing for single-family dwellings. These loans are supported by a term take-out commitment that may be subject to certain contingencies.
Consumer Land or Lot Loans
The Company originates land and lot acquisition loans to borrowers who intend to construct their primary residence on the respective land or lot. These loans are generally for a term of three to five years and are secured by the developed land or lot with the loan-to-value limited to the lesser of 75 percent of the appraised value or 75 percent of the cost.
Unimproved Land and Land Development Loans
Although the Company has originated very few unimproved land and land development loans since the economic downturn in 2008, the Company may originate such loans on properties intended for residential and commercial use where real estate market conditions have improved. These loans are typically made for a term of 18 months to two years and are secured by the developed property with a loan-to-value not to exceed the lesser of 75 percent of cost or 65 percent of the appraised discounted bulk sale value upon completion of the improvements. The projects under development are inspected on a regular basis and advances are made on a percentage-of-completion basis. The loans are made to borrowers with real estate development experience and appropriate financial strength. Generally, the Company requires that a certain percentage of the development be pre-sold or that construction and term take-out commitments are in place prior to funding the loan. Loans made on unimproved land are generally made for a term of five to ten years with a loan-to-value not to exceed the lesser of 50 percent of appraised value or 50 percent of cost.
Residential Builder Guidance Lines
The Company provides Builder Guidance Lines that are comprised of pre-sold and spec-home construction and lot acquisition loans. The spec-home construction and lot acquisition loans are limited to a specific number and maximum amount. Generally, the individual loans will not exceed a one year maturity. The homes under construction are inspected on a regular basis and advances made on a percentage-of-completion basis.
Construction Loans
During the construction loan term, all construction loan collateral properties are inspected at least monthly, or more frequently as needed, until completion. Draws on construction loans are predicated upon the results of the inspection and advanced based upon a percentage-of-completion basis versus original budget percentages. When construction loans become non-performing and the associated project is not complete, the Company on a case-by-case basis makes the decision to advance additional funds or to initiate collection/foreclosure proceedings. Such decision includes obtaining “as-is” and “at completion” appraisals for consideration of potential increases or decreases in the collateral’s value. The Company also considers the increased costs of monitoring progress to completion, and the related collection/holding period costs should collateral ownership be transferred to the Company.
Commercial Real Estate Loans
Loans are made to purchase, construct and finance commercial real estate properties. These loans are generally made to borrowers who will own and occupy the property, but may include loans to finance investment or income properties. Commercial real estate loans generally have a loan-to-value up to the lesser of 75 percent of the appraised value or 75 percent of the cost and require a minimum 1.2 times debt service coverage margin.
Agricultural Lending
Agricultural lending is conducted on a conservative basis and consists of operating credits, term real estate loans for the acquisition or refinance of agricultural real estate or equipment, and term livestock loans for the acquisition or refinance of livestock. Loan-to-value on equipment, livestock and agricultural real estate is generally limited to 75 percent.
PPP Loans
A PPP loan is a small business loan designed to assist qualifying businesses in keeping workers on the payroll during the Covid-19 pandemic. The program commenced on April 3, 2020 with June 30, 2020 (subsequently changed to August 8, 2020) as the last day to apply for and receive a PPP loan for the first round. As originally enacted, each PPP loan is 100% guaranteed by the SBA, has a 1% interest rate, 2-year maturity and 6-month payment deferral period starting from the loan disbursement date. The PPP program was further amended as of June 5, 2020 under the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act with the primary changes to extend the period of qualifying expenditures from 8 weeks to 24 weeks, reduce the required use of funds for payroll expenses from 75% to 60%, change the deferral date from 6 months to the date of forgiveness, and extend the maturity from 2 years to 5 years for loans originated after the June 5, 2020 enactment date. A second round of the program opened up January 11, 2021, and ran through May 31, 2021.
Home Equity Loans
Home equity lines of credit are generally originated with maturity terms of 15 years. At origination, borrowers can choose a variable interest rate that changes quarterly, or after the first 3 or 5 years from the origination date. The draw period for home equity lines of credit usually exists from origination to maturity. During the draw period, the Company has home equity lines of credit where the borrowers pay interest only and home equity lines of credit where borrowers pay principal and interest.
Consumer Lending
The majority of consumer loans are secured by real estate, automobiles, or other assets. The Company intends to continue making such loans because of their short-term nature, generally between three months and five years. Moreover, interest rates on consumer loans are generally higher than on residential mortgage loans.
States and Political Subdivisions Lending
The Company lends directly to state and local political subdivisions. The loans are typically secured by the full faith and credit of the municipality or a specific revenue stream such as water or sewer fees. In general, state and local political subdivision loans carry a low risk of default and offer other complementary business opportunities such as deposits and cash management. The loans are generally long-term in nature and interest on many of these loans is tax-exempt for federal income tax purposes.
Credit Risk Management
The Company is committed to a conservative management of the credit risk within the loan portfolio, including the early recognition of problem loans. The Company’s credit risk management includes stringent credit policies, individual loan approval limits, limits on concentrations of credit, and committee approval of larger loan requests. Management practices also include regular internal and external credit examinations, identification and review of individual loans and leases experiencing deterioration of credit quality, procedures for the collection of non-performing assets, quarterly monitoring of the loan portfolio, semi-annual review of loans by industry, and periodic stress testing of the loans secured by real estate. Federal and state regulatory safety and soundness examinations are conducted annually.
The Company’s loan policy and credit administration practices establish standards and limits for all extensions of credit that are secured by interests in or liens on real estate, or made for the purpose of financing the construction of real property or other improvements. Ongoing monitoring and review of the loan portfolio is based on current information, including: the borrowers’ and guarantors’ creditworthiness, value of the real estate and other collateral, the project’s performance against projections, and monthly inspections by Company employees or external parties until the real estate project is complete.
Monitoring of the junior lien and home equity lines of credit portfolios includes evaluating payment delinquency, collateral values, bankruptcy notices and foreclosure filings. Additionally, the Company places junior lien mortgages and junior lien home equity lines of credit on non-accrual status when there is evidence that the associated senior lien is 90 days past due or is in the process of foreclosure, regardless of the junior lien delinquency status.
Loan Approval Limits
Individual loan approval limits have been established for each lender based on the loan types and experience of the individual. There are four additional loan approval levels: 1) the Bank divisions’ Officer Loan Committees, consisting of senior lenders and members of senior management; 2) the Bank divisions’ advisory boards; 3) the Bank’s Executive Loan Committee, consisting of the Bank divisions’ senior loan officers and the Company’s Chief Credit Administrator; and 4) the Bank’s Board of Directors. Under banking laws, loans-to-one-borrower and related entities are limited to a prescribed percentage of the unimpaired capital and surplus of the Bank.
Interest Reserves
Interest reserves are used to periodically advance loan funds to pay interest charges on the outstanding balance of the related loan. As with any extension of credit, the decision to establish a loan-funded interest reserve upon origination of construction loans, including residential construction and land, lot and other construction loans, is based on prudent underwriting, including the feasibility of the project, expected cash flow, creditworthiness of the borrower and guarantors, and the protection provided by the real estate and other underlying collateral. Interest reserves provide an effective means for addressing the cash flow characteristics of construction loans. In response to the downturn in the housing market and potential impact upon construction lending, the Company discourages the creation or continued use of interest reserves.
Interest reserves are advanced provided the related construction loan is performing as expected. Loans with interest reserves may be extended, renewed or restructured only when the related loan continues to perform as expected and meets the prudent underwriting standards identified above. Such renewals, extension or restructuring are not permitted in order to keep the related loan current.
In monitoring the performance and credit quality of a construction loan, the Company assesses the adequacy of any remaining interest reserve, and whether the use of an interest reserve remains appropriate in the presence of emerging weakness and associated risks in the construction loan.
The ongoing accrual and recognition of uncollected interest as income continues only when facts and circumstances continue to reasonably support the contractual payment of principal or interest. Loans are typically designated as non-accrual when the collection
of the contractual principal or interest is unlikely and has remained unpaid for ninety days or more. For such loans, the accrual of interest and its capitalization into the loan balance will be discontinued.
The Company had $374 million and $155 million of loans with remaining interest reserves of $17.6 million and $6.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021 and 2020, the Company extended, renewed or restructured 3 loans and 6 loans, respectively, with interest reserves. Such loans had an aggregate outstanding principal balance of $3.7 million and $12.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no construction loans with interest reserves that are currently non-performing or which are potential problem loans.
Loan Purchases, Sales, and Servicing
Fixed rate, long-term mortgage loans are generally sold in the secondary market. The Company is active in the secondary market, primarily through the origination of conventional, Rural Development, Federal Housing Administration and Department of Veterans Affairs residential mortgages. The sale of loans in the secondary mortgage market reduces the Company’s risk of holding long-term, fixed rate loans during periods of rising interest rates. In connection with conventional loan sales, the Company typically sells the majority of mortgage loans originated with servicing released. In certain circumstances, the Company strategically retains servicing and in the current year has been more active in retaining the servicing. For the loans that are sold with servicing retained, the Company records a servicing right asset that is subsequently amortized over the life of the loan. The servicing assets are also evaluated for impairment based on the fair value of the servicing asset compared to the carrying value.
The Company has also been very active in generating commercial SBA loans, and other commercial loans, with a portion of those loans sold to investors. The Company has not originated any type of subprime mortgages, either for the loan portfolio or for sale to investors. In addition, the Company has not purchased debt securities collateralized with subprime mortgages. The Company does not actively purchase loans from other financial institutions, and substantially all of the Company’s loans receivable are with customers in the Company’s geographic market areas.
Loan Origination and Other Fees
In addition to interest earned on loans, the Company receives fees for originating loans. Loan fees generally are a percentage of the principal amount of the loan and are charged to the borrower, and are normally deducted from the proceeds of the loan. Loan origination fees are generally 1.0 to 1.5 percent on residential mortgages and 0.5 to 1.5 percent on commercial loans, excluding PPP loans. Consumer loans generally require a fixed fee amount. The Company also receives other fees and charges relating to existing loans, which include charges and fees collected in connection with loan modifications.
As enticement to financial institutions to administer the program, the SBA reimburses PPP lenders for processing a PPP loan via loan fees. The fee structure changed as the PPP developed with the following reflecting the fee structure for each program:
Original Program Commencing on April 3, 2020 (round one):
•5% for loans of not more than $350,000.
•3% for loans of more than $350,000 and less than $2 million.
•1% for loans of $2 million up to a maximum loan of $10 million that were available under the original PPP.
New program commencing on January 11, 2021 for new borrowers (round two):
•50% with maximum of $2,500 for loans up to $50,000.
•5% for loans of more than $50,000 and less than $350,000.
•3% for loans of more than $350,000 and less than $2 million.
•1% for loans of $2 million up to a maximum loan of $10 million.
New program commencing on January 11, 2021 for existing borrowers (round two):
•50% with maximum of $2,500 for loans up to $50,000.
•5% for loans of more than $50,000 and less than $350,000.
•3% for loans of $350,000 up to a maximum loan of $2 million.
Appraisal and Evaluation Process
The Company’s loan policy and credit administration practices have adopted and implemented the applicable legal and regulatory requirements, which establishes criteria for obtaining appraisals or evaluations (new or updated), including transactions that are otherwise exempt from the appraisal requirements.
Each of the Bank divisions monitor conditions, including supply and demand factors, in the real estate markets served so they can react quickly to changing market conditions to mitigate potential losses from specific credit exposures within the loan portfolio. Evidence of the following real estate market conditions and trends is obtained from lending personnel and third party sources:
•demographic indicators, including employment and population trends;
•foreclosures, vacancy, construction and absorption rates;
•property sales prices, rental rates, and lease terms;
•current tax assessments;
•economic indicators, including trends within the lending areas; and
•valuation trends, including discount and capitalization rates.
Third party information sources include federal, state, and local governments and agencies thereof, private sector economic data vendors, real estate brokers, licensed agents, sales, rental and foreclosure data tracking services.
The time between ordering an appraisal or evaluation and receipt from third party vendors is typically two to six weeks for residential property depending on geographic market and four to six weeks for non-residential property. For real estate properties that are of highly specialized or limited use, significantly complex or large, additional time beyond the typical times may be required for new appraisals or evaluations (new or updated).
As part of the Company’s credit administration and portfolio monitoring practices, the Company’s regular internal and external credit examinations review a significant number of individual loan files. Appraisals and evaluations (new or updated) are reviewed to determine whether the timeliness, methods, assumptions, and findings are reasonable and in compliance with the Company’s loan policy and credit administration practices. Such reviews include the adequacy of the steps taken by the Company to ensure that the individuals who perform appraisals and evaluations (new or updated) are appropriately qualified and are not subject to conflicts of interest. If there are any deficiencies noted in the reviews, they are reported to Bank management and prompt corrective action is taken.
Non-performing Assets
The following table summarizes information regarding non-performing assets at the dates indicated:
______________________________
1Amounts represent estimated interest income that would have been recognized on loans accounted for on a non-accrual basis as of the end of each period had such loans performed pursuant to contractual terms.
Non-performing assets increased $32.3 million, or 91 percent, over the prior year primarily as a result of the Alta acquisition and a single credit relationship. Non-performing assets as a percentage of subsidiary assets at December 31, 2021 was 0.26 percent compared to 0.19 percent in the prior year. Early stage delinquencies (accruing loans 30-89 days past due) of $50.6 million at December 31, 2021 increased $27.8 million from the prior year. Early stage delinquencies as a percentage of loans at December 31, 2021 was 0.38 percent, which was an increase of 18 basis points increase from prior year.
Most of the Company’s non-performing assets are secured by real estate, and based on the most current information available to management, including updated appraisals or evaluations (new or updated), the Company believes the value of the underlying real estate collateral is adequate to minimize significant charge-offs or losses to the Company. Through pro-active credit administration, the Company works closely with its borrowers to seek favorable resolution to the extent possible, thereby attempting to minimize net charge-offs or losses to the Company. With very limited exceptions, the Company does not disburse additional funds on non-performing loans. Instead, the Company proceeds to collection and foreclosure actions in order to reduce the Company’s exposure to loss on such loans.
For additional information on accounting policies relating to non-performing assets, see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Restructured Loans
A restructured loan is considered a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) if the creditor, for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties, grants a concession to the debtor that it would not otherwise consider. Each restructured debt is separately negotiated with the borrower and includes terms and conditions that reflect the borrower’s prospective ability to service their obligations as modified. The Company discourages the use of the multiple loan strategy when restructuring loans regardless of whether or not the loans are designated as TDRs. The Company had TDR loans of $37.2 million and $45.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law which includes many provisions that impact the Company and its customers. The banking regulatory agencies have encouraged banks to work with borrowers who have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the CARES Act, along with related regulatory guidance, allowed the Bank to not designate certain modifications as TDRs that otherwise may have been classified as TDRs.
Other Real Estate Owned and Foreclosed Assets
The book value of loans prior to the acquisition of collateral and transfer of the loans into other real estate owned (“OREO”) during 2021 was $1.6 million. The fair value of the loan collateral acquired in foreclosure during 2021 was $1.5 million. The following table sets forth the changes in OREO for the periods indicated:
PPP Loans
The SBA Round 2 PPP program ended in early May 2021 after the available funds were fully drawn upon. During the first half of 2021, the Company originated $555 million of Round 2 PPP loans which generated $33.2 million of SBA deferred processing fees and $6.7 million of deferred compensation costs for total net deferred fees of $26.5 million. These net deferred fees are recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the loans or when the loans are forgiven in whole or in part by the SBA.
During 2021, the SBA processing fees received on Round 2 averaged 5.99 percent which compared to the average of 3.75 percent received on Round 1 in the prior year. The increase in the fee percentage received on Round 2 was the result of an increase in the number of smaller loans which receive a higher percentage fee.
The Company’s PPP borrowers received $1.305 billion in PPP loan forgiveness during 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $32.3 million remaining, or 2 percent of the $1.472 billion of Round 1 PPP loans originated in the prior year still to be forgiven and had $136 million remaining, or 25 percent of the $555 million of Round 2 PPP loans originated in the current year. Net deferred fees remaining on the balance of the PPP loans at December 31, 2021 were $5.1 million.
Supplemental information regarding credit quality and identification of the Company’s loan portfolio based on regulatory classification is provided below in the section entitled “Loans by Regulatory Classification”. The regulatory classification of loans is based primarily on collateral type while the Company’s loan segments presented herein are based on the purpose of the loan.
Allowance for Credit Losses - Loans Receivable
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, which significantly changed the allowance for credit loss accounting policies. The following allowance for credit loss discussion was presented under Accounting Standards Codification™ (“ASC”) Topic 326.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the ACL as of the dates indicated:
The following table summarizes the ACL experience for the periods indicated:
The ACL as a percentage of total loans outstanding at December 31 2021 was 1.29 percent which was a 13 basis points decrease from the prior year end. The Company’s ACL of $173 million is considered by management to be adequate to absorb the estimated credit losses from any segment of its loan portfolio based upon managements’ best estimate of current expected credit losses within the existing portfolio of loans. Should any of the factors considered by management in making this estimate change, the Company’s estimate of current expected credit losses could also change, which could affect the level of future provision of credit losses related to loans. For the periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company believes the ACL is commensurate with the risk in the Company’s loan portfolio and is directionally consistent with the change in the quality of the Company’s loan portfolio. During 2021, provision for credit losses exceeded the charge-offs, net of recoveries, by $14.1 million. During the same period in 2020, the charge-offs, net of recoveries, exceeded provision for credit losses by $30.0 million.
While the Company has incorporated its estimate of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic into its calculation of the ACL for based on assumptions and forecasts that existed as of the reporting period end, the uncertainty of the current economic environment remains volatile and the Company cannot predict whether additional credit losses will be sustained as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic if assumptions and forecasts change in the future.
At the end of each quarter, the Company analyzes its loan portfolio and maintains an ACL at a level that is appropriate and determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Determining the adequacy of the ACL involves a high degree of judgment and is inevitably imprecise as the risk of loss is difficult to quantify. The ACL methodology is designed to reasonably estimate the probable credit losses within the Company’s loan portfolio. Accordingly, the ACL is maintained within a range of estimated losses. The determination of the ACL on loans, including credit loss expense and net charge-offs, is a critical accounting estimate that involves management’s judgments about the loan portfolio that impact credit losses, including the credit risk inherent in the loan portfolio, economic forecasts nationally and in the local markets in which the Company operates, trends and changes in collateral values, delinquencies, non-performing assets, net charge-offs, credit-related policies and personnel, and other environmental factors.
In determining the allowance, the loan portfolio is separated into pools of loans that share similar risk characteristics which are the Company’s loan segments. The Company then derives estimated loss assumptions from its model by loan segment which is further segregated by the credit quality indicators. The loss assumptions are then applied to each segment of loan to estimate the ACL on the pooled loans. For any loans that do not share similar risk characteristics, the estimated credit losses are determined on an individual loan basis and such loans primarily consist of non-accrual loans. An estimated credit loss is recorded on individually reviewed loans
when the fair value of a collateral-dependent loan or the present value of the loan’s expected future cash flows (discounted at the loans original effective interest rate) is less than the amortized cost of the loan.
The Company provides commercial banking services to individuals, small to medium-sized businesses, community organizations and public entities from 224 locations, including 188 branches, across Montana, Idaho, Utah, Washington, Wyoming, Colorado, Arizona and Nevada. The states in which the Company operates have diverse economies and markets that are tied to commodities (crops, livestock, minerals, oil and natural gas), tourism, real estate and land development and an assortment of industries, both manufacturing and service-related. Thus, the changes in the global, national, and local economies are not uniform across the Company’s geographic locations. The geographic dispersion of these market areas helps to mitigate the risk of credit loss. The Company’s model of seventeen bank divisions with separate management teams is also a significant benefit in mitigating and managing the Company’s credit risk. This model provides substantial local oversight to the lending and credit management function and requires multiple reviews of larger loans before credit is extended.
The primary responsibility for credit risk assessment and identification of problem loans rests with the loan officer of the account. This continuous process of identifying non-performing loans is necessary to support management’s evaluation of the ACL adequacy. An independent loan review function verifying credit risk ratings evaluates the loan officer and management’s evaluation of the loan portfolio credit quality. The ACL evaluation is well documented and approved by the Company’s Board. In addition, the policy and procedures for determining the balance of the ACL are reviewed annually by the Company’s Board, the internal audit department, independent credit reviewers and state and federal bank regulatory agencies.
Although the Company continues to actively monitor economic trends and regulatory developments, no assurance can be given that the Company will not, in any particular period, sustain losses that are significant relative to the ACL amount, or that subsequent evaluations of the loan portfolio applying management’s judgment about then current factors will not require significant changes in the ACL. Under such circumstances, additional credit loss expense could result.
For additional information regarding the ACL, its relation to credit loss expense and risk related to asset quality, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Loans by Regulatory Classification
Supplemental information regarding identification of the Company’s loan portfolio and credit quality based on regulatory classification is provided in the following tables. The regulatory classification of loans is based primarily on the type of collateral for the loans. There may be differences when compared to loan tables and loan amounts appearing elsewhere which reflect the Company’s internal loan segments which are based on the purpose of the loan.
The following table summarizes the Company’s loan portfolio by regulatory classification:
______________________________
1 Loans held for sale are primarily 1st lien 1-4 family loans.
The following table summarizes the Company’s non-performing assets by regulatory classification:
The following table summarizes the Company’s accruing loans 30-89 days past due by regulatory classification:
_________________
n/m - not measurable
The following table summarizes the Company’s charge-offs and recoveries by regulatory classification:
Sources of Funds
The Company’s deposits have traditionally been the principal source of funds for use in lending and other business purposes. The Company also obtains funds from repayment of loans and debt securities, securities sold under agreements to repurchase (“repurchase agreements”), wholesale deposits, advances from FHLB and other borrowings. Loan repayments are a relatively stable source of funds, while interest bearing deposit inflows and outflows are significantly influenced by general interest rate levels and market conditions. Borrowings and advances may be used on a short-term basis to compensate for reductions in normal sources of funds such as deposit inflows at less than projected levels. Borrowings also may be used on a long-term basis to support expanded activities, match maturities of longer-term assets or manage interest rate risk.
Deposits
The Company has several deposit programs designed to attract both short-term and long-term deposits from the general public by providing a wide selection of accounts and rates. These programs include non-interest bearing deposit accounts and interest bearing deposit accounts such as NOW, DDA, savings, money market deposits, fixed rate certificates of deposit with maturities ranging from three months to five years, negotiated-rate jumbo certificates, and individual retirement accounts. These deposits are obtained primarily from individual and business residents in the Bank’s geographic market areas. Wholesale deposits are obtained through various programs and include brokered deposits classified as NOW, DDA, money market deposits and certificate accounts. The Company’s deposits are summarized below:
Total estimated uninsured deposits were $6,907,608,000 and $4,066,521,000 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The following table summarizes the estimated amounts outstanding at December 31, 2021 for uninsured time deposits according to the time remaining to maturity.
For additional information on deposits, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase, Federal Home Loan Bank Advances and Other Borrowings
The Company borrows money through repurchase agreements. This process involves the selling of one or more of the securities in the Company’s investment portfolio and simultaneously entering into an agreement to repurchase the same securities at an agreed upon later date, typically overnight. A rate of interest is paid for the agreed period of time. The Bank enters into repurchase agreements with local municipalities, and certain customers, and has adopted procedures designed to ensure proper transfer of title and safekeeping of the underlying securities. In addition to retail repurchase agreements, the Company periodically enters into wholesale repurchase agreements as additional funding sources. The Company has not entered into reverse repurchase agreements.
The Bank is a member of the FHLB of Des Moines, which is one of eleven banks that comprise the FHLB system. The Bank is required to maintain a certain level of activity-based stock in order to borrow or to engage in other transactions with the FHLB of Des Moines. Additionally, the Bank is subject to a membership capital stock requirement that is based upon an annual calibration tied to the total assets of the Bank. The borrowings are collateralized by eligible categories of loans and debt securities (principally, securities which are obligations of, or guaranteed by, the U.S. government and its agencies), provided certain standards related to credit-worthiness have been met. Advances are made pursuant to several different credit programs, each of which has its own interest rates and range of maturities. The Bank’s maximum amount of FHLB advances is limited to the lesser of a fixed percentage of the Bank’s total assets or the discounted value of eligible collateral. FHLB advances fluctuate to meet seasonal and other withdrawals of deposits and to expand lending or investment opportunities of the Company.
Additionally, the Company has other sources of secured and unsecured borrowing lines from various sources that may be used from time to time.
For additional information concerning the Company’s borrowings, see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Short-term borrowings
A critical component of the Company’s liquidity and capital resources is access to short-term borrowings to fund its operations. Short-term borrowings are accompanied by increased risks managed by the Bank’s Asset Liability Committee (“ALCO”) such as rate increases or unfavorable change in terms which would make it more costly to obtain future short-term borrowings. The Company’s short-term borrowing sources include FHLB advances, federal funds purchased and retail and wholesale repurchase agreements. The Company also has access to the short-term discount window borrowing programs (i.e., primary credit) of the Federal Reserve Bank (“FRB”). FHLB advances and certain other short-term borrowings may be renewed as long-term borrowings to decrease certain risks such as liquidity or interest rate risk; however, the reduction in risks are weighed against the increased cost of funds and other risks.
The following table provides information relating to significant short-term borrowings, which consists of borrowings that mature within one year of period end:
Subordinated Debentures
In addition to funds obtained in the ordinary course of business, the Company formed or acquired financing subsidiaries for the purpose of issuing trust preferred securities that entitle the investor to receive cumulative cash distributions thereon. Subordinated debentures were issued in conjunction with the trust preferred securities and the terms of the subordinated debentures and trust preferred securities are the same. For regulatory capital purposes, the trust preferred securities are included in Tier 2 capital at December 31, 2021. The subordinated debentures outstanding as of December 31, 2021 were $133 million, including fair value adjustments from acquisitions. For additional information regarding the subordinated debentures, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Liquidity Risk
In the normal course of business, the Company has commitments that require material cash requirements for customer deposits outflows, repurchase agreements, borrowed funds, lease obligations, off-balance sheet obligations, operating expenses and other contractual obligations. The source of funding for such requirements includes loan repayments, customer deposit inflows, borrowings and capital resources. Liquidity risk is the possibility that the Company will not be able to fund present and future obligations as they come due because of an inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding at a reasonable cost.
The objective of liquidity management is to maintain cash flows adequate to meet current and future needs for credit demand, deposit withdrawals, maturing liabilities and corporate operating expenses. Effective liquidity management entails three elements:
1.assessing on an ongoing basis, the current and expected future needs for funds, and ensuring that sufficient funds or access to funds exist to meet those needs at the appropriate time;
2.providing for an adequate cushion of liquidity to meet unanticipated cash flow needs that may arise from potential adverse circumstances ranging from high probability/low severity events to low probability/high severity; and
3.balancing the benefits between providing for adequate liquidity to mitigate potential adverse events and the cost of that liquidity.
The Company has a wide range of versatility in managing the liquidity and asset/liability mix. The Bank’s ALCO meets regularly to assess liquidity risk, among other matters. The Company monitors liquidity and contingency funding alternatives through management reports of liquid assets (e.g., debt securities), both unencumbered and pledged, as well as borrowing capacity, both secured and unsecured, including off-balance sheet funding sources. The Company evaluates its potential funding needs across alternative scenarios and maintains contingency funding plans consistent with the Company’s access to diversified sources of contingent funding.
The following table identifies certain liquidity sources and capacity available to the Company as of the dates indicated:
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, there may be various outstanding commitments to obtain funding and to extend credit, such as letters of credit and unfunded loan commitments, which are not reflected in the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements. The Company assessed the off-balance sheet credit exposures as of December 31, 2021 and determined its ACL of $22.8 million was adequate to absorb the estimated credit losses. Such ACL is included in other liabilities.
Off-balance sheet arrangements also include any obligation related to a variable interest held in an unconsolidated entity. The Company does not anticipate any material losses as a result of these transactions. For additional information regarding the Company’s interests in unconsolidated VIEs, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Capital Resources
Maintaining capital strength continues to be a long-term objective of the Company. Abundant capital is necessary to sustain growth, provide protection against unanticipated declines in asset values, and to safeguard the funds of depositors. Capital is also a source of funds for loan demand and enables the Company to effectively manage its assets and liabilities. The Company has the capacity to issue 117,187,500 shares of common stock of which 110,687,533 have been issued as of December 31, 2021. The Company also has the capacity to issue 1,000,000 shares of preferred stock of which none have been issued as of December 31, 2021. Conversely, the Company may decide to utilize a portion of its strong capital position, as it has done in the past, to repurchase shares of its outstanding common stock, depending on market price and other relevant considerations.
The Federal Reserve has adopted capital adequacy guidelines that are used to assess the adequacy of capital in supervising a bank holding company. The federal banking agencies issued final rules (“Final Rules”) that established a comprehensive regulatory capital framework based on the recommendation of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and certain requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Final Rules require the Company to hold a 2.5 percent capital conservation buffer designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. As of December 31, 2021, management believes the Company and Bank meet all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject and there are no conditions or events subsequent to this date that management believes have changed the Company’s or Bank’s risk-based capital category.
The following table illustrates the Bank’s regulatory capital ratios and the Federal Reserve’s capital adequacy guidelines as of December 31, 2021:
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) accounting standard that requires management’s estimate of credit losses over the expected contractual lives of the Company's relevant financial assets. On March 27, 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, federal banking regulators issued an interim final rule to delay for two years the initial adoption impact of CECL on regulatory capital, followed by a three-year transition period to phase out the aggregate amount of the capital benefit provided during 2020 and 2021 (i.e., a five-year transition period). The Company has elected to utilize the five-year transition period. During the two-year delay, the Company will add back to Common Tier 1 capital 100 percent of the initial adoption impact of CECL plus 25 percent of the cumulative quarterly changes in ACL (i.e., quarterly transitional amounts). Starting on January 1, 2022, the quarterly transitional amounts along with the initial adoption impact of CECL will be phased out of Common Tier 1 capital evenly over the three-year period.
For additional information regarding regulatory capital, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Federal and State Income Taxes
The Company files a consolidated federal income tax return using the accrual method of accounting. All required tax returns have been timely filed. Financial institutions are subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, in the same general manner as other corporations. The federal statutory corporate income tax rate is 21 percent.
Within the Company’s geographic footprint under Montana, Idaho, Utah, Colorado and Arizona law, financial institutions are subject to a corporation income tax, which incorporates or is substantially similar to applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The corporation income tax is imposed on federal taxable income, subject to certain adjustments. State taxes are incurred at the rate of 6.75 percent in Montana, 6.500 percent in Idaho, 4.95 percent in Utah, 4.6 percent in Colorado and 4.9 percent in Arizona. Washington, Wyoming and Nevada do not impose a corporate income tax. The Company is also required to file in states other than the eight states in which it has properties.
Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $64.7 million and $61.6 million, respectively. The Company’s effective income tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 18.5 percent and 18.8 percent, respectively. The current and prior year’s low effective income tax rates were due to income from tax-exempt debt securities, municipal loans and leases and benefits from federal income tax credits. Income from tax-exempt debt securities, loans and leases was $69.2 million and $62.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Benefits from federal income tax credits were $12.3 million and $14.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company has equity investments in Certified Development Entities (“CDE”) which have received allocations of New Markets Tax Credits (“NMTC”). Administered by the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (“CDFI Fund”) of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the NMTC program is aimed at stimulating economic and community development and job creation in low-income communities. The federal income tax credits received are claimed over a seven-year credit allowance period. The Company also has equity investments in Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (“LIHTC”) which are indirect federal subsidies used to finance the development of affordable rental housing for low-income households. The federal income tax credits are claimed over a ten-year credit allowance period. The Company has investments of $16.0 million in Qualified School Construction bonds whereby the Company receives quarterly federal income tax credits in lieu of taxable interest income. The federal income tax credits on these debt securities are subject to federal and state income tax.
Following is a list of expected federal income tax credits to be received in the years indicated.
For additional information on income taxes, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Average Balance Sheet
The following schedule provides 1) the total dollar amount of interest and dividend income of the Company for earning assets and the average yields; 2) the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest bearing liabilities and the average rates; 3) net interest and dividend income and interest rate spread; and 4) net interest margin (tax-equivalent).
______________________________
1Includes tax effect of $5.6 million, $5.3 million and $4.8 million on tax-exempt municipal loan and lease income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
2Total loans are gross of the allowance for credit losses, net of unearned income and include loans held for sale. Non-accrual loans were included in the average volume for the entire period.
3Includes tax effect of $12.2 million, $10.5 million and $7.8 million on tax-exempt debt securities income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
4Includes tax effect of $1.0 million, $1.1 million and $1.1 million on federal income tax credits for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
5Wholesale deposits include brokered deposits classified as NOW, DDA, money market deposit and certificate accounts with contractual maturities.
Rate/Volume Analysis
Net interest income can be evaluated from the perspective of relative dollars of change in each period. Interest income and interest expense, which are the components of net interest income, are shown in the following table on the basis of the amount of any increases (or decreases) attributable to changes in the dollar levels of the Company’s interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities (“volume”) and the yields earned and paid on such assets and liabilities (“rate”). The change in interest income and interest expense attributable to changes in both volume and rates has been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
Net interest income (tax-equivalent) increased $64.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The interest income for 2021 increased over the same period last year primarily from the acquisition of Alta, increased volume in commercial loans and investment securities. The growth in the investment securities was the result of security purchases utilizing the $1.623 billion of cash received from the Alta acquisition, excess liquidity from the increase in core deposits, and SBA forgiveness of PPP loans. Total interest expense decreased from the prior year primarily from the decreased rates on deposits.
Net interest income (tax-equivalent) increased $99.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The interest income for 2020 increased over the same period last year primarily from increased growth in commercial loans and investment securities. The growth in the commercial loan portfolio was driven by the PPP loans new for 2020. The growth in the investment securities was the result of security purchases utilizing excess liquidity from the increase in core deposits. Total interest expense decreased from the prior year primarily from the decreased rates on deposits and borrowings combined with a decreased amount of FHLB advances and wholesale deposits.
Cyber Risk
A failure in or breach of the Company’s operational or security systems, or those of the Company’s third party service providers, including as a result of cyber-attacks, could disrupt business, result in the disclosure or misuse of confidential or proprietary information, damage our reputation, increase costs and cause losses. The Company employs detection and response mechanisms designed to contain and mitigate these risks. The Company maintains a robust information security program that is regularly reviewed, tested, and updated. This includes vulnerability and patch management programs, incident response planning, security monitoring, employee training, and security awareness testing. The Board's Risk Oversight Committee is responsible for monitoring the Company’s cyber risk management profile and related programs. The Board is responsible for approval of related policies.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP often requires management to use significant judgments as well as subjective and/or complex measurements in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses. The Company considers its accounting policies for the ACL, goodwill and fair value measurements to be critical accounting policies. The application of these policies has a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and financial results could differ significantly if different judgments or estimates were applied. The following describes why the estimates are subject to uncertainty, the estimated change in the reported periods, and the sensitivity of the reported amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying the calculation.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses for loans receivable represents management’s estimate of credit losses over the expected contractual life of the loan portfolio. Determining the adequacy of the allowance is complex and requires a high degree of judgment by management about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Subsequent evaluations of the then-existing loan portfolio, in light of the factors then prevailing, may result in significant changes in the allowance in those future period which is why there is such a high degree of uncertainty. Such factors or assumptions include loan volumes, delinquency status, credit ratings, historical loss experiences, estimated prepayment speeds, weighted average lives and other conditions influencing loss expectations, such as reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions. As a result of the significant size of the loan portfolio, the numerous assumptions in the model, and the high degree of potential change in such assumptions, there is a high degree of sensitivity to the reported amounts. For information regarding the ACL for loans receivable, its relation to the provision for credit losses and risk related to asset quality, and the estimated change during the reported periods, see the section captioned “Allowance for Credit Losses - Loans Receivable” included in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and Notes 1 and 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Goodwill
The Company is required to assess goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if determined necessary. Goodwill of a reporting unit is tested for impairment if an event is more-likely-than-not to reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Changes in the economic environment, operations of the aggregated reporting units, or other factors could result in the decline in the fair value of the aggregated reporting units which could result in a goodwill impairment in the future. The estimate is considered to have a low amount of uncertainty unless there is an event that significantly lowers the goodwill fair value estimate. Examples of events and circumstances include: significant change in legal factors or in the business climate, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, loss of key personnel, a more likely-than-not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of, and the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit. There were no changes to the Company’s assessment or reported amounts during 2021. For information on goodwill, see Notes 1 and 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value measurement estimates are used for certain recorded and disclosed financial instruments on a recurring and non-recurring basis. Such estimates utilize a variety of assumptions which are subject to uncertainty. Certain fair value measurements have a higher degree of sensitivity of the reported amount to the methods, assumptions and estimates underlying the calculation. For information on fair value measurements and the estimated changes during the reporting periods, see Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Authoritative accounting guidance that may have had a material impact on the Company that became effective during 2021 or 2020 includes amendments to:
•FASB ASC Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses
•FASB ASC Topic 350, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill
There is no authoritative accounting guidance which is pending adoption at December 31, 2021, that is expected to have a material impact on the Company.
For additional information on the topics and the impact on the Company see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”