Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this annual report as our initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our ordinary shares if preferred shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
GBT Business Combination
On December 2, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with GBT, a company limited by shares incorporated under the laws of Jersey, pursuant to which, among other things and subject to the terms and conditions contained in the Business Combination Agreement, GBT will become our direct subsidiary, with us being renamed “Global Business Travel Group, Inc.” and conducting its business through GBT in an Up-C structure. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, the Continuing JerseyCo Owners will together acquire a majority voting interest in PubCo and maintain a majority economic interest in GBT, and our existing shareholders will own a minority voting interest in PubCo and an indirect minority economic interest in the GBT business. See “Item 1. Business” for a description of the pending Business Combination with GBT and the related agreements.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for our business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents on marketable securities held in the trust account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses for due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $6,199,890, which consists of a gain in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities of $18,698,777 and interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $371,004 offset by operating costs of $12,864,426 and interest expense of $5,465. Operating costs increased by $12,281,143 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the increase in professional fees related to the due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For a discussion of the results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, please refer to “Item 7. Results of Operations” in our 2020 10-K/A.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We do not have sufficient liquidity to meet our anticipated obligations over the next year from the date of issuance of the financial statements included herein. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” our management has determined that if we are unsuccessful in consummating an Initial Business Combination, the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the ability to continue as a going concern. Our management has determined that we have access to funds from our sponsor that are sufficient to fund our working capital needs until a potential business combination or up to the mandatory liquidation as stipulated in our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern.
On October 6, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 75,000,000 Units, and in connection therewith granted the underwriters an over-allotment option to purchase an additional 11,250,000 Over-Allotment Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $750,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,333,334 Private Placement Warrants, at $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $17,000,000. Upon closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 6, 2020, the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering of $750,000,000 were held in cash and subsequently invested in U.S. government securities.
On November 10, 2020, the Company consummated the sale of 6,681,000 Over-Allotment Units pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option. Such Over-Allotment Units were sold at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $66,810,000. Substantially concurrently with the closing of the sale of 6,681,000 Over-Allotment Units, the Company consummated the private sale of an additional 890,800 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $1,336,200. Following the closing of the over-allotment option and sale of additional Private Placement Warrants (together, the “Over-Allotment Closing”), a total of $816,810,000, including approximately $28,588,350 of underwriters’ deferred discount, was held in the trust account.
On October 20, 2020, our sponsor executed a promissory note (the “October Note”) with a principal amount of $1,500,000. The October Note bears interest at a rate of 0.14% per annum and is payable on the earlier of an initial business combination or the liquidation of the Company. On October 20, 2020, the Company borrowed $1,500,000 pursuant to the October Note and $1,500,000 remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Up to $1,500,000 of the October Note may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On February 22, 2021, our sponsor executed a promissory note (the “February Note”) with a principal amount of $800,000. The February Note bears interest at a rate of 0.12% per annum and is payable on the earlier of an initial business combination or the liquidation of the Company. On February 22, 2021, the Company borrowed $800,000 pursuant to the February Note and $800,000 remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
On June 18, 2021, our sponsor executed a promissory note (the “June Note”) with a principal amount of $2,000,000. The June Note bears interest at a rate of 0.13% per annum and is payable on the earlier of an initial business combination or the liquidation of the Company. On June 18, 2021, the Company borrowed $2,000,000 pursuant to the June Note and $2,000,000 remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
On September 14, 2021, our sponsor executed a promissory note (the “September Note”) with a principal amount of $1,500,000. The September Note bears interest at a rate of 0.17% per annum and is payable on the earlier of an initial business combination or the liquidation of the Company. On September 14, 2021, the Company borrowed $1,500,000 pursuant to the September Note and $1,500,000 remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $817,356,537 and $816,985,533, respectively (including approximately $371,004 and $175,533, respectively, of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we withdrew $0 of interest earned on the trust account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $4,024,828. Net income was $6,199,890 primarily as a result of the gain in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities of $18,698,777 and interest income of $371,004. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $8,845,063 of cash from operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2,441,248. Net loss was $19,641,760 primarily as a result of the loss in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities of $16,889,088, costs associated with warrant liabilities of $2,344,508 and formation and organization costs paid by related parties of $27,607. These amounts were offset by interest income of $175,533. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1,885,158 of cash from operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to make permitted withdrawals. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. To the extent that our capital shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
For a discussion of the sources and uses of cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, please refer to “Item 7. Results of Operations” in our 2020 10-K/A.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash of $161,277 and $257,872, respectively, held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection an initial business combination, our initial shareholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we will repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of Class A ordinary shares included in the Units upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $16,667, for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on October 2, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly for up to 27 months until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of $28,588,350. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
The Company has entered into a fee arrangement with a service provider pursuant to which certain success fees in connection with a potential Business Combination will become payable only if the Company consummates the pending Business Combination with GBT. If the pending Business Combination with GBT does not occur, the Company will not be required to pay these contingent fees. As of December 31, 2021, the amount of these contingent fees with the service provider was approximately $7.0 million.
Separately, the Company has entered into a fee arrangement with placement agents pursuant to which certain placement fees equal to 3.5% of gross proceeds from a securities private placement (net of proceeds invested by related parties or affiliates of the Company) will become payable only if the Company consummates the pending Business Combination with GBT. If the pending Business Combination with GBT does not occur, the Company will not be required to pay these contingent fees.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the financial statements prepared by management and are based upon management’s current judgments. These judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience regarding past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect our financial statements, the areas that are particularly significant include use of estimates; Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption; net income (loss) per ordinary share; and the fair value of assets and liabilities.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt --Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging --Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.