ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included in Item 15 of this Annual Report, as well as the discussion of the Company’s business and risk contained in Item 1 - Business
and Item 1A - Risk Factors
,
Overview
The Company has been engaged in developing its Camelina assets since 2013. Between July 2018, the date that we entered into a letter of intent for the purchase of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, and the closing of the purchase of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery in May 2020, we were exclusively engaged in completing the purchase of the refinery and in obtaining the financing necessary to purchase and retool the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery into a renewable fuels facility. Accordingly, our principal expenses in 2020 until we purchased the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery in May 2020 consisted of general and administrative expenses and costs incurred to obtain the financing required to purchase and retool the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. After the purchase of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery on May 7, 2020, both our operating expenses and our capital expenditures increased significantly.
Since all of our resources were dedicated to the purchase and financing of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, we did not generate any operating revenues in either 2020 nor 2021 other than a minimal amount of Camelina seed sales in 2021. In order to fund our operating expenses prior to May 2020, we obtained $10 million under a derivative contract (the “Derivative Contract”) that we entered into with a commodity trading company late in October 2018 and modified in October 2019. The Derivative Contract was further amended in 2020 and replaced by a fixed payment obligation that requires the Company to make total payments of $24.8 million, consisting of the $4.5 million payment we made in June 2020, and six equal monthly installment payments that are due beginning in May 2022. The cash that we received from the Derivative Contract was used to fund our operating costs, our due diligence costs, our pre-acquisition costs, the purchase price down payment/deposit for the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, our consulting and legal fees associated with the acquisition, and our payments to key vendors and suppliers.
In May 2020 we completed the purchase of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. The total amount of cash consideration paid for the refinery was $40 million and the total amount of all consideration and assumed liabilities was $89.4 million. In order to fund the purchase price of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery and the currently on-going conversion of the facility into a renewable diesel refinery, in May 2020 we also entered into a $300 million Senior Credit Facility and a $65 million Mezzanine Credit Facility. The Senior Credit Facility and Mezzanine Credit Facility have been amended so that the credit available under the Senior Credit Facility now is $337.6 million and the credit available under the Mezzanine Credit Facility between GCEH and BKRF HCB, LLC is now is $67.4 million. We are currently converting the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery from a crude oil refinery into a renewable fuels refinery, and we do not expect to commence our proposed renewable fuels refinery operations until the second half of 2022. Therefore, we do not anticipate generating revenues from the operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery until later in 2022. Through December 31, 2021,we have invested approximately $350 million in the acquisition and retooling of the renewable fuels refinery.
During 2021 the Company further expanded its operations by acquiring three new subsidiaries, Agribody Technologies, Inc. (ATI) in order to enhance its plant science development capabilities, Entira, Incorporated to supplement its agriculture marketing and development capabilities, and Camelina Company Espana, S.L. (“CCE”) to launch its international Camelina operations. The Company also opened a new office and research facility in Great Falls, Montana, and acquired an undeveloped parcel of land in Havre, Montana, on which the Company plans to build a grain storage and rail loading facility. These changes affected the Company’s operations and financial condition in 2021 and will continue to impact the Company’s future operations and financial results.
Credit Agreements
In order to finance the costs of the Refinery Acquisition and the development, construction, completion, ownership and operation of the renewable fuels refinery, our newly formed special purpose subsidiaries (collectively, “Loan Parties”) entered into two credit facilities, the terms of which will materially impact our future cash flow and results of operations.
On May 4, 2020 we entered into a senior credit agreement with a group of lenders (the “Senior Lenders”) pursuant to which the Senior Lenders agreed to provide us a $300 million senior secured term loan facility to enable us to acquire the equity interests of BKRF and to pay the costs of the retooling of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. The Senior Lenders consist of Orion Energy Partners, L.P., GCM Grosvenor and Voya Investment Management. Orion Energy Partners TP Agent, LLC acts as administrative agent for the Senior Lenders. The Senior Lenders have revised the terms of the Senior Credit Facility to increase the amount available thereunder to $337.6 million as of December 20, 2021 and as of December 21, 2021, we had borrowed the full $337.6 million. On December 20, 2021, GCEH entered into a binding Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with ExxonMobil whereby ExxonMobil would purchase $125.0 million of Series C Preferred. Concurrently, the Senior Lenders committed to make an additional Bridge Loan of $20.0 million
available
to us, under equivalent borrowing terms as the Senior Credit Facility, until the financing transaction contemplated under the MOU was completed. On December 21, 2021, the Senior Lenders funded $12.0 million of the Bridge Loan and on January 7, 2022 the balance of $8.0 million was funded. The Series C Preferred offering closed on February 23, 2022 with ExxonMobil and the Senior Lenders, and concurrently, the Bridge Loan, and accrued interest, was paid in full. Also, on December 20, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to the Senior Credit Facility whereby GCEH agreed to issue to the Senior Lenders five-year warrants covering 5,017,008 shares of common stock of GCEH at the closing of the Series C Financing (Warrant Commitment Liability”). The Warrant Commitment Liability was in consideration for i) the 1%, or $4.1 million, consent premium payable from an earlier amendment to the Senior and Mezzanine Credit Facilities, ii) the Bridge Loan, and iii) as additional creditor fees for forbearance to the Senior Lenders and Mezzanine Lenders. The warrants have an exercise price of $2.25 per share and were issued on February 23, 2022 to the Senior Lenders, and the Senior Lenders purchased $20 million of the Series C Preferred.
The Senior Credit Facility bears interest at the rate of 12.5% per annum, payable quarterly. The principal of the Senior Credit Facility is due at maturity, provided that we must offer to prepay the senior loans with any proceeds of asset dispositions, borrowings other than permitted borrowings, proceeds from damage or losses at the refinery, and excess net cash flow. We have the right to prepay the senior loan in whole or in part with the payment of a prepayment premium. As additional consideration for the senior loans, certain of the Loan Parties issued membership interests to the Senior Lenders, which membership interests may provide the Senior Lenders with certain limited cash distributions (see below).
The Senior Credit Facility is secured by all of the assets of the applicable Loan Parties (including its membership interests in BKRF and the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery). The senior loans mature on November 4, 2026. The Senior Lenders have a right to accelerate the maturity date of the senior loans if, among other reasons, the retooling and repurposing of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is not substantially complete by August 31, 2022 (subject to extension for up to 90 days under certain circumstances), and the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery’s production does not meet certain project milestones by dates specified under the Senior Credit Facility.
On May 4, 2020 we also entered into a second credit agreement, dated May 4, 2020, with certain mezzanine lenders (the “Mezzanine Lenders”) pursuant to which the Mezzanine Lenders agreed to provide us with a $65 million secured term loan facility to be used to pay the costs of repurposing and starting up the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. The Mezzanine Credit Facility has been amended to provide $67.4 million of credit available to us as of February 23, 2022. The Mezzanine Lenders, for whom Orion Energy Partners TP Agent, LLC acts as administrative agent, consist of Orion Energy Partners, L.P., GCM Grosvenor and Voya Investment Management. On February 23, 2022, the Mezzanine Lenders assigned the Mezzanine Credit Facility and its rights to the Class C Units (see below) to GCEH, and GCEH subsequently fully funded the $67.4 million mezzanine loan. Accordingly, as of February 23, 2022 all Mezzanine Lenders have been replaced by GCEH, and GCEH hereafter is entitled to all of the payments required to be made under the mezzanine loans and all of the distributions payable to the holder of the Class C Units.
The Mezzanine Credit Facility bears interest at the rate of 15.0% per annum, payable quarterly, provided that we may defer interest to the extent we don’t not have sufficient cash to pay the interest, such deferred interest being added to principal. As additional consideration for the mezzanine loans, we have agreed to issue membership interest to the Mezzanine Lenders, now GCEH, in BKRF HCB, LLC, which interests were issued on February 23, 2022 upon the full funding of $67.4 million.
The mezzanine loans mature in November 2027. Principal of the mezzanine loans is due at maturity, provided that we must offer to prepay the loan with any excess net cash flow. We have the right to prepay the loan in whole or in part with the payment of a prepayment premium. The mezzanine loans are secured by the assets of the applicable Loan Parties.
As part of the Senior Credit Facility and the Mezzanine Credit Facility, we agreed to grant the Senior Lenders and GCEH, upon the assignment from the original Mezzanine Lenders, membership interests in BKRF HCB, LLC
, which membership interests will provide the Senior Lenders and GCEH with an interest in excess cash flows from the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery’s operations. These membership interests provide the Senior Lenders and GCEH with an indirect financial interest in the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. Other than certain limited approval rights, we have the right to manage the Loan Parties and the refinery, and the lenders have no voting rights. These membership interests are to be issued under the BKRF HCB, LLC Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement (the “BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement”). The BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement provides for three classes of membership interests (Units): (i) Class A Units, all of which are held by GCE Acquisitions, LLC as evidence of
our ownership of this subsidiary; (ii) Class B Units that were
issued to the Senior Lenders as we drew
down on the Senior Credit Facility (fully issued as of December 21, 2021) and (iii) Class C Units that were
issued to GCEH upon the funding of
the Mezzanine Credit Facility (fully issued as of February 23, 2022).
Until the later of (i) five years from the commercial operations date of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery and (ii) the date the Senior Lenders have received two times the loan amount under the credit facility (the “Termination Date”), the Senior Lenders, as holders of the Class B Units, are entitled to receive quarterly distributions of 25% of the free cash flow until the Senior Lenders have received (collectively, from these cash distributions plus principal and interest on the senior loans) an amount equal to a 2X multiple of invested capital (“MOIC”), or two times the amount of the senior loans, for a total of up to $674.8 million, and, if the Termination Date has not occurred, thereafter quarterly distributions of 5% of the free cash flow until the Termination Date. See Note E to the consolidated financial statements for additional details regarding the credit facility.
On February 23, 2022 GCEH replaced the original Mezzanine Lenders both as the lender of the mezzanine loan and as the holder of the Class C Units. Accordingly, under the BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement, as holders of the Class C Units GCEH is entitled to receive out of the distributions by BKRF Mezz Borrower not paid to the Class B Members, the following:
●
First, 80.0% of such distributions until GCEH has received cumulative payments (distributions and principal and interests on the $67.5 million mezzanine loan) equal to 2.0X MOIC;
●
Second, 65.0% of such distributions until GCEH has received cumulative payments equal to 3.0X MOIC;
●
Third, 50.0% of such distributions until GCEH has received cumulative payments equal to 4.0X MOIC;
●
Fourth, 30.0% of such distributions until GCEH has received cumulative payments equal to 99.0X MOIC.
Amendments to Credit Agreements:
The Senior Credit Facility and the Mezzanine Credit Facility were entered into on May 4, 2020 in order to fund the acquisition, development and construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. Since the two credit agreements were entered into, the scope of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery has both changed and expanded to include additional capabilities and equipment, which changes have affected certain of the assumptions made regarding the cost of installing, developing and constructing the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. Accordingly, the two Credit Agreements were amended on several occasions, and the amount of credit available under both the Senior Credit Facility and Mezzanine Credit Facility was increased to $337.6 million and $67.4 million, respectively.
On February 23, 2022, Amendment No. 8 modified a provision whereby the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery needs to achieve Substantial Completion, as defined under the Senior Credit Facility, no later than August 31, 2022, or an event of default occurs and the Senior Lenders have the right to accelerate the loan for immediate payment of all principal and interest accrued to that date. However, the Substantial Completion date of August 31, 2022 can be extended on a day-for-day basis depending on the number of days that the ExxonMobil Offtake Agreement commercial target date of October 15, 2022 is also extended, up to a total extension of 90 days. The amendment also requires a quarterly principal prepayment amount to achieve an agreed-upon end-of-quarter targeted debt balance designed to meet the full payment of the Senior Credit Facility by November 4, 2026. The Company is only obligated to pay this quarterly principal amount to achieve these targeted debt balances to the extent there is available cash under the specific calculations required in the Senior Credit Facility. Irrespective of the cash available from the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery operations, the full amount of the loan matures and is due on November 4, 2026. Additionally, the $35 million reserve requirement from Amendment No. 3 was eliminated by Amendment No. 8 in conjunction with the Series C Preferred Financing.
Effective as of February 23, 2022, the Senior Credit Facility was further amended to permit the Loan Parties to defer up to 3.50% per annum of the interest until the earlier of September 30, 2022 and the final completion of the retooling of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, with all deferred interest being added to principal. In addition, effective as of February 23, 2022, the parties agreed to various amendments to the representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default in the senior loan facility, including (i) the Company’s loan subsidiaries may enter into working capital facilities in an amount of up to $125 million without the Senior Lenders’ consent, and the Company agreed to use its commercially reasonable efforts to enter into a permitted working capital facility on or before June 30, 2022; (ii) the retooling of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery must be substantially complete by August 31, 2022 (subject to extension for up to 90 days as described above); and (iii) the final completion of the retooling of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery must be achieved by January 31, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported assets, liabilities, sales and expenses in the accompanying financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those that require the most subjective and complex judgments, often employing the use of estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
The Company’s most critical accounting policies and estimates that may materially impact the Company’s results of operations include:
Asset Retirement Obligations
- The Company recognizes liabilities which represent the fair value of a legal obligation to perform asset retirement activities, including those that are conditional on a future event, when the amount can be reasonably estimated. If a reasonable estimate cannot be made at the time the liability is incurred, we record the liability when sufficient information is available to estimate the liability’s fair value.
We have asset retirement obligations with respect to our refinery due to various legal obligations to clean and/or dispose of these assets at the time they are retired. However, the majority of these assets can be used for extended and indeterminate periods of time provided that they are properly maintained and/or upgraded. It is our practice and intent to continue to maintain these assets and make improvements based on technological advances. We also have obligations related to the required cleanout of the pipeline and terminal tanks
In order to determine fair value, management must make certain estimates and assumptions including, among other things, projected cash flows, a credit-adjusted risk-free rate and an assessment of market conditions that could significantly impact the estimated fair value of the asset retirement obligations. We believe the estimates selected, in each instance, represent our best estimate of future outcomes, but the actual outcomes could differ from the estimates selected.
Environmental Remediation Liabilities -
The Company accrues environmental and clean-up related costs of a non-capital nature when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Environmental liabilities represent the current estimated costs to investigate and remediate contamination at sites where we have environmental exposure. This estimate is based on assessments of the extent of the contamination, the selected remediation methodology and review of applicable environmental regulations, typically considering estimated activities and costs for 15 years, and up to 30 years if a longer period is believed reasonably necessary. Such estimates require judgment with respect to costs, time frame and extent of required remedial and clean-up activities. Accruals for estimated costs from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than completion of the remedial feasibility study and include, but are not limited to, costs to perform remedial actions and costs of machinery and equipment that are dedicated to the remedial actions and that do not have an alternative use. Such accruals are adjusted as further information develops or circumstances change. We discount environmental liabilities to their present value if payments are fixed or reliably determinable. Expenditures for equipment necessary for environmental issues relating to ongoing operations are capitalized.
Changes in laws and regulations and actual remediation expenses compared to historical experience could significantly impact our results of operations and financial position. We believe the estimates selected, in each instance, represent our best estimate of future outcomes, but the actual outcomes could differ from the estimates selected.
Fair Value of Class B Units -
The Company classifies the Class B units as mandatorily redeemable financial instruments in accordance with ASC 480. The Company has elected to record these financials at fair value pursuant to the fair value option in ASC 825-10. At each borrowing the Company will initially recognize the Class B Unit liability based on the issuance date fair value with an offset to the discount on the Senior Credit Agreement. The Company remeasures their Class B Units at fair value at each reporting date with changes recognized in other income/expense.
Fair Value of Warrant Commitment Liability -
The Company recognized a Warrant Commitment Liability as a freestanding instrument that is classified as a liability under ASC 480, as the commitment to issue the warrants represents a variable share settlement where the warrants to be issued vary based on occurrence of a future event.
This Warrant Commitment Liability was initially recognized at fair value and is remeasured at fair value at each reporting date until settled with changes in fair value recognized in earnings in other income/expense.
Recoverability of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
- The Company recognizes Goodwill during an acquisition when there is an excess of the fair value of consideration over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is allocated at the date of the business combination. Recognized goodwill pertains in part to the value of the expected synergies to be derived from combining the operations of the businesses we acquire including the value of the acquired workforce. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets may include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customers acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. It is possible that the judgments and estimates described above could change in future periods.
We use estimates, assumptions, and judgments when assessing the recoverability of goodwill and acquired intangible assets. We test for impairment on an annual basis as of December 31, or more frequently if a significant event or circumstance indicates impairment. We also evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of acquired intangible assets for changes in circumstances that warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. For purposes of assessing potential impairment of goodwill, we estimate the fair value of the reporting unit, based on our market capitalization, and compare this amount to the carrying value of the reporting unit. If we determine that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge would be required. We have determined that we operate as one reporting unit and may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicate that an impairment test on goodwill is required. The Company internally monitors business and market conditions for evidence of triggering events for goodwill and acquired intangible assets. Such events or changes in circumstances include, but are not limited to, a significant decrease in the fair value of the underlying asset or asset group, a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset or asset group is being used or in its physical condition, an accumulation of costs and resources in excess of the original expectation, or a significant change in the operations of the acquired assets or use of an asset or asset group. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and goodwill impairment for our reporting unit.
Results of Operations
Revenues.
As discussed above, until May 7, 2020 our activities were devoted solely to the acquisition and financing of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. Since our acquisition of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery on May 7, 2020, we have been engaged in converting and repositioning the former crude oil refinery into a renewable fuels refinery and in further developing our Camelina feedstock production supply chain. Accordingly, in fiscal 2020 and the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”) we did not engage in any activities that generated current revenues, except for a minimal amount of certified seed sales, and, as a result, we had no operating revenues in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020 from the renewable fuels refinery operations. The Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery currently is being retooled and converted from a crude oil refinery into a renewable fuels refinery and is not expected to commence operations until the second half of 2022. Therefore, we do not anticipate generating revenues from the operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery until that time.
General And Administrative Expenses and Facility Expenses.
General and administrative expense consists of expenses generally involving corporate overhead functions and operations. Our general and administrative expenses increased by $17.2 million, or 215%, from $8.0 million in fiscal 2020 to $25.2 million in fiscal 2021. This increase was due to higher payroll costs (we have hired over 60 new employees in 2021, many of whom are engaged in the construction and operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery), higher accounting and professional fees, higher insurance, information technology services and general office expenses arising from the ownership of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in 2022 as the development of the refinery progresses, and expenses will further increase once the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is fully operational. Facility expenses primarily consist of maintenance costs to keep the Bakersfield assets, purchased in May 2020, in an operational mode and expenses normally related to the operations of a refinery. The 2021 facility expense was $14.5 million, an increase of $11.2 million as compared to $3.3 million in 2020. General and administrative expenses also increased in part as a result of the additional corporate and facility expenses related to the two new subsidiaries (ATI and CCE) that the Company acquired in 2021, and to the new corporate office and research facility that SusOils leased in Great Falls, Montana, in 2021. These additional general and administrative expenses will increase in 2022 as these expenses are borne for an entire year.
Interest Income/Expense.
Our net fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 interest expenses consisted of accrued and paid interest of $2.8 million and $2.9 million, respectively. In fiscal 2020 we had $2.1 million of promissory notes outstanding as well as $151.5 million borrowed under our Senior Credit Facility. For fiscal 2021, we had $2.7 million in promissory notes outstanding and had a balance of $337.6 million borrowed from the Senior Credit Facility. Accordingly, our interest expense for these years represent interest accrued and paid on these amounts borrowed. We expect that our interest expenses will significantly increase as the company utilizes mezzanine financing to continue the construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. Applicable construction period interest costs will be capitalized into the project under the guidance of the current accounting standards.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative, Class B Units, Finance Charges and Warrant Commitment Liability
. In October of 2018 we entered into the Derivative Contract and made amendments through 2020. As part of the Derivative Contract, we recorded a gain from the change in fair value of the derivative of $5.5 million in 2020 as it was converted to a fixed payment. In May 2020 we entered into a Senior Credit Facility whereby we issued equity units in a subsidiary. We record these units at their fair value when they are issued or become issuable, and we remeasure the fair value of these units at the end of each reporting period. As of December 31, 2021 we determined that the fair value of the liability of the mandatorily redeemable instruments to be $21.6 million, which was an increase in fair value of $6.1 million, which was charged to other expenses. This compared to a charge of $2.0 million in 2020 for these equity units. In 2021, we also recognized a charge of $3.2 million related to our obligation to issue warrants to our Senior Lenders. The fair value of these warrants increased by $3.2 million from December 20, 2021, the date of our obligation, to December 31, 2021. We had no comparable change in fair value in 2020.
Net losses.
For 2021 we incurred an operating loss of $40.7 million, an increase of $29.0 million from our operating loss of $11.7 million in 2020. Our operating loss increased because of the substantial increase in our general and administrative expenses (including facilities costs), the costs related to the retooling of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, and our activities in developing the Camelina farming operations and feedstock program. Our total net loss for the year 2021 was $51.4 million, an increase of $40.8 million or 385% compared to the $10.6 million loss in 2020. Our net loss for 2021 increased over 2020 primarily due to our full year work effort retooling the refinery and our expanded activities at the refinery, our expanding feedstock program, acquisition integration efforts and increased charges from the change in fair value of both our Class B units and Warrant Commitment Liability for an increased charge of $7.3 million. We expect to continue to incur losses in 2022 until we begin operations at our renewable fuels refinery which we expect in the second half of 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $23.4 million of cash on hand, of which $2.9 million was short-term unrestricted cash, $8.0 million was short-term restricted cash and $12.5 million was long-term restricted cash. As of December 31, 2020 we had approximately $39 million of cash, of which $3.4 was short-term unrestricted cash, $12.9 million was short-term restricted cash and $22.7 million was long-term restricted cash. Long-term restricted cash represents cash that we expect to spend on the construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery and which expenditures will be capitalized, and such amount cannot be used for general corporate purposes. Short-term restricted cash represents cash that we expect to spend on the operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery and which expenditures will not be capitalized, and such amount cannot be used for general corporate purposes. On December 31, 2021 we had working capital of negative $81.7 million compared to negative working capital of $5.8 million at the end of fiscal 2020.
The Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is currently being retooled and converted from a crude oil refinery into a renewable fuels refinery. The construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is expected to be completed, and production of renewable fuel products at the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is expected to commence in the second half of 2022. Based on our existing agreements for the sale of renewable diesel and other renewable products that the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery will produce, once the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery becomes fully operational, we anticipate that we will generate sufficient cash to fund all of our operating expenses. However, until the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery commences production, we will continue to incur material operating expenses without generating any refinery operating revenues and, accordingly, we will continue to incur significant negative cash flow.
In order to fund the cost of acquiring the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, converting the existing refinery into a renewable refinery, and paying all operating expenses during the preoperational period, in 2020 our BKRF OCB, LLC subsidiary entered into the secured Senior Credit Facility with the Senior Lenders under which, as of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed $337.6 million. Also, in 2020 our BKRF HCB, LLC subsidiary entered into a secured Mezzanine Credit Facility with the Mezzanine Lenders under which we most recently had the ability to borrow up to $67.4 million. On December 20, 2021, our Senior Lenders agreed to provide a Bridge Loan of up to $20 million, of which $12 million was funded as of December 31, 2021, to provide working capital until our contemplated preferred share financing with ExxonMobil and the Senior Lenders could be completed. On February 23, 2022 GCEH assumed all of the rights and obligations of the Mezzanine Lenders under the Mezzanine Credit Facility, and accordingly loaned $67.4 million to BKRF HCB, LLC as the lender under the Mezzanine Credit Facility. Accordingly, GCEH now is the mezzanine lender to BKRF HCB, LLC. The proceeds from the Senior Credit Facility and the Mezzanine Credit Facility have been, and will continue to be used to fund the pre-operational expenses and the capital costs of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery.
The Senior Credit Facility bears interest at the rate of 12.5% per annum, payable quarterly. Principal payments are required to be made under the Senior Credit Facility beginning after the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery has commercial operations. The Senior Credit Facility matures on November 4, 2026. The Mezzanine Credit Facility bears interest at the rate of 15.0% per annum, payable quarterly, provided that BKRF HCB, LLC may defer up to 2.5% interest to the extent BKRF HCB, LLC does not have sufficient cash to pay the interest (any deferred interest will be added to principal). Borrowings under the Mezzanine Credit Facility are due at maturity in November 2027. As additional consideration, the Senior Lenders were issued Class B Units. The Class B Units represent membership interest in our subsidiary, BKRF HCB, LLC and entitle the holders thereof to preferential cash distributions. The Class B Units will not affect our liquidity until the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery commences operations, which is expected in the second half of 2022. However, since the holders of the Class B Units will be entitled to certain priority cumulative cash distributions, if any, that may be made in the future from the operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, distributions made on behalf of the Class B Units will reduce the amount of distributions that we may be entitled to receive in the future from the operations of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery.
On December 20, 2021 GCEH entered into the MOU with ExxonMobil whereby ExxonMobil agreed to purchase $125 million of a new series of preferred shares by January 31, 2022. In conjunction with the MOU, the Senior Lenders expressed interest to also purchase $20 million of the contemplated preferred shares on the same terms as ExxonMobil. Additionally, the Senior Lenders committed to fund an additional Bridge Loan of $20.0 million, under equivalent borrowing terms as the Senior Credit Facility, until the financing transaction contemplated under the MOU was completed. On December 21, 2021, the Senior Lenders funded $12.0 million of the Bridge Loan and on January 7, 2022 the balance of $8.0 million was funded. The Series C Preferred offering, which was delayed past January 31, 2022, closed on February 23, 2022, and concurrently the Bridge Loan, and accrued interest, was paid in full. Also, on December 20, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to the Senior Credit Facility whereby GCEH committed to the Senior Lenders to issue warrants covering 5,017,008 shares of common stock of GCEH at an exercise price to be determined based on a market pricing mechanism upon the completion of the Series C Financing for a term of five years from that date (the “Lender Warrant Commitment”). The Warrant Commitment Liability was in consideration for i) the 1%, or $4.1 million, consent premium payable from an earlier amendment to the Senior and Mezzanine Credit Facilities, ii) the Bridge Loan, and iii) as additional creditor fees for forbearance to the Senior Lenders and Mezzanine Lenders. The Warrant Commitment Liability was settled on February 23, 2022 through the issuance of five-year warrants (the “GCEH Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 5,017,008 shares of our Common Stock at an exercise price of $2.25 per share. Additionally, on February 23, 2022, the Senior Lenders purchased $20 million of the Series C Preferred.
On February 23, 2022, we raised $145 million from the sale of shares of our newly created Series C Preferred to ExxonMobil and the Senior Lenders. The net offering proceeds of the Series C Preferred offering (after payment of $9.3 million of offering expenses and other related fees and costs) were allocated as follows: (i) $20 million to repay the Bridge Loan, (ii) $77.4 million (which includes $67.4 million funded under the Mezzanine Credit Facility) to fund the construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, (iii) $18 million for a debt service reserve account, and (iv) the balance for use by us as working capital, including the further development of our Camelina feedstock program.
Based on our construction budget (including the purchase orders we have issued for the required equipment) and on our projections of our future operating expenses, we anticipated that the $405 million provided to BKRF HCB, LLC under the Senior Credit Facility and the Mezzanine Credit Facility, together with the funds available under the Series C Financing would be sufficient to fund our projected capital expenditures and operating expenses at the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery until the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery becomes operational. However, because of the uncertainty around the cost of change orders to the refinery, the impact of the loss of revenues from the refinery arising from the unexpected delay in the completion of construction, and the amount and timing of certain credits due to us, we now believe that we will need additional capital to fund certain of our liquidity requirements.
A portion of the net proceeds from the Series C Preferred financing are being used to fund our corporate operating expenses. However, the completion of the construction of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery has been delayed, and production at the refinery is now not expected to commence until the second half of 2022. The delay in the commencement of production at the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery will result in a loss of anticipated revenues. As a result, we currently expect that we will need additional funds to meet the Company’s projected commitments over the next twelve months. Our financial commitments during the next twelve months include a fixed payment obligation that arose from the settlement of a derivative contract that we amended on April 20, 2020, which requires us to pay $20.2 million in six equal monthly payments of $3.375 million beginning in May 2022 from the cash generated by the refinery’s operations. Since the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery will not be operational and we will not generate revenues when the payments under the derivative contract are required to begin in May 2022, we have initiated discussions with the holder of this unsecured obligation to defer the repayment of this obligation until the refinery’s operations commence. No assurance can be given that we will be able to renegotiate this obligation on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
In order to bridge the anticipated cash shortfall resulting from the delayed commencement of the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery, we intend to pursue raising additional debt or equity funding. Although we have identified possible sources for some or all of the additional capital, we do not currently have commitments from any third parties to provide us with the additional capital. In the event that we do not obtain the necessary additional bridge financing, we will have to revise our short-term operating plans, reduce our anticipated investments in camelina production and in infrastructure improvements, and otherwise reduce our operating expenses. No assurance can be given that these short-term cash flow adjustments will be successful.
Our transition to profitability is dependent upon, among other things, the future commercialization of the renewable fuel products that we intend to produce at the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery. In order to ensure that we have a buyer for the renewable diesel produced at our renewable refinery, we have entered into the Offtake Agreement with ExxonMobil under which ExxonMobil has agreed to purchase a minimum of 105 million gallons per year of renewable diesel from the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery for a period of five years following the date that the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery commences commercial operations. The price of the renewable diesel to be sold under the Offtake Agreement is based on a combination of a fixed price and a variable price. We have also entered into the Term Purchase Agreement with ExxonMobil under which ExxonMobil has the right to purchase the additional renewable diesel that is not sold to ExxonMobil under the Offtake Agreement. The revenues we expect to receive under the Offtake Agreement once the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery is fully operational, together with a potential line of credit for purchasing feedstock, and
with our other projected sources of revenues, are expected to fund our anticipated working capital and liquidity needs.
Once completed, the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery will be able to produce renewable diesel from various renewable feedstocks, such as Camelina oil produced from our patented Camelina varieties, soybean oil, used cooking oil, inedible animal fat, and other vegetable oils. We believe that one of our strategic advantages is that a significant portion of the feedstock expected to be used at our renewable refinery will be Camelina oil derived from the Camelina grain produced for the Bakersfield Renewable Fuels Refinery using our patented Camelina varieties. However, we anticipate that we will need additional funding for general corporate purposes, to grow our certified Camelina seeds, to enter into agreements with farmers, and to otherwise ramp up the cultivation and production of Camelina. In addition, we will also have to purchase significant amounts of feedstock from which we will produce renewable diesel, which purchase price we may have to pay in advance. Our goal is to fund the foregoing feedstock purchase and production costs through a feedstock supply credit line we expect to obtain from one or more commercial financial institutions. Based on our current Camelina production expectations and the projected costs of purchasing feedstock, we expect that we will have to obtain a line of credit for $100 million to $125 million. Any such line of credit is expected to be secured by the feedstock that we purchase and by the accounts receivables generated from our renewable diesel sales.
To the extent that we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity securities, our stockholders will experience dilution, and the terms of the newly issued securities could include certain rights that would adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Furthermore, if these new securities are convertible or are accompanied by the issuance of warrants to purchase shares of our common stock, our current stockholders may experience substantial dilution. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising debt or equity funding or that any such financing will be available, available on favorable or acceptable terms, or in the amounts needed. Additionally, while the potential economic impact brought on by the current geopolitical developments, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the continuing impacts of the coronavirus pandemic are difficult to assess or predict, the significant impact that these developments have had on the global financial markets, on the costs of raw materials we need, and on our own stock trading price, could reduce our ability to access additional capital, which would negatively impact our short-term and longer-term liquidity.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation and changing prices have had minimal effect on our continuing operations over our two most recent fiscal years.