ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report. In addition to the historical information, certain statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of certain events may differ significantly from those projected in such forward-looking statements. Refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report for additional information regarding forward-looking statements.
Overview
We own and operate a diversified entertainment platform, consisting of a portfolio of gaming assets that focus on casino and distributed gaming operations (including gaming in our branded taverns). We conduct our business through four reportable segments: Nevada Casino Resorts, Nevada Locals Casinos, Maryland Casino Resort and Distributed Gaming.
Our Nevada Casino Resorts segment is comprised of destination casino resort properties offering a variety of food and beverage outlets, entertainment venues and other amenities. Our Nevada Locals Casinos segment is comprised of casino properties that cater to local customers who generally live within a five-mile radius, and typically have no or a limited number of hotel rooms and offer fewer food and beverage outlets or other amenities, with revenues primarily generated from slot machine play. Our Maryland Casino Resort segment is comprised of our Rocky Gap casino resort. Our Distributed Gaming segment is comprised of the operation of slot machines and amusement devices in approximately 1,100 non-casino locations, such as restaurants, bars, taverns, convenience stores, liquor stores and grocery stores, across Nevada and Montana, with a limited number of slot machines in each location, as well as the operation of branded taverns targeting local patrons located primarily in the greater Las Vegas, Nevada metropolitan area.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenues
The $402.4 million, or 58%, increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year resulted from increases of $289.6 million, $55.7 million, $38.4 million and $18.7 million in gaming, food and beverage, room, and other revenues, respectively. The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a full year of operations, an increase in occupancy of our hotel rooms for certain of our casino properties and the easing of the COVID-19 mitigation measures, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020. Our Distributed Gaming operations in Montana and Nevada resumed on May 4, 2020 and June 4, 2020, respectively (although our tavern locations became subject to subsequent closure orders in the third quarter of 2020), and our casino properties in Nevada and Maryland reopened on June 4, 2020 and June 19, 2020, respectively.
The $279.3 million, or 29%, decrease in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted from decreases of $102.1 million, $90.9 million, $60.8 million and $25.5 million in gaming, food and beverage, room, and other revenues, respectively, primarily due to mandated temporary property closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations, and the limitations placed on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
Operating Expenses
The $181.4 million, or 43%, increase in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year
resulted from increases of $141.2 million, $26.3 million, $8.7 million and $5.2 million in gaming, food and beverage, room, and other expenses, respectively. The increase in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in occupancy due to a full year of operations coupled with the easing of COVID-19 mitigation measures. In the prior year, our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020, as discussed above.
The $159.5 million, or 28%, decrease in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted from decreases of $59.9 million, $67.5 million, $22.6 million and $9.5 million in gaming, food and beverage, room, and other expenses, respectively. These operating expense decreases primarily reflect the impact of mandated temporary property closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the various mitigating actions we took to preserve liquidity, including delaying material capital expenditures, reducing operating expenses and implementing a cost reduction program with respect to discretionary expenditures.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The $38.8 million, or 21%, increase in selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a full year of operations. In the prior year, our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020, as discussed above, which resulted in a lower payroll and other expenses. SG&A expenses are comprised of marketing and advertising, utilities, building rent, maintenance contracts, corporate office overhead, information technology, legal, accounting, third-party service providers, executive compensation, share-based compensation, payroll expenses and payroll taxes.
The $46.2 million, or 20%, decrease in SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the impact of mandated temporary property closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decrease in payroll, rent and other expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
The decrease in depreciation and amortization expenses of $17.7 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily related to long-lived assets acquired in connection with the American Casino and Entertainment Properties LLC acquisition being fully depreciated and amortized. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not acquire any amortizable intangible assets and our property and equipment additions were not significant.
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses of $7.8 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the depreciation of the assets related to the remodel of The STRAT and the amortization of intangible assets related to the Laughlin Acquisition.
Loss on Disposal of Assets
Loss on disposal of assets in the amount of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to disposals of property and equipment by our Distributed Gaming segment and sales of used equipment by our Maryland Casino Resort.
Loss on disposal of assets in the amount of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by disposals of property and equipment by our Nevada Casino Resorts segment.
Preopening Expenses
Preopening expenses consist of labor, food, utilities, training, initial licensing, rent and organizational costs incurred in connection with the opening of tavern and casino locations. Preopening expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were primarily related to our planned expansion into new markets for our Distributed Gaming segment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, preopening expenses were primarily related to costs incurred in the opening of new taverns in the Las Vegas Valley.
Non-Operating Expense, Net
Non-operating expense, net decreased by $65.3 million, or 94%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to the recognition of non-operating income of $60.0 million in connection with the execution of an amendment to our agreement with William Hill providing for certain payments arising from the acquisition of William Hill PLC by Caesars Entertainment, Inc. discussed in “Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report. In addition, interest expense, net, decreased by $6.3 million, or 9%,
for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the $122.0 million prepayment of our term loan borrowings, offset by a non-cash charge in the amount of $1.0 million discussed in “Note 6 - Debt” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report.
Non-operating expense, net decreased by $18.4 million, or 21%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $9.2 million decrease in loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, $5.1 million decrease in interest expense and $4.1 million decrease in loss related to change in fair value of derivative.
Income Taxes
Income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in the amounts of $0.4 million and $0.1 million, respectively, and income tax benefit in the amount of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted primarily from the change in valuation allowance. The effective tax rates were 0.27%, (0.04)% and 4.50% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which differed from the federal tax rate of 21% due primarily to the change in valuation allowance.
We evaluated all available positive and negative evidence related to our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. We considered the expected future taxable income (and losses) and deductions from existing deferred tax assets and liabilities, net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards, and other factors in reaching the conclusion that the deferred tax assets are not currently expected to be realized, and that therefore, the valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets required adjustment.
We recognize penalties and interest related to uncertain tax benefits in the provision for income taxes.
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDA by Reportable Segment
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use Adjusted EBITDA because it is the primary metric used by our chief operating decision makers and investors in measuring both our past and future expectations of performance. Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to the users of our financial statements by excluding specific expenses and gains that we believe are not indicative of our core operating results. Furthermore, our annual performance plan used to determine compensation for our executive officers and employees is tied to the Adjusted EBITDA metric. It is also a measure of operating performance widely used in the gaming industry. The presentation of this additional information is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do.
We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, acquisition and severance expenses, preopening and related expenses, gain or loss on disposal of assets, share-based compensation expenses, change in non-cash lease expense, change in fair value of derivative, and other non-cash charges that are deemed to be not indicative of our core operating results, calculated before corporate overhead (which is not allocated to each reportable segment).
The following table presents our total revenues and Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segment and a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)Preopening and related expenses consist of labor, food, utilities, training, initial licensing, rent and organizational costs incurred in connection with the opening of tavern and casino locations.
Nevada Casino Resorts
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased by $139.1 million, or 55%, and $91.6 million, or 159%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a full year of operations, an increase in occupancy of our hotel rooms and the easing of the COVID-19 mitigation measures, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020 which lasted until June 4, 2020.
The $158.9 million, or 39%, decrease in revenues and $57.7 million, or 50%, decrease in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from mandated temporary property closures and the limitations placed on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
Nevada Locals Casinos
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased by $46.8 million, or 41%, and $34.4 million, or 75%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a full year of operations, an increase in demand for gaming and a related increase in occupancy of our hotel rooms, and the easing of the COVID-19 mitigation measures, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020 which lasted until June 4, 2020.
The $22.7 million, or 17%, decrease in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from mandated temporary property closures and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure. Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $2.3 million, or 5%, primarily due to cost saving measures implemented in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Maryland Casino Resort
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased by $26.5 million, or 51%, and $11.6 million, or 77%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a full year of operations, an increase in demand for gaming and a related increase in occupancy of our hotel rooms, and the easing of the COVID-19 mitigation measures, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020 which lasted until June 19, 2020.
The $18.5 million, or 26%, decrease in revenues and $5.3 million, or 26%, decrease in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from mandated temporary property closures and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
Distributed Gaming
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased by $189.3 million, or 68%, and $60.3 million, or 224%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a full year of operations and the easing of the COVID-19 mitigation measures, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020. Our Distributed Gaming operations in Montana and Nevada resumed on May 4, 2020 and June 4, 2020, respectively (although our tavern locations became subject to subsequent closure orders in the third quarter of 2020).
The $79.0 million, or 22%, decrease in revenues and $23.7 million, or 47%, decrease in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from mandated temporary property closures and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of segment revenues (or Adjusted EBITDA margin) was 38%, 50%, 34% and 19% for Nevada Casino Resorts, Nevada Locals Casinos, Maryland Casino and Distributed Gaming, respectively, as compared to Adjusted EBITDA margins of 23%, 40%, 29% and 10%, and Adjusted EBITDA margins of 28%, 32%, 29% and 14% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our Adjusted EBITDA margins for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In the event our Adjusted EBITDA margins demonstrate new trends and developments in future periods, we may be required to identify additional reportable segments in future filings. In addition, the lower Adjusted EBITDA margins in our Distributed Gaming segment reflect the fixed and variable amounts paid to third parties under our space lease and participation agreements as expenses.
Refer to “Overview - Operations” in Part I, Item 1: Business and “Note 14 - Segment Information” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for additional discussion on our segments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $220.5 million in cash and cash equivalents. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements during the next 12 months.
Our operating results and performance depend significantly on national, regional and local economic conditions and their effect on consumer spending. Declines in consumer spending would cause revenues generated by our operations to be adversely affected.
To further enhance our liquidity position or to finance any future acquisition or other business investment initiatives, we may obtain additional financing, which could consist of debt, convertible debt or equity financing from public and/or private credit and capital markets.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities was $295.8 million, $36.7 million and $113.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $259.1 million, or 706%, increase in operating cash flows in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily related to a full year of operations in 2021, whereas in the prior year our operations were subject to mandatory property closure requirements commencing in March 2020 as discussed under “Overview - Impact of COVID-19” in Part I, Item 1: Business and the timing of working capital spending. In addition, net cash provided by operating activities reflects a $60 million payment received in the third quarter of 2021 from Caesars Entertainment, Inc. pursuant to our agreement with William Hill discussed in “Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report. The $77.2 million, or 68%, decrease in operating cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was attributable primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above.
Net cash used in investing activities was $28.9 million, $35.9 million and $256.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $7.0 million, or 20%, decrease in net cash used in investing activities in 2021 over 2020 reflects management’s continued focus on preservation of liquidity and deferral of material capital expenditures in light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The $220.2 million, or 86%, decrease in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was attributable to the closing of the Laughlin Acquisition and related capital expenditures made in 2019, and the deferral of material capital expenditures in light of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities was $149.9 million and $9.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and net cash provided by financing activities was $137.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $140.9 million, or 1,566%, increase in net cash used in financing activities in 2021 over 2020 primarily related to the repayment of outstanding term loan borrowings with a principal amount of $122.0 million (refer to “Note 6 - Debt” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report), $10.6 million in open market repurchases of our common stock pursuant to the share repurchase program, repayments of notes payable and finance leases, and tax withholding on option exercises and the vesting of RSUs. We also paid $0.7 million for debt modification costs and fees in connection with the increase of the size and extension of the maturity date for our Revolving Credit Facility discussed in “Note 6 - Debt” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report. The $146.8 million, or 107%, change in cash flows from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily related to cash spent on repayments of notes payable and finance leases, and a repurchase of shares of common stock under our share repurchase program in 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to $375.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Unsecured Notes offset by $220.0 million of repayments under our Credit Facility.
Long-Term Debt
For information regarding our Credit Facility and Indenture refer to “Note 6 - Debt” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report.
Share Repurchase Program
On March 12, 2019, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $25.0 million worth of shares of common stock, subject to available liquidity, general market and economic conditions, alternate uses for the capital and other factors, and on August 3, 2021, our Board of Directors increased the March 12, 2019 authorization to $50.0 million. Share repurchases may be made from time to time in open market transactions, block trades or in private transactions in accordance with applicable securities laws and regulations and other legal requirements, including compliance with our finance agreements. There is no minimum number of shares that we are required to repurchase and the repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
On December 22, 2020, we repurchased 50,000 shares of our common stock from Lyle A. Berman, a former independent non-employee member of our Board of Directors, pursuant to our share repurchase program at a price of $19.00 per share, resulting
in a charge to accumulated deficit for $1.0 million. This transaction was approved by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors prior to being executed.
In December 2021, we repurchased 226,485 shares of our common stock pursuant to the share repurchase program in open market transactions at an average price of $46.87 per share, resulting in a charge to accumulated deficit of $10.6 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $39.4 million of remaining share repurchase availability under our August 3, 2021 authorization.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
The outcome of the following specific matters, including our commitments and contingencies, may also affect our liquidity.
Commitments, Capital Spending and Development
We perform on-going refurbishment and maintenance at our facilities, of which certain maintenance costs are capitalized if such improvement or refurbishment extends the life of the related asset, while other maintenance costs that do not so qualify are expensed as incurred. The commitment of capital and the related timing thereof are contingent upon, among other things, negotiation of final agreements and receipt of approvals from the appropriate regulatory bodies. We intend to fund such capital expenditures through our operating cash flows and Revolving Credit Facility.
Refer to “Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for additional information regarding commitments and contingencies that may also affect our liquidity.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Represents estimated interest payments on our outstanding term loan borrowings under our Credit Facility based on interest rates as of December 31, 2021 until maturity, as well as interest on our 2026 Unsecured Notes and notes payable.
(2)Includes total operating lease interest obligations of $55.1 million.
(3)Includes total finance lease interest obligations of $2.5 million.
(4)Represents obligations related to license agreements.
Other Opportunities
We may investigate and pursue expansion opportunities in our existing or new markets from time to time. Such expansions will be influenced and determined by a number of factors, which may include licensing availability and approval, suitable investment opportunities and availability of acceptable financing. Investigation and pursuit of such opportunities may require us to make substantial investments or incur substantial costs, which we may fund through cash flows from operations or borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. To the extent such sources of funds are not sufficient, we may also seek to raise such additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or from other sources. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available or that, if available, such financing will be obtainable on terms favorable to us. Moreover, we can provide no assurances that the investigation or pursuit of an opportunity will result in a completed transaction.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The SEC has defined critical accounting policies as those that are most important to the presentation of the financial position and results of operations, and which require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. We have identified our critical accounting policies that meet this definition below. Other key accounting policies that involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions are discussed in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, based upon information presently available; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2021, the value of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets was $158.4 million and $46.8 million, respectively. As discussed in “Note 4 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report, we concluded that there was no impairment of our goodwill and intangible assets as of December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment charges to our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets of $27.1 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
We test our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets comprised of trade names for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year, and whenever events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. When performing testing for impairment, we either conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, or elect to bypass this qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative test. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider both positive and negative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry events, financial performance and other changes, and make a determination of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the qualitative factors, we determine that it is more likely than not the asset is impaired, we then perform a quantitative test in which the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The fair value of our trade names is estimated using the income approach to valuation at each of our reporting units.
The estimation of fair value for both goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires management to make critical estimates, judgments and assumptions, such as: the valuation methodology, the estimated future cash flows for each of our reporting units, the discount rate used to calculate the present value of such cash flows, our current valuation multiple and multiples of comparable publicly traded companies, and royalty rate to be applied to valuation of our trade names. Application of alternative estimates and assumptions could produce significantly different results, especially with regards to estimated future cash flows, as they are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from such estimates. Cash flow estimates are unpredictable and inherently uncertain, since they are based on the current regulatory, political and economic climates, recent operating information and projections. Such estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, competition, events affecting various forms of travel and access to our properties, and other factors. If our estimates of future cash flows are not met or if there are changes in significant assumptions and judgments used in the estimation process, including the discount rate and market multiple, we may have to record impairment charges in the future.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets at Colorado Belle
As of December 31, 2021, the balance of long-lived assets at Colorado Belle was $32.5 million. As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the operations of the Colorado Belle remain suspended. Since we review the carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable, suspension of this casino resort property’s operations qualified as an indicator that impairment may exist related to our long-lived assets at Colorado Belle. As discussed in “Note 3 - Property and Equipment” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report, the results of interim and annual assessments conducted during the year did not indicate an impairment of the long-lived assets at Colorado Belle as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recoverability of a long-lived asset is evaluated by comparing the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to its carrying amount. If the undiscounted estimated future cash flows exceed the carrying amount, no impairment is
indicated. If the undiscounted estimated future cash flows do not exceed the carrying amount, impairment is recorded based on the difference between the asset’s estimated fair value and its carrying amount. To estimate fair values, we generally use market comparables, when available, or a discounted cash flow model. The estimation of fair value utilizing a discounted cash flow model requires management to make critical estimates, judgments and assumptions with regards to estimated future cash flows, as they are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from such estimates. Cash flow estimates are unpredictable and inherently uncertain, since they are based on the current regulatory, political and economic climates, recent operating information and projections. Such estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, competition, events affecting various forms of travel and access to our properties, and other factors. If our estimates of future cash flows are not met or if there are changes in significant assumptions and judgments used in the estimation process, we may have to record impairment charges in the future.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Regulation and Taxes
The casino and distributed gaming industries are subject to extensive regulation by state gaming authorities. Changes in applicable laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on us.
The gaming industry represents a significant source of tax revenues to regulators. From time to time, various federal and state legislators and officials have proposed changes in tax law, or in the administration of such law, affecting the gaming industry. It is not possible to determine the likelihood of possible changes in tax law or in the administration of such law. Such changes, if adopted, could have a material adverse effect on our future financial position, results of operations, cash flows and prospects. Refer to the “Regulation” section included in Part I, Item 1: Business of this Annual Report for further discussion of applicable regulations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.