Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been reported previously in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021, under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We believe our financial results reflect the significant market demand for our offerings and the value that we provide to the broader healthcare ecosystem. For the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Revenue grew 35% to $745.4 million from $550.7 million.
•Net loss was $25.3 million compared to net loss of $293.6 million. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was mainly driven by $92.1 million of stock-based compensation expense and payroll tax expense related to the Founders Awards made in connection with our IPO and $15.1 million provision for income taxes principally related to the establishment of a full valuation allowance of $52.4 million against our net deferred tax assets, partially offset by windfall tax benefits from stock-based awards. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly driven by $383.4 million of stock-based compensation expense and payroll tax expense related to the Founders Awards made in connection with our IPO and a $41.7 million charge related to a charitable stock donation in support of our philanthropic endeavors.
•Adjusted EBITDA was $229.6 million up from $203.4 million.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, information about why we consider Adjusted EBITDA useful and a discussion of the material risks and limitations of this measure, please see “Key Financial and Operating Metrics-Non-GAAP Financial Measures" included within this Part II, Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19
GoodRx continues to closely monitor how the spread of COVID-19 is affecting its employees, customers and business operations. The number of Monthly Active Consumers decreased and our prescription transactions offering experienced a decline in activity in the second quarter of 2020 as compared to the first quarter of 2020 as many consumers avoided visiting healthcare professionals and pharmacies in-person, which we believe had a similar effect across the industry. The number of Monthly Active Consumers then increased starting from the third quarter of 2020 as the number of physician visits increased and as consumers partially resumed their interaction with the healthcare system. Even though we saw improved activity in our prescription transactions offering subsequent to the second quarter of 2020, we believe COVID-19 continues to have an adverse impact on the growth of our prescription transactions offering, due to the cumulative impact of lower healthcare utilization for almost two years since the pandemic began, and continued improvement in future periods remains uncertain. Any decrease in the number of consumers seeking to fill prescriptions could negatively impact demand for and use of certain of our offerings, particularly our prescription and subscription offerings, which would have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
For additional information, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-A pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease in the United States, including the outbreak of COVID-19, could impact our business.”
Seasonality
We typically experience stronger consumer demand during the first and fourth quarters of each year, which coincide with generally higher consumer healthcare spending, doctor office visits, annual benefit enrollment season, and seasonal cold and flu trends. In addition, we may experience stronger demand for our pharma manufacturer solutions offering during the fourth quarter of each year, which coincides with pharma manufacturers' annual budgetary spending patterns. This seasonality may impact revenue and sales and marketing expense. The rapid growth of our business may have masked these trends to date, and we expect the impact of seasonality to be more pronounced in the future. In 2020 and 2021, we saw the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic further disrupt these trends and may continue in future periods.
Initial Public Offering
On September 25, 2020, we completed our IPO by issuing 28.6 million shares of our Class A common stock at a price to the public of $33.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds to us of $886.9 million, after deducting the underwriting discount of $52.5 million and offering expenses of $4.9 million. Additionally, certain existing stockholders sold an aggregate of 11.2 million shares.
Private Placement
On September 25, 2020, we completed the sale of 3.0 million shares of our Class A common stock at a purchase price of $33.00 per share to SLP Geology Aggregator, L.P., resulting in proceeds to us of $100.0 million.
Recent Developments
For a summary of recent developments, refer to Note 18 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
We use Monthly Active Consumers, subscription plans and Adjusted EBITDA to assess our performance, make strategic and offering decisions and build our financial projections. The number of Monthly Active Consumers and subscription plans are key indicators of the scale of our consumer base and a gauge for our marketing and engagement efforts. We believe these operating metrics reflect our scale, growth and engagement with consumers.
Monthly Active Consumers
Our Monthly Active Consumers includes consumers we acquired through the acquisitions of RxSaver (acquired in April 2021) and Scriptcycle (acquired in August 2020), beginning in the third quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020, respectively. RxSaver Monthly Active Consumers are estimated due to incomplete consumer information.
Subscription Plans
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure we use to assess our financial performance and is also used for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to investors, analysts and other interested parties because it can assist in providing a more consistent and comparable overview of our operations across our historical financial periods. In addition, this measure is frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate and assess performance.
We define Adjusted EBITDA for a particular period as net loss or income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and as further adjusted, as applicable, for acquisition related expenses, cash bonuses to vested option holders, stock-based compensation expense, payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation, loss on extinguishment of debt, financing related expenses, loss on abandonment and impairment of operating lease assets, charitable stock donation and other income or expense, net. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures and are presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered as alternatives or substitutes to financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. These measures have certain limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations that are necessary to run our business. Other companies, including other companies in our industry, may not use these measures or may calculate these measures differently than as presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)Financing related expenses include third party fees related to proposed financings.
(2)Acquisition related expenses include third party fees for actual or planned acquisitions, including related legal, consulting and other expenditures, and as applicable, retention bonuses to employees related to acquisitions and change in fair value of contingent consideration.
(3)Non-cash expenses related to equity-based compensation programs, which vary from period to period depending on various factors including the timing, number and the valuation of awards.
(4)Non-cash expense related to a donation of 1.1 million shares of our Class A common stock that was made to a charitable foundation in the year ended December 31, 2020.
(5)Non-cash loss on the abandonment and impairment of operating lease assets related to certain office space that was abandoned or subleased.
Adjusted EBITDA increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $229.6 million, compared to $203.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as our business continued to grow. Adjusted EBITDA Margin decreased from 36.9% to 30.8% due primarily to continued investments in product development and technology, an increase in sales and marketing spend, partially since we proactively reduced advertising spend at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, investments in our general and administrative infrastructure as we continued to operate as a public company for the full year in 2021 as compared to a partial year in 2020, and an increase in cost of revenue relative to revenue due primarily to offering mix.
We expect our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to fluctuate primarily based on the level of our investments in sales and marketing and product development and technology relative to changes in revenue.
We generally expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing in the near-term, but will continue to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on our business and actively manage our sales and marketing spend, including investment in consumer acquisition, which is largely variable, as market conditions change. We also intend to continue to invest in product development and technology to continue to improve our platform, introduce new offerings and scale existing ones. Additionally, we expect to continue to invest in our general and administrative infrastructure to support our operation as a public company.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue is primarily derived from prescription transactions revenue that is generated when pharmacies fill prescriptions for consumers, and from other revenue streams such as our subscription offerings, pharma manufacturer solutions, and our telehealth offerings. All of our revenue has been generated in the United States.
•Prescription transactions revenue: Consists primarily of revenue generated from PBMs, or customers, when a prescription is filled with a GoodRx code provided through our platform. The majority of our contracts with PBMs provide for fees that represent a percentage of the fees that PBMs charge to the pharmacy, and a minority of our contracts provide for a fixed fee per transaction. Our percentage of fee contracts often also include a minimum fixed fee per transaction. We expect the revenue contribution from contracts with fixed fee arrangements to remain largely
stable over the medium term, and do not expect that changes in revenue contribution from fixed fee versus percentage of fee arrangements will materially impact our revenue. Certain contracts also provide that the amount of fees we receive is based on the volume of prescriptions filled each month.
•Subscription revenue: Consists of revenue from our Gold and Kroger Savings subscription offerings. Subscription revenue is disclosed separately from other revenue beginning in the year ended December 31, 2021. Prior period amounts have been recast to conform with the current period presentation.
•Other revenue: Consists primarily of revenue generated from pharma manufacturers and other customers for advertising, including integrating onto our platform their affordability solutions to our consumers, and revenue generated by our telehealth offerings that allow consumers to access healthcare professionals online.
Expenses
We incur the following expenses directly related to our cost of revenue and operating expenses:
•Cost of revenue: Consists primarily of costs related to outsourced consumer support, healthcare provider costs for GoodRx Care, personnel costs including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense, for our consumer support employees, hosting and cloud costs, merchant account fees, processing fees and allocated overhead. Cost of revenue is largely driven by the growth of our visitor, subscriber and active consumer base, as well as our offering mix. Our cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue may vary based on the relative growth rates of our various offerings.
•Product development and technology: Consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense, for employees involved in product development activities, third-party services and contractors related to product development, information technology and software-related costs, and allocated overhead. Product development and technology expenses are primarily driven by increases in headcount required to support and further develop our various products. We capitalize certain qualified costs related to the development of internal-use software, which may also cause product development and technology expenses to vary from period to period. We expect product development and technology expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to grow our platform and product offerings.
•Sales and marketing: Consists primarily of advertising and marketing expenses for consumer acquisition and retention, as well as personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense and sales commissions, for sales and marketing employees, third-party services and contractors, and allocated overhead. Sales and marketing expenses are primarily driven by investments to grow and retain our consumer base and may fluctuate based on the timing of our investments in consumer acquisition and retention. Over the near to medium term, we expect to increase our spending on sales and marketing.
•General and administrative: Consists primarily of personnel costs including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense for our executive, finance, accounting, legal, and human resources functions, as well as professional fees, occupancy costs, other general overhead costs, and as applicable, change in fair value of contingent consideration and charitable donations. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, additional general and administrative costs in compliance, legal, investor relations, insurance, and professional services related to our compliance and reporting obligations as a public company. We have incurred, and also expect to incur, additional general and administrative costs in connection with the vesting and settlement of RSUs, including the Founders Awards made in connection with our IPO in particular. We also anticipate that as we continue to grow as a company our general and administrative costs will increase on an absolute dollar basis.
•Depreciation and amortization: Consists of depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs and intangible assets. Our depreciation and amortization changes primarily based on changes in our property and equipment, intangible assets, and capitalized software balances.
Other Expense, Net
Our other expense, net consists of the following:
•Other income or expense, net: Consists primarily of miscellaneous expense or income that are not core to our operations, including third-party transaction expenses related to modifications of our debt facilities.
•Interest income: Consists primarily of interest income earned on excess cash held in interest-bearing accounts.
•Interest expense: Consists primarily of interest expense associated with our debt arrangements, including amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Our income tax (expense) benefit consists of federal and state income taxes. Our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to effects of non-deductible officers’ stock-based compensation expense, state income taxes, research and development tax credits, excess tax benefits from our equity awards and changes in the valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Prescription transactions revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $105.1 million, or 22%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by a 24% increase in the number of our average Monthly Active Consumers, partially offset by lower contribution-per-consumer due to the acquisitions of RxSaver and Scriptcycle. We believe COVID-19 continues to have an adverse impact on the growth of our prescription transactions revenue, due to the cumulative impact of lower healthcare utilization for almost two years since the pandemic began.
Subscription revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $30.5 million, or 104%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by an increase in the number of subscription plans to 1.2 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to 0.8 million as of December 31, 2020, as well as a favorable change in subscription plan mix.
Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $59.1 million, or 179%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in revenue from pharma manufacturers and other customers, and an increase in telehealth revenue.
We expect the percentage growth in subscription and other revenue to continue to outpace our prescription transactions revenue as we continue to scale the capabilities and platforms of our subscription, pharma manufacturer solutions and telehealth offerings.
Costs and operating expenses
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $17.1 million, or 58%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by a $7.4 million increase in outsourced and in-house personnel related consumer support expense to support our growth and a $6.7 million increase in hosting fees, merchant fees, provider cost related to our telehealth offerings and allocated overhead.
Product development and technology
Product development and technology expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $64.0 million, or 104%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in product development payroll and related expenses of $50.6 million due to higher headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense and payroll taxes related to awards made in connection with and after our IPO. The increase in product development and technology expense was also due to an increase in allocated overhead of $6.8 million to support our product development efforts and an increase in third-party services and contractor expenses related to product development of $6.6 million.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $115.1 million, or 45%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $74.2 million increase in advertising expenses which was partially due to our proactive reduction of advertising spend at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a $33.4 million increase in sales and marketing payroll and related expenses due to higher headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to awards made in connection with and after our IPO.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $306.8 million, or 66%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to $282.1 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense related to Founders Awards made in connection with our IPO as further described in Note 15 of our consolidated financial statements, and a $41.7 million charge related to a charitable stock donation in support of our philanthropic endeavors. This decrease was partially offset by $10.9 million increase in other executive and administrative payroll and related expenses due to higher headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense and payroll taxes related to awards made in connection with and after our IPO, and a $5.8 million increase in acquisition related and other professional fees to support our organic growth, M&A activity and operations as a public company.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $16.1 million, or 87%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to a $7.9 million increase in capitalized software amortization due to higher capitalized costs for platform improvements and the introduction of new products and features and a $5.7 million increase in amortization related to acquired intangible assets.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $4.3 million, or 15%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower average debt balances and lower interest rates.
Income tax (expense) benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had an income tax expense of $15.1 million compared to an income tax benefit of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an effective income tax rate of (148.1%) and 3.2%, respectively. The primary driver for the change from an income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 to an income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to a $52.4 million full valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets during the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, the income tax expense (benefit) for both periods was due to pre-tax losses, tax benefits from U.S. federal and state tax credits and excess tax benefits related to our equity awards, partially offset by the tax effects of nondeductible officers’ stock-based compensation expense and state income taxes.
A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized and is an area of significant judgment. Refer to "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Income Taxes-Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets" of this Part II, Item 7, and Note 11 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through net cash provided by operating activities, equity issuances, and borrowings under our long-term debt arrangements. Our principal sources of liquidity are expected to be our cash and cash equivalents and borrowings available under our $100.0 million secured asset-based revolving credit facility
which expires in October 2024. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $941.1 million and $90.8 million available under the revolving credit facility.
Our primary short-term and long-term requirements for liquidity and capital are to finance business acquisitions and investments we may make from time to time, working capital including our noncancelable operating lease obligations, interest and principal payments related to our outstanding debt arrangements, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. In May 2021, we entered into a noncancelable lease agreement to lease additional space adjacent to our office facility in Santa Monica, California. We anticipate that we will invest in additional capital expenditures with respect to the expanded leased space principally in 2022 and 2023.
We also anticipate to expend substantial funds to satisfy tax withholding and remittance obligations with respect to equity awards granted to our employees, and the Founders Awards in particular, as they vest over time. For further information, please see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Ownership of Our Class A Common Stock-We anticipate incurring substantial stock-based compensation expense and incurring substantial obligations related to the vesting and settlement of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) granted in connection with and after our IPO, which may have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations and may result in substantial dilution.”
We believe that our net cash provided by operating activities and cash on hand will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth, the timing and extent of investments to support such growth, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and many other factors as described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” For further details regarding our cash requirements from noncancelable operating lease obligations, terms and commitments under our debt arrangements including our revolving credit facility, and other contractual commitments, see Note 10, Note 12 and Note 13 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, respectively.
If necessary, we may borrow funds under our revolving credit facility to finance our liquidity requirements, subject to customary borrowing conditions. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. In particular, the widespread COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital. If we are unable to raise additional funds when or on the terms desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Holding Company Status
GoodRx Holdings, Inc. is a holding company that does not conduct any business operations of its own. As a result, GoodRx Holdings, Inc. is largely dependent upon cash distributions and other transfers from its subsidiaries to meet its obligations and to make future dividend payments, if any. Our existing debt arrangements contain covenants restricting payments of dividends by our subsidiaries, including GoodRx, Inc., unless certain conditions are met. These covenants provide for certain exceptions for specific types of payments. Based on these restrictions, all of the net assets of GoodRx, Inc. were restricted pursuant to the terms of our debt arrangements as of December 31, 2021. Since the restricted net assets of GoodRx, Inc. and its subsidiaries exceed 25% of our consolidated net assets, in accordance with Regulation S-X, refer to Note 17 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for condensed parent company financial information of GoodRx Holdings, Inc.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities consisted of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities. The $47.4 million increase in net cash provided by operations during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was due to $268.4 million lower net loss, offset by a $20.7 million increase resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, as well as a net $241.6 million decrease in non-cash adjustments principally driven by a decrease in
stock-based compensation expense and charitable stock donation. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by the timing of income tax payments and refunds, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable due to growth in our operations.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash flows used in investing activities primarily consisted of cash used for acquisitions, capital expenditures and investments, and software development costs. The $87.1 million increase in net cash used in investing activities for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily related to a $88.5 million increase in cash paid for acquisitions and investments and a $14.6 million increase in software development costs, partially offset by $16.0 million less in capital expenditures due to the completion of our corporate office facility in 2020.
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
Net cash flows from financing activities primarily consisted of net proceeds and payments related to our debt arrangements, issuances of our common stock, proceeds from exercises of stock options, and payments made related to net share settlement of equity awards. The $936.3 million decrease in net cash related to financing activities for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to a $986.9 million decrease in net proceeds from the issuances of our common stock in connection with our IPO, offset by a $29.7 million increase in proceeds from exercises of stock options and $21.0 million decrease in payments related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on certain accounting standards adopted in 2021 and recent accounting announcements that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. An accounting policy is deemed critical if it is both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and requires us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. An accounting estimate is deemed critical where the nature of the estimate is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the impact of the estimate on our financial condition or operating performance is material. We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. For further information of the below critical accounting policies and estimates and our other significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition represents an important accounting policy to the understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. Our revenue recognition does not involve any critical accounting estimates. For information regarding our revenue recognition accounting policy, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards requires judgment. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model is used to estimate the fair value of stock options with service or performance vesting conditions, while the fair value of our common stock at the date of grant is used to measure the fair value of restricted stock units and restricted stock awards with service or performance conditions. For awards with market vesting conditions, the fair value is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model that incorporates the likelihood of achieving the market condition. The valuation of stock-based compensation awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model or the Monte Carlo simulation model include the
valuation of our common stock as the primary assumption. For periods prior to our IPO given our stock was not publicly traded, our board of directors determined the fair value of the common stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including our actual operating and financial performance, market conditions and performance of comparable publicly traded companies, our developments and milestones, the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event transaction, and the results of third-party valuations. The third-party valuations used various models which included assumptions and estimates of forecasted revenues and costs, discount rates, the selection of comparable companies and related multiples, and the likelihood and timing of an exit event, among other assumptions and estimates. Therefore, the fair value of our common stock for periods prior to our IPO represented a critical accounting estimate. Subsequent to the completion of our IPO, the fair value of common stock is determined on the grant date using the closing price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market and therefore no longer represents a critical accounting estimate.
Business Combinations
We record tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination at fair value as of the acquisition date in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 805, Business Combinations. Any excess consideration over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill. The valuations of intangible assets use different valuation methods depending on the asset acquired and that may include significant estimates and judgments. Our critical accounting estimates are those relating to forecasts of revenue and estimates of discount rates used in the valuation of customer related intangibles. Our revenue forecasts include assumptions about future industry conditions, macroeconomic events such as the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to renew contracts in a competitive bidding process, among other factors. The discount rates focus on rates of return for equity and debt and are calculated using public information from selected guideline companies. The magnitude of the discount rates reflects the perceived risk of each investment, which requires significant judgment. A change in the estimated risk of either of the acquired companies' cash flows would change the discount rates applied, which in turn could significantly affect the valuation of our acquired customer related intangible assets.
Income Taxes-Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credits. We evaluate the recoverability of deferred tax assets by assessing all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is needed. A valuation allowance is established if it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of whether a valuation allowance should be established, as well as the amount of such allowance, requires significant judgment and estimates, including estimates of future earnings. Accordingly, the valuation of our net deferred tax assets is a critical accounting estimate.
In evaluating the realizability of our net deferred tax assets, we perform an assessment each reporting period of both positive and negative evidence. Negative evidence included the existence of three-year cumulative pre-tax losses adjusted for permanent adjustments, incurred in the fourth quarter of 2021. These losses were generated in 2021 and 2020 principally due to substantial excess tax benefits realized from the exercise of stock options granted prior to our IPO. Stock options granted prior to our IPO contained substantially lower exercise prices compared to the closing prices of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, which when exercised resulted in significant excess tax benefits to us. In addition, we have a significant number of outstanding stock options granted prior to our IPO available to be exercised in future tax periods, which may generate incremental excess tax benefits if they are exercised, and contributed to our evaluation of negative evidence regarding the realizability of our net deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2021, positive evidence reviewed included (i) our forecast of future earnings; (ii) stock options granted prior to our IPO are definite-lived and will expire 10 years from the date of grant if unexercised; and (iii) an indefinite carryforward period for certain deferred tax assets.
We apply judgment to consider the relative impact of negative and positive evidence and the weight given to negative and positive evidence is commensurate with the extent to which such evidence can be objectively verified. Objective historical evidence, such as cumulative three-year pre-tax losses adjusted for permanent adjustments, is given greater weight than subjective positive evidence such as forecasts of future earnings. The more objective negative evidence that exists limits our ability to consider other, potentially positive, subjective evidence, such as our future earnings projections. Based on our evaluation of all available positive and negative evidence, and by placing greater weight on the objective negative evidence associated with our three-year cumulative pre-tax loss adjusted for permanent adjustments, we determined, as of December 31, 2021, that it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets will not be realized. Accordingly, we recorded a full valuation allowance of $52.4 million against our net deferred tax assets for the year then ended.
To the extent sufficient positive evidence becomes available or the negative objective evidence described above decreases in relative importance, for example as stock options granted prior to our IPO associated with excess tax benefits have been exercised, we may conclude that based on the weighting of positive and negative evidence that some or all of our net deferred tax assets more likely than not will be realized in the future. Accordingly, we may determine to release all or a portion of the valuation allowance in one or more future periods. A release of the valuation allowance, if any, would result in the recognition of certain deferred tax assets and income tax benefit in the period in which such release is recorded.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Upon completion of our IPO, we elected to be an Emerging Growth Company ("EGC"), as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act. Effective December 31, 2021, we lost our EGC status due to becoming a “large accelerated filer." As a result, we must comply with all financial disclosure and governance requirements applicable to a “large accelerated filer." For further information, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.