ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Goldenstone Acquisition Limited, except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on September 9, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On March 21, 2022, we consummated our IPO of 5,750,000 units at $10.00 per unit (the “Units”). The units sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment. Each Unit consists of one share of our common stock (the “Public Shares”), one redeemable warrant to purchase one-half of one share of our common stock at a price of $11.50 per whole share and one right. Each right entitles the holder thereof to receive one-tenth (1/10) of one share of our common stock upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO and the over-allotment, we consummated the issuance of 351,250 private placement units (the “Private Placement Units”) for aggregate cash proceeds of $3,512,500. Each Private Placement Unit consists of one share of our common stock, one redeemable warrant to purchase one-half of one share of our common stock at a price of $11.50 per whole share and one right. Each right entitles the holder thereof to receive one-tenth (1/10) of one share of our common stock upon the consummation of our Business Combination. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placement Units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be generally applied toward consummating our Business Combination.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering on March 21, 2022, a total of $58,362,500 of the net proceeds from the IPO, the Over-Allotment and the Private Placement were deposited in a trust account established for the benefit of our public stockholders.
If we have not completed our initial business combination within 12 months (unless extended), we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable, and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to March 31, 2022 was in connection with our initial public offering and our search for a target for our initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the year ended from March 31, 2022, we incurred a net loss of $53,448, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $43,401 and franchise tax expense of $12,250, partially offset by interest income on the trust account of $2,203. For the period from September 9, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $1,054 which was all attributable to formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2022, we had $959,964 in cash in our operating account as compared to cash of $36,446 at March 31, 2021 and working capital of $949,866 as compared to a working capital deficit of $37,680 at March 31, 2021. The improvement in liquidity is all attributable to the completion of the IPO
Prior the completion of the IPO, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsors of $25,874 for common stock and from loans from a Sponsor and related parties in order to pay offering costs. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of March 31, 2022, there was no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital, Sponsors or related party loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We have made a policy election in accordance with ASC 480-10-S99-3A and recognizes changes in redemption value in additional paid-in capital (or accumulated deficit in the absence of additional paid-in capital) over an expected 12-month period leading up to a Business Combination.
Deferred Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of FASB ASC Topic 340-10-S99-1, “Other Assets and Deferred Costs - SEC Materials” (“ASC 340-10-S99”) and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A, “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs were $4,331,021 consisting principally of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses that are directly related to the IPO and charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of the IPO.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - “Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 as of January 1, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on September 10, 2021, the holders of the founder shares, the private placement units and private placement units that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the closing date of this offering requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriters Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the initial public offering to purchase up to an additional 750,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. This option was fully exercised at the time of the IPO.
The underwriters received a cash underwriting discount of 2% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $1,150,000, upon closing of the IPO. In addition the underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the sale of Units in the IPO, or $2,012,500, which is currently held in the trust account and would be payable upon the completion of the initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.