Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to assist you in understanding our results of operations and our present financial condition and contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. We caution you that our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors,” all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
There is limited historical financial information about our Company upon which to base an evaluation of our future performance. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our hemp businesses. We are subject to risks inherent in a small company, including limited capital resources, delays and cost overruns due to price and cost increases. There is no assurance that future financing will be available to our company on acceptable terms. Additional equity financing could result in dilution to existing shareholders.
Overview
We are a holding company active within the “hemp” space. We were incorporated on August 21, 2021 in the State of Delaware. The Company was originally incorporated on July 28, 2008 in the State of Colorado. On November 27, 2019, HTF purchased approximately 94% of the common stock of EHR in a series of transactions accounted for as a reverse merger.
On January 11, 2021, we completed the acquisition of certain assets of Halcyon Thruput, LLC (“Halcyon”). With this acquisition, we commenced providing post-harvest and midstream services to growers by drying, processing, cleaning and stripping harvested hemp directly from the field and wetbaled at our 48,000 square foot leased facility located in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. Additionally, the Company offers safe storage services for processed hemp, which enables farmers to maximize strategic market timing. In August 2021, the Company launched its small animal bedding consumer goods product line (“Rowdy Rooster”) made from the hemp hurd byproduct that is produced from its hemp processing operations.
We also generate revenue from rental of our “Cannabis Zoned” (Hemp) warehouse property located in Denver, Colorado currently leased to an unaffiliated hemp seed company.
Liquidity - The Company is dependent upon obtaining additional funding to continue ongoing operations and to pursue its strategy and execute its acquisition plans.
In 2021, the Company used $3.5 million of cash for its operating activities. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s current liabilities, including financing obligations due within one year, totaled $4.4 million as compared with its current assets of $238 thousand.
The Company will continue to pursue additional capital raising opportunities in order to fund future acquisitions and meet its obligations as they become due. In the event financing cannot be obtained, the Company may not be able to satisfy these plans and obligations. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business - Our business, results of operations and financial condition have been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in mid-March 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to contain it have subjected our business, results of operations, financial condition, stock price and liquidity to a number of material risks and uncertainties, all of which may continue or may worsen.
How the Company Generates Revenue
We provide post-harvest and midstream services to growers by drying, processing, cleaning and stripping harvested hemp directly from the field and wetbaled at our leased 48,000 square foot facility located in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. Additionally, the Company offers safe storage services for processed hemp, which enables farmers to maximize strategic market timing. In August 2021, the Company launched its animal bedding consumer goods product line made from the hemp hurd byproduct that is produced from its hemp processing operations.
We also generate revenue from rental of our “Cannabis Zoned” (Hemp) warehouse property located in Denver, Colorado currently leased to a hemp seed company.
Our Costs and Expenses of Conducting Business
The principal costs and expenses involved in conducting our business are labor, materials and overhead costs for processing services, real estate holding costs (interest, taxes, depreciation and maintenance costs) and general and administrative expenses for our management, contract labor, professional fees and other costs of being a public company. We also incur costs in seeking acquisitions and financings of our business.
Discontinued Oil & Gas Activities
As of December 31, 2021, EHR held an approximate 8% working interest in an oil & gas property located in Cochran County, Texas within the Slaughter-Levelland Field of the San Andres formation in the Northwest Shelf of West Texas. EHR’s oil & gas activities are currently held for sale and are presented in these consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for each of the periods presented.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $9.8 million as compared with a net loss of $1.6 million for 2020. The larger loss in 2021 was principally due to higher costs for staffing additions and other business operating costs as we commenced post-harvest midstream services after the acquisition of certain assets of Halcyon. The 2021 loss also include non-cash expense totaling $5.9 million for stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization.
The Company reports its oil & gas activities as discontinued operations. Loss from discontinued operations was $32 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with a loss of $34 thousand in 2020.
Revenue. We commenced post-harvest and midstream services for new and renewed customer contracts in the third quarter of 2021. These revenues are typically limited due during the first half of each year until harvest. In 2020 (prior to our acquisition), Halcyon had revenues of $3.0 million for the processing of approximately 8.5 million pounds of hemp biomass. In 2021, we had revenues of $592 thousand for the processing of approximately 2.1 million pounds of hemp biomass. The decrease is partially due to taking inventory in-kind and holding such inventory for a sale at a later date. We have executed contracts for processing of 6.7 million pounds during the 2022.
Rental revenue was $82 thousand in 2021 as compared with $90 thousand in 2020. The Company’s Denver warehouse is presently leased through August 1, 2023 for $7.5 thousand per month plus certain other expenses.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue for 2021 was $653 thousand and consisted of direct labor, supplies and overhead for the Company’s post-harvest and midstream services operations. The negative margin on this business was caused by holding costs and limited staffing needed until the annual harvest and processing began in the third quarter of 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense totaled $1.3 million in 2021 as compared with $71 thousand for 2020. The increase in the 2021 period is due to completion of the Halcyon acquisition including $818 thousand for amortization of acquired intangible assets. Intangible assets consist of customer relationships and non-compete agreements acquired in the acquisition of certain assets of Halcyon. Future amortization expense in each of the next five years amounts to $587 thousand for 2022, $419 thousand for 2023, $278 thousand for 2024, $194 thousand for 2025, $130 thousand for 2026 and $250 thousand thereafter.
Merger and Acquisition Costs. We incurred $16 thousand and $100 thousand of costs for evaluating acquisition opportunities during 2021 and 2020, respectively. These costs principally related to the Halcyon acquisition. The amount of future expenses of this type that we incur will depend upon our future acquisition activities.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expenses totaled $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $1.1 million in 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense in the 2021 period is principally due the Halcyon acquisition, other corporate staffing additions made this year, and the payment of bonus compensation as well as stock-based compensation expense. Bonus compensation totaling $610 thousand was paid to our CEO for successful completion of the Halcyon acquisition. In the third quarter of 2021, the Company paid $189 thousand for legal fees and $33 thousand of interest in settlement of an arbitration. General and administrative expense for 2021 also includes $4.5 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
Other Income/Expense. Total other expense was $671 thousand for 2021 as compared with $296 thousand for 2020. The largest item of total other expense is interest expense which has increased due to having higher levels of indebtedness. Interest expense for 2021 includes $380 thousand of amortization of debt discounts and $33 thousand of interest for the arbitration settlement discussed above.
In 2021, we sold our investment in the marketable common stock we held for total proceeds of $35 thousand. We recognized a loss of $12 thousand on this disposal. This publicly traded security was marked to market each fiscal quarter until its eventual sale. In 2020, we recognized a gain of $10 thousand for the increase in this security’s value.
We received notice that the Company’s PPP Loan principal and interest thereon was fully forgiven on April 20, 2021. As such, we recognized forgiveness income of $25,424 in 2021.
Loss from Discontinued Operations. In 2021, we recognized a loss from discontinued operations of $32 thousand as compared with a loss of $34 thousand in 2020. The major classes of line items constituting the loss on discontinued operations is presented in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 11-Discontinued Operations.” Until we fully dispose of our remaining oil & gas property interests, we expect lower future revenues and costs as production activities have declined substantially. We do not anticipate making future investment of growth capital into these properties.
In 2019, the Company’s oil and gas properties became impaired and the carrying amount of the properties was expensed to the market decline and the Company’s determination to exit the oil and gas business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of cash from continuing operations includes post-harvest and midstream services and rental revenue. Our primary uses of cash include our operating costs, general and administrative expenses and merger and acquisition expenses.
Cash flow information from continuing operations for the first nine months of 2021 was as follows:
● Cash used in operating activities was $3.5 million principally due to the net loss adjusted for non-cash items.
● Net cash used in investing activities totaled $1.6 million including an expenditure of $1.5 million for the cash portion of the total consideration for the Halcyon acquisition and proceeds from the sale of our investment in common stock of $35 thousand. We made capital expenditures totaling $78 thousand for new processing equipment to expand our business lines to include post-processing of biomass.
● Net cash from financing activities totaled $2.3 million. This amount included $4.3 million of cash inflows from the issuance of common stock units and proceeds from warrant exercises. As well, we received $410 thousand in advances from our CEO under promissory notes. We used $2.2 million of cash for repayment of outstanding indebtedness and $154 thousand for payment of scheduled redemptions and dividends on the Series B preferred stock.
We had no cash flows from discontinued operations in 2021.
Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our overall expenses may increase significantly as we grow our hemp business.
We anticipate that we will require additional capital to fund operations, including hiring additional employees, completing acquisitions and funding capital expenditures during the next twelve-month period.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our business, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● our success in identifying and making acquisitions of profitable operations;
● our ability to negotiate operating contracts with growers and others within the hemp industry on favorable terms, if at all;
● deriving revenue from our assets and operations; and
● the cost of such operations and costs of being a public company.
Until such time as we can generate substantial revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common shareholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our growth plans and future commercialization efforts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Indebtedness
The Company’s indebtedness at December 31, 2021 is presented in Item I, “Financial Statements - Note 5 - Notes Payable - Related Parties” and in Item I, “Financial Statements-Note 6-Other Indebtedness.”
In the first quarter of 2022, Investment Hunter, LLC, a Texas LLC controlled by our CEO, made advances totaling $449,000 to the Company under a promissory note due June 30, 2022. If the Company raises new equity capital of $3 million or more, then the full amount outstanding under the note is due within five days. The note bears interest at 10% per annum.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the amounts of revenue and expenses reported for the period then ended.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. These events and circumstances include, but are not limited to, a current expectation that a long-lived asset will be disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life, a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which we use a long-lived asset or a change in its physical condition.
When such events or changes in circumstances occur, a recoverability test is performed comparing projected undiscounted cash flows from the use and eventual disposition of an asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the projected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount, an impairment is recorded for the excess of the carrying amount over the estimated fair value.
We make various assumptions, including assumptions regarding future cash flows in our assessments of long-lived assets for impairment. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the current and long-term business plans related to the long-lived assets.
Stock-based Compensation - We account for employee stock-based compensation using the fair value method. Compensation cost for equity incentive awards is based on the fair value of the equity instrument generally on the date of grant and is recognized over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements.”