Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of the major elements of our consolidated financial statements. You should read this discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements, including the accompanying notes, and other detailed information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including under the heading “Risk Factors.” The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations includes various forward-looking statements about our markets, the demand for our products and services and our future plans and results. These statements are based on assumptions that we consider to be reasonable, but that could prove to be incorrect. For more information regarding our assumptions, you should refer to the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Assumptions” below.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Assumptions
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and the documents incorporated by reference herein, if any, contain “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. These forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such as “may”, “will”, “should”, “intend”, “expect”, “plan”, “budget”, “forecast”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate”, “predict”, “potential”, “continue”, “evaluating” or similar words. Statements that contain these words should be read carefully because they discuss our future expectations, contain projections of our future results of operations or of our financial position or state other forward-looking information. Examples of forward-looking statements include, among others, statements that we make regarding our expected operating results, the adoption, results and success of our rollout of our Aquana smart water valves and cloud-based control platform, future demand for our Quantum security solutions, the adoption and sale of our products in various geographic regions, potential tenders for PRM systems, future demand for OBX systems, the completion of new orders for our channels of our GCL system, the fulfillment of customer payment obligations, the impact of and the recovery from the impact of the coronavirus (or COVID-19) pandemic, the impact of the current armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine, our ability to manage changes and the continued health or availability of management personnel, volatility and direction of oil prices, anticipated levels of capital expenditures and the sources of funding therefor, and our strategy for growth, product development, market position, financial results and the provision of accounting reserves. These forward-looking statements reflect our current judgment about future events and trends based on the information currently available to us. However, there will likely be events in the future that we are not able to predict or control. The factors listed under the caption “Risk Factors”, as well as cautionary language in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward-looking statements. Such examples include, but are not limited to, the failure of the Quantum or OptoSeis® or Aquana technology transactions to yield positive operating results, decreases in commodity price levels and continued adverse impact of COVID-19 which could reduce demand for our products, the failure of our products to achieve market acceptance (despite substantial investment by us) our sensitivity to short term backlog, delayed or cancelled customer orders, product obsolescence resulting from poor industry conditions or new technologies, bad debt write-offs associated with customer accounts, inability to collect on promissory notes, lack of further orders for our OBX systems, failure of our Quantum products to be adopted by the border and perimeter security market, or a decrease in such market due to governmental changes, and infringement or failure to protect intellectual property. The occurrence of the events described in these risk factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial position, and actual events and results of operations may vary materially from our current expectations. We assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statement, whether written or oral, that we may make from time to time, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as required by applicable securities laws and regulations.
Background
We design and manufacture seismic instruments and equipment and primarily market these products to the oil and gas industry to locate, characterize and monitor hydrocarbon producing reservoirs. We also market our seismic products to other industries for vibration monitoring, border and perimeter security and various geotechnical applications. We design and manufacture other products of a non-seismic nature, including water meter products, imaging equipment and provide contract manufacturing services. For further informtion on the nature of our operations, see the information under the heading “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated Results of Operations
As we have reported in the past, our revenue and operating profits have varied significantly from quarter-to-quarter, and even year-to-year, and are expected to continue that trend in the future, especially when our quarterly or annual financial results are impacted by the presence or absence of relatively large, but somewhat erratic, sales of our oil and gas PRM systems and/or wireless seismic data acquisition systems for land and marine applications.
We report and evaluate financial information for three segments: Oil and Gas Markets, Adjacent Markets and Emerging Markets. Summary financial data by business segment follows (in thousands):
Overview
Although in an already depressed oil and gas industry, demand further decreased in February 2020 because of the oversupply of crude oil due to failed OPEC negotiations that led to a dramatic drop in crude oil prices when combined with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These declines in the demand for oil and gas have caused oil and gas exploration and production companies to experience a significant reduction in cash flows, which have resulted in reductions in their capital spending budgets for oil and gas exploration-focused activities, including seismic data acquisition activities. Recently, crude oil prices have rebounded and held above February 2020 levels; however, a lag in time typically occurs between higher oil prices and greater demand for our Oil and Gas Markets segment products. We believe this lag is the result of exploration and production (“E&P”) companies allocating their cash flow towards shareholder reward initiatives, such as stock buy-back programs and dividend payments, or in debt reduction. We believe this lag is a short-term trend that will continue until E&P companies decide to reinvest capital into exploration activities. As this lag persists, we expect the reduced levels of demand for our Oil and Gas Markets segment products and our rental marine wireless nodal products to continue. We also expect our land-based traditional and wireless products will continue to experience low levels of product demand until our customers consume their excess levels of underutilized equipment. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2022, we experienced increased rental demand for our marine nodal products in the form of additional rental contracts and requests for quotes from existing and new customers.
In light of current market conditions, the inventory balances in our Oil and Gas Markets business segment at September 30, 2022 continued to exceed levels we consider appropriate for the current level of product demand. We are continuing to work aggressively to reduce these legacy inventory balances; however, we are also adding new inventories for new wireless product developments and for other product demand in our Adjacent Markets segment. During periods of excessive inventory levels, our policy has been, and will continue to be, to record obsolescence expense as we experience reduced product demand and as our inventories continue to age. As difficult market conditions continue for the products in our Oil and Gas Markets segment, we are recording additional expenses for inventory obsolescence and will continue to do so in the future until product demand and/or resulting inventory turnover return to acceptable levels.
Armed Conflict Between Russia and Ukraine
A portion of our oil and gas product manufacturing is conducted through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Geospace Technologies Eurasia LLC, which is based in the Russian Federation. Consequently, our oil and gas business could be directly affected by the current war between Russia and Ukraine. Please see “Part I-Item 1A.-Risk Factors” for more information.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted worldwide economic activity and continues to create challenges in our markets, such as uncertainties regarding the duration and extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately have a negative impact on the demand for our products and services or on our supply chain. We continue to closely monitor the situation as information becomes readily available.
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, our operations have, for the most part, remained open globally and the impact of the effects of COVID-19 to our personnel and operations has been limited. Our supply chain has become increasingly strained due to increased pricing for raw material and supplies coupled with longer than expected lead times. We initially experienced a reduction in demand for the rental of our OBX marine nodal products, which we believed was primarily the result of the pandemic; however, demand has increased in fiscal year 2022. We also believe our Adjacent Markets business segment has entered into a period of recovery from the initial effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, but we continue to be cautious about the pandemic’s effect on our other business segments and our supply chain. As a result, we continually communicate with our suppliers and customers as information is available to best manage this difficult situation.
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
Consolidated revenue for fiscal year 2022 was $89.3 million, a decrease of $5.6 million, or 5.9%, from fiscal year 2021. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to a reduction in revenue from our Emerging Markets segment related to our contract with the CBP and a decrease in revenue from sales of our wireless seismic products. The decrease in revenue was partially offset by increased rental revenue from our OBX rental fleet and higher sales of our industrial and imaging products.
Consolidated gross profit for fiscal year 2022 was $18.0 million, an increase of $1.7 million, or 10.7%, from fiscal year 2021. The increase in gross profit primarily resulted from (i) higher gross profit attributable to the increased utilization of our OBX rental fleet and (ii) the higher profit margins generated on wireless exploration product sales. The increase was partially offset by the reduction in revenue and related gross profit from our contract with the CBP discussed above.
Consolidated operating expenses for fiscal year 2022 were $41.2 million, an increase of $8.0 million, or 24.2%, from fiscal year 2021. The increase was due to (i) a $4.3 million goodwill impairment charge related to our Quantum acquisition, (ii) a $1.8 million increase in research and development project costs, (iii) a $1.4 million increase in personnel costs, (iv) $1.1 million in incremental operating costs associated with our acquisition of Aquana and (v) a $0.9 million increase in sales, marketing and other general business expenses. The increase was partially offset by a $1.5 million increase in a favorable non-cash adjustment to the estimated fair value of contingent consideration related to our Quantum and OptoSeis® acquisitions when compared to the prior fiscal year.
Consolidated other income for fiscal year 2022 was $0.5 million compared to $3.4 million from fiscal year 2021. The decrease in other income was primarily due to (i) a gain recognized on the sale of our investment in a debt security in fiscal year 2021, (ii) an increase in foreign exchanges losses and (iii) a decrease in interest income.
Consolidated income tax expense for fiscal year 2022 was $0.2 million compared to $0.6 million from fiscal year 2021. This decrease in income tax expense was primarily the result of a decrease in rental revenue earned in foreign jurisdictions requiring tax withholding. We are currently unable to record any tax benefits from the tax losses we incur in the U.S., Canada and Russian Federation due to the uncertainty surrounding our ability to utilize such losses in the future to offset taxable income.
Segment Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
Oil and Gas Markets
Revenue
Revenue from our Oil and Gas Markets products for fiscal year 2022 decreased $3.1 million, or 6.0%, from fiscal year 2021. Our product and rental revenue in this segment continues to be negatively impacted by a lack of spending by oil and gas exploration companies despite higher crude oil prices. The components of this decrease were as follows:
•Traditional Exploration Product Revenue - Revenue from our traditional products increased $2.1 million, or 46.0% from the prior fiscal year. The increase primarily reflects higher demand for our sensor and marine products.
•Wireless Exploration Product Revenue - Revenue from our wireless exploration products decreased $5.1 million, or 11.1%, from the prior fiscal year. The decrease was primarily due to the recognition of $12.5 million of revenue related to a land-based wireless system in the second quarter of fiscal year 2021 and a $9.9 million sale of used OBX rental
equipment in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. The decrease was partially offset by a $10.0 million sale of used OBX rental equipment in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022 and increased OBX rental revenue during fiscal year 2022.
•Reservoir Product Revenue - Revenue from our reservoir products decreased $0.1 million, or 5.3%, from the prior fiscal year. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to lower reservoir monitoring service revenue. The decrease was largely offset by higher demand for our borehole products.
Operating Loss	
Operating loss from our Oil and Gas Markets products for fiscal year 2022 was $(7.5) million, a decrease of $(8.7) million, or 53.5%, from the prior fiscal year. The decrease in operating loss was primarily due to (i) higher wireless rental revenue and related gross profits due to improved utilization of our OBX rental fleet and (ii) a $3.6 million increase to a favorable non-cash adjustment to the estimated fair value of contingent consideration related to our OptoSeis® acquisition when compared to the same period of the prior fiscal year. The decrease in operating loss was partially offset by an increase in research and development costs.
Adjacent Markets
Revenue
Revenue from our Adjacent Markets products for fiscal year 2022 increased $6.8 million, or 20.8%, from the prior fiscal year. While we experienced an increase in the demand for our Adjacent Markets products and services during fiscal year 2022 despite the global supply chain shortages, we cannot reasonably determine the lasting effects of the supply chain shortage on this operating segment. The components of this increases were as follows:
•Industrial Product Revenue and Services - Revenue from our industrial products increased $4.3 million, or 20.2%, from the prior fiscal year. The increase was primarily due to higher demand for water meter products and contract manufacturing services.
•Imaging Product Revenue - Revenue from our imaging products increased $2.4 million, or 22.1%, from the prior fiscal year. The increase was primarily due to higher demand for our imaging equipment.
Operating Income
Operating income from our Adjacent Markets products for fiscal year 2022 was $6.0 million, a decrease of $0.4 million, or 6.3% from the prior fiscal year. The decrease in operating income was primarily due (i) a $1.3 million increase in research and development expense, (ii) $1.0 million in incremental operating costs attributable to our acquisition of Aquana and (iii) a $0.4 million impairment charge on our manufacturing equipment. The decrease was largely offset by an increase in revenue and related gross profits for fiscal year 2022.
Emerging Markets
Revenue
Revenue from our Emerging Markets products for fiscal year 2022 was $0.7 million, compared to $10.2 million from the prior fiscal year. The decrease was due to $10.1 million of revenue recognized on our contract with the CBP during the prior fiscal year. We were awarded this contract during fiscal year 2020 to provide a technology solution to the Department of Homeland Security. The majority of the revenue related to this contract was recognized in fiscal year 2021. The contract was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income (loss) from our Emerging Markets products for fiscal year 2022 was $(9.1) million, compared to $5.0 million from the prior fiscal year. The decrease for fiscal year 2022 was primarily due to the revenue and related gross profit recognized on our contract with the CBP in the prior fiscal year. The decrease in operating income (loss) was also due (i) a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $4.3 million and (ii) a $2.0 million decrease to a favorable non-cash adjustment to the estimated fair value of contingent consideration related to our Quantum acquisition when compared to the same period of the prior fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Fiscal Year 2022
At September 30, 2022, we had approximately $17.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we used $10.0 million of cash from operating activities. Our net loss of $22.9 million was offset by
net non-cash charges of $24.6 million resulting from deferred income taxes, depreciation, amortization, asset impairments, accretion, inventory obsolescence, stock-based compensation, bad debt expense and changes in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. Other uses of cash in our operations primarily included (i) the removal of $11.1 million gross profit from the sale of used rental equipment as it is included in investing activities, (ii) a $0.8 million decrease in accounts payable due to the timing of payments to suppliers, (iii) a $2.4 million increase in inventories to meet an increase in demand for our Adjacent Markets products and (iv) a $0.7 million decrease in other liabilities primarily due to a decrease in customer deposits on rental equipment and a decrease in accrued compensation costs. Offsetting these uses of cash primarily included (i) a $1.8 million decrease in trade accounts and notes receivable primarily due to the timing of collections from customers and (ii) a $1.1 million decrease in unbilled receivables resulting from the collection of billings to the CBP.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we generated cash of $14.1 million in investing activities. Sources of cash included (i) net proceeds of $8.5 million from the sale of short-term investments and (ii) proceeds of $11.6 million from the sale of used rental equipment. Offsetting these sources were (i) $1.1 million for additions to our property, plant and equipment and (ii) $4.8 million for additions to our equipment rental fleet. We expect our cash investments in our rental fleet to be approximately $6 million in fiscal year 2023. We expect fiscal year 2023 cash investments in property, plant and equipment will be approximately $1 million during fiscal year 2023. Our capital expenditures are expected to be funded from our cash on hand, internal cash flows, cash flows from our rental contracts or, if necessary, borrowings under our new credit agreement.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we used $1.7 million from financing activities. Uses of cash included (i) $0.8 million for contingent consideration payments to the former shareholders of Quantum, (ii) debt issuance costs of $0.2 million incurred in connection with our new credit agreement and (iii) $0.7 million for the purchase of treasury stock pursuant to a stock buy-back program authorized by our board of directors in November 2020. The stock buy-back program authorized us to repurchase up to $7.5 million of our common stock in open market transactions. The program was completed in November 2021.
Our available cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $17.0 million at September 30, 2022, which included $2.6 million of cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices, of which $1.8 million was held by our subsidiary in the Russian Federation. . In response to sanctions imposed by the U.S. and others on Russia, the Russian government has imposed restrictions on companies’ abilities to repatriate or otherwise remit cash from their Russian-based operations to locations outside of Russia. As a result, this cash can be used in our Russian operations, but we may be unable to transfer it out of Russia without incurring substantial costs, if at all. In addition, if we were to repatriate the cash held by our Russian subsidiary, we would be required to accrue and pay taxes on any amount repatriated.
In May 2022, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Agreement”) with Amerisource Funding, Inc., as administrative agent and as a lender, and Woodforest National Bank, as a lender. Available borrowings under the Agreement are determined by a borrowing base with a maximum availability of $10 million. The borrowing base is determined based upon certain of our domestic assets which include (i) 70% loan to value of our property located at 6410 Langfield Road in Houston, Texas (the “Property”), (ii) 50% of forced liquidation value of equipment, (iii) 80% of certain accounts receivable and (iv) 50% of forced liquidation value of certain inventory (inventory borrowing base limited to 100% of borrowing base credit given toward accounts receivable). The Agreement is for a two-year term with all funds borrowed due at the expiration of the term. The interest rate on borrowed funds is the Wall Street prime rate (with a minimum of 3.25%) plus 4.00%. We are required to make monthly interest payments on borrowed funds. Borrowings under the Agreement will be principally secured by the Property and our domestic equipment, inventory and accounts receivables. In addition, certain of our domestic subsidiaries have guaranteed our obligations under the Agreement and such subsidiaries have secured the obligations by pledging certain assets. The Agreement requires us to maintain a minimum consolidated tangible net worth of $100 million. We expect to remain in compliance with this requirement in fiscal year 2023.
At September 30, 2022, we had no borrowings outstanding and were compliant with all covenants under the Agreement. Our borrowing availability at September 30, 2022 was $8.5 million. We do not currently anticipate the need to borrow under the Agreement, however, we may decide to do so in the future, if needed.
Our available cash and cash equivalent and short-term investments decreased $6.6 million during fiscal year 2022. In the absence of future profitable results of operations, we may need to rely on other sources of liquidity to fund our future operations, including executed rental contracts, available borrowings under our Agreement through its expiration in May 2024, leveraging or sales of real estate assets, sales of rental assets and other liquidity sources which may be available to us. We currently believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to finance any future operating losses and planned capital expenditures through the next twelve months.
We do not have any obligations which meet the definition of an off-balance sheet arrangement and which have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial statements or the items contained therein that are material to investors.
Contractual Obligations
Contingent Consideration
We recorded an initial contingent consideration liability of $7.7 million in connection with our July 2018 acquisition of Quantum. Subsequent to the acquisition, we reduced the liability to $0.2 million as of September 30, 2022 as a result of $2.3 million of earn-out payments made through June 2022 and $5.2 million in adjustments to reduce the value of expected future payments. Contingent payments derived from eligible revenue generated during the four-year post-acquisition period ended July 2022 can be paid in the form of cash or Company stock. In November 2022, the Company paid in cash the remaining $0.2 million liability to the former shareholders of Quantum. Subsequent to this payment, there are no further contingent payment obligations related to this acquisition.
We recorded an initial contingent consideration liability of $4.3 million in connection with our November 2018 acquisition of all the intellectual property and related assets of the OptoSeis® fiber optic sensing technology. We decreased the estimated liability to zero as of September 30, 2022 as a result of the unlikelihood any eligible revenue will be generated during the earn-out period. Contingent cash payments were to be derived from eligible revenue generated during a five-and-a-half year post-acquisition earn-out period ending in May 2024. In order for revenue to be considered eligible, sales contracts must be entered into during the first four years of the earn-out period, which ended November 13, 2022. No sales contracts were entered into during this period and we have no contingent payment obligations related to this acquisition.
Contingent Compensation Costs
In connection with the acquisition of Aquana in July 2021, we are subject to additional contingent cash payments to the former members of Aquana over a six-year earn-out period. The contingent payments, if any, will be derived from certain eligible revenue generated during the earn-out period from products and services sold by Aquana. There is no maximum limit to the contingent cash payments that could be made. The merger agreement with Aquana requires the continued employment of a certain key employee and former member of Aquana for the first four years of the six year earn-out period in order for any of Aquana’s former members to be eligible to receive any earn-out payments. In accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations, due to the continued employment requirement, no liability has been recorded for the estimated fair value of contingent earn-out payments for this transaction. Earn-outs achieved, if any, will be recorded as compensation expense when incurred.
See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our contractual contingencies.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We consider many factors in selecting appropriate operational and financial accounting policies and controls, and in developing the estimates and assumptions that are used in the preparation of these financial statements. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, bad debt reserves, inventory obsolescence reserves, goodwill and long-lived asset impairment. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other factors, including the impact from the current economic conditions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different conditions or assumptions.
Our normal credit terms for trade receivables are 30 days. In certain situations, credit terms for trade receivables may be extended to 60 days or longer and such receivables generally do not require collateral. Additionally, we provide long-term financing in the form of promissory notes and sales-type leases when competitive conditions require such financing and, in such cases, we may require collateral. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our accounts and financing receivables, and allowances are recognized for potential credit losses.
Our long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever an event or change in circumstances indicates the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable. The impairment review, if necessary, includes a comparison of expected future cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) to be generated by an asset group with the associated carrying value of the related assets. If the carrying value of the asset group exceeds the expected future cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying value of the asset group exceeds its fair value.
We conduct our evaluation of goodwill at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of September 30 and more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The guidance on the testing of goodwill for impairment provides the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine if the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount. If, based on the qualitative assessment of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is more than its carrying amount then it is not necessary to perform a quantitative assessment. However, if an entity concludes otherwise, then a quantitative assessment must be performed. If, based on the quantitative assessment, we determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is less that its carrying amount, a goodwill impairment is recognized equal to the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of the goodwill.
We record a write-down of our inventories when the cost basis of any manufactured product, including any estimated future costs to complete the manufacturing process, exceeds its net realizable value. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on a first-in, first-out method, except that our subsidiaries in the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom use an average cost method to value their inventories.
We periodically review the composition of our inventories to determine if market demand, product modifications, technology changes, excessive quantities on-hand and other factors hinder our ability to recover our investment in such inventories. Management’s assessment is based upon historical product demand, estimated future product demand and various other judgments and estimates. Inventory obsolescence reserves are recorded when such assessments reveal that portions or components of our inventory investment will not be realized in our operating activities.
The value of our inventories not expected to be realized in cash, sold or consumed during our next operating cycle are classified as non-current assets in our consolidated balance sheets.
We recognize revenue from product sales and services in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This standard applies to contracts for the sale of products and services and does not apply to contracts for the rental or lease of products. Under this standard, we recognize revenue when performance of contractual obligations are satisfied, generally when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue from product sales is recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, control is transferred and collectability of the sales price is reasonably assured. Transfer of control generally occurs with shipment or delivery, depending on the terms of the underlying contract. Our products are generally sold without any customer acceptance provisions, and our standard terms of sale do not allow customers to return products for credit. Most of our products do not require installation assistance or sophisticated instruction. We offer a standard product warranty, which obligates us to repair or replace our products having manufacturing defects. We maintain a reserve for future warranty costs based on historical experience or, in the absence of historical experience, management estimates. Revenue from engineering services is recognized as services are rendered over the duration of a project or as billed on a per hour basis. Field service revenue is recognized when services are rendered and is generally priced on a per day rate. We recognize rental revenue as earned over the rental period. Rentals of our equipment generally range from daily rentals to rental periods of up to six months or longer.
We recognize rental revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases. In the event collectability of lease payments is not probable at the lease commencement date, we recognize revenue when payments are received. We regularly evaluate the collectability of our lease receivables on a lease by lease basis. The evaluation primarily consists of reviewing past due account balances and other factors such as the credit quality of the customer, historical trends of the customer and current economic conditions. We suspend the recognition of rental revenue when the collectability of amounts due are no longer probable and record a direct write-off of the lease receivable to rental revenue.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Management’s Current Outlook and Assumptions
As further discussed above, there remains uncertainties regarding the duration and to what extent the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact the demand for our products and services or with our supply chain.
Regarding our Oil and Gas Markets business segment, demand for our products are subject to volatile fluctuations in crude oil prices. As a result of substantial declines in crude oil prices in recent years combined with the recent reduced global demand for oil and gas as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, oil and gas exploration and production companies experienced a significant reduction in cash flows resulting in sharp reductions in their capital spending budgets for oil and gas exploration-focused activities including seismic data acquisition activities. While we have experienced stronger marine nodal rental activity in fiscal year 2022, the need for new seismic equipment, particularly land-based equipment, remains restrained due to our customers’ (i) limited capital resources, (ii) lack of visibility into future demand for their seismic services and (iii) in some cases, under-utilized legacy equipment. Crude oil prices have recently rebounded; however, lasting higher levels of oil and gas commodity pricing may not stabilize in the long term, thus continuing the challenging industry conditions we have experienced in previous fiscal years.
Many of our land-based traditional seismic products can be damaged, destroyed or otherwise consumed during our customer’s field operations. We expect fiscal year 2023 demand for our land-based traditional seismic products may increase slightly over fiscal year 2022 levels.
It is uncertain what revenue impact our land-based wireless data recorder will have during fiscal year 2023 in light of the tepid market demand for oil and gas seismic services and equipment, but we are optimistic demand during fiscal year 2023 will exceed fiscal year 2022 levels.
The vast majority of our oil and gas rental revenue in fiscal year 2022 was derived from short-term rentals of our OBX ocean-bottom recorder. We believe our OBX rental revenue will increase substantially in fiscal year 2023 as a result of rental contracts executed during fiscal year 2022 and anticipated new rental contracts, but we can make no assurance in this regard.
We expect that fiscal year 2023 revenue from our oil and gas reservoir products, and principally our borehole tools and services, will increase slightly over fiscal year 2022 levels. We have not received any orders for a large-scale seabed PRM system since November 2012, although we do believe opportunities for PRM orders do exist in today's market. If a large scale PRM order were received in fiscal year 2023, it could significantly impact our fiscal year 2023 or fiscal year 2024 revenue and profits.
We expect fiscal year 2023 revenue from our Adjacent Markets products to increase over fiscal year 2022 levels due to our acquisition of Aquana and intergration of Aquana's products into our business and optimisim that demand for our industrial, imaging products and contract manufacturing services will continue to increase in fiscal year 2023.
We expect fiscal year 2023 revenue from our Emerging Markets products to increase over 2022 levels largely due to optimism of obtaining new security-related contracts and opportunities with oil and gas industry customers.