ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
Unless the context indicates otherwise, when we refer to “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company” in this Form 10-K, we are referring to Guess?, Inc. and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
COVID-19 Business Update
The COVID-19 pandemic is continuing to negatively impact our businesses. In late fiscal 2021, we incurred a new round of government-mandated temporary store closures, mostly in Europe. The number of temporary store closures ebbed and flowed during the first quarter of fiscal 2022 based on local conditions. During the second quarter of fiscal 2022, we gradually opened our stores that were closed at the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2022 due to COVID-19 restrictions. As of January 29, 2022, 100% of our stores were open. As of March 21, 2022, approximately 99% of our directly operated stores were open.
The COVID-19 crisis has also contributed to disruptions in the overall global supply chain, leading to industry-wide product delays and higher product and freight costs. We have been working actively to mitigate these headwinds to the extent possible through a number of global supply chain initiatives.
In light of the fluid nature of the pandemic, we continue to carefully monitor global and regional developments, such as the recent spread of the Omicron variant, and respond appropriately. We also continue to strategically manage expenses in order to protect profitability and to mitigate, to the extent possible, the effect of the supply chain disruptions.
Business Segments
Our businesses are grouped into five reportable segments for management and internal financial reporting purposes: Americas Retail, Americas Wholesale, Europe, Asia and Licensing. Our Americas Retail, Americas Wholesale, Europe and Licensing reportable segments are the same as their respective operating segments. Certain components of our Asia operating segment are separate operating segments based on region, which have been aggregated into the Asia reportable segment for disclosure purposes. We evaluate segment performance based primarily on revenues and earnings (loss) from operations before corporate performance-based compensation costs, asset impairment charges, net gains (losses) from lease modifications, restructuring charges and certain non-recurring credits (charges), if any. The Americas Retail segment includes our retail and e-commerce operations in the Americas. The Americas Wholesale segment includes our wholesale operations in the Americas. The Europe segment includes our retail, e-commerce and wholesale operations in Europe and the Middle East. The Asia segment includes our retail, e-commerce and wholesale operations in Asia and the Pacific. The Licensing segment includes the worldwide licensing operations. The business segment operating results exclude corporate overhead costs, which consist of shared costs of the organization, asset impairment charges, net gains (losses) on lease modifications, restructuring charges and certain non-recurring credits (charges), if any. Corporate overhead costs are presented separately and generally include, among other things, the following unallocated corporate costs: accounting and finance, executive compensation, corporate performance-based compensation, facilities, global advertising and marketing, human resources, information technology and legal. Information regarding these segments is summarized in “Part IV. Financial Statements - Note 18 - Segment Information” in this Form 10-K.
Products
We derive our net revenue from the sale of GUESS?, G by GUESS (GbG), GUESS Kids and MARCIANO apparel and our licensees’ products through our worldwide network of directly-operated and licensed retail stores, wholesale customers and distributors, as well as our online sites. We also derive royalty revenue from worldwide licensing activities. During fiscal 2021, we made the decision to integrate our G by GUESS brand into our Factory business over time in order to drive further efficiencies.
Foreign Currency Volatility
Since the majority of our international operations are conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar (primarily the British pound, Canadian dollar, Chinese yuan, euro, Japanese yen, Korean won, Mexican peso, Polish zloty, Russian rouble and Turkish lira), currency fluctuations can have a significant impact on the translation of our international revenues and earnings (loss) into U.S. dollars.
Some of our transactions that occur primarily in Europe, Canada, South Korea, China, Hong Kong and Mexico are denominated in U.S. dollars, Swiss francs, British pounds and Russian roubles, exposing them to exchange rate fluctuations when these transactions (such as inventory purchases or periodic lease payments) are converted to their functional currencies. As a result, fluctuations in exchange rates can impact the operating margins of our foreign operations and reported earnings (loss), and are largely dependent on the transaction timing and magnitude during the period that the currency fluctuates. When these foreign exchange rates weaken versus the U.S. dollar at the time the respective U.S. dollar denominated payment is made relative to the payments made in the comparable period, our product margins could be unfavorably impacted.
In addition, there are certain real estate leases which are denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the respective entity that entered into the agreement (primarily Swiss francs, Russian roubles and Polish zloty). As a result, we may be exposed to volatility related to unrealized gains or losses on the translation of present value of future lease payment obligations when translated at the exchange rate as of a reporting period-end.
During fiscal 2022, the average U.S. dollar rate was stronger against the Turkish lira, Russian rouble, and Japanese yen and weaker against the British pound, Canadian dollar, euro, Chinese yuan, Mexican peso, Polish zloty and Korean won compared to the average rate in fiscal 2021. This had an overall unfavorable impact on the translation of our international revenues and earnings from operations during fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year.
If the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to the respective fiscal 2022 foreign exchange rates, foreign exchange could negatively impact our revenues and operating results, as well as our international cash and other balance sheet items during fiscal 2023, particularly in Canada, Europe (primarily the euro, British pound, Turkish lira and Russian rouble) and Mexico. Alternatively, if the U.S. dollar weakens relative to the respective fiscal 2022 foreign exchange rates, our revenues and operating results, as well as our other cash balance sheet items, could be positively impacted by foreign currency fluctuations during fiscal 2023, particularly in these regions.
We currently operate in Russia through our wholesale, retail and e-commerce channels and have 70% ownership of a joint venture. We do not have contracts or other relationships with Russian banks, and Russian sales in our wholesale channel are primarily conducted either in cash in advance, with a bank guarantee or with insurance coverage. Slightly less than 3% of our revenues for fiscal 2022 were generated from sales in these regions. The imposition of enhanced export controls and economic sanctions on transactions with Russia and Russian entities could prevent us from performing existing contracts. For further discussion on currency-related risk, refer to our risk factors under “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
We enter into derivative financial instruments to offset some but not all of the exchange risk on foreign currency transactions. For additional discussion regarding our exposure to foreign currency risk, forward contracts designated as hedging instruments and forward contracts not designated as hedging instruments, refer to “Part II,