Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Report. This Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 2, 2021 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from July 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, described below, and since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after our Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $110,338, which resulted from payments for formation and operating costs of $105,282 and an unrealized loss on investments held in the Trust Account of $5,056.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 14, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 25,300,000 Units, including 3,300,000 Units issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters' over-allotment option in full, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $253,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale of 800,000 Private Placement Units to our Sponsor at a purchase price of $10.00 per, including 66,000 Private Placement Units issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters' over-allotment option in full, generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000.
For the period from July 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $696,989, which was due to changes in working capital of $591,707 and our net loss of $110,338, partially offset by the a non-cash unrealized loss on investments held in the Trust Account added back to net income of $5,056.
For the period from July 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $253,000,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from our Initial Public Offering being deposited into the Trust Account.
For the period from July 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $255,434,500 was comprised of $247,940,000 in proceeds from the issuance of Units in our Initial Public Offering net of underwriter’s discount paid, $8,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of the Private Placement Units to our Sponsor, proceeds from a promissory note with our Sponsor of $237,784 and proceeds from the issuance of Founder Shares to our Sponsor of $25,000, partially offset by the repayment of the promissory note with our Sponsor of $237,784, payment of offering costs of $530,500.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $252,994,944. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,737,511 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the Initial Public Offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial Business Combination, other than funds available from loans from our Sponsor, its affiliates or members of our management team. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required ("working capital loans"). If we complete our initial Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust Account released to us. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into private placement units of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial Business Combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor, its affiliates or our management team as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing to complete our initial Business Combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our Trust Account, or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. If we have not consummated our initial Business Combination within the required time period because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights Agreement
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Units and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A Ordinary Shares issuable upon the exercise of the warrants included in the Private Placement Units (the "private placement warrants") and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of our Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial Business Combination. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lockup period, which occurs (i) in the case of the Founder Shares, as described in the following paragraph, and (ii) in the case of the Private Placement Units, private placement warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, and the respective Class A Ordinary Shares underlying such warrants, 30 days after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
The holders of the Founder Shares have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell (i) any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of our initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to our initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A Ordinary Shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the holders of the public shares (the "public shareholders") having the right to exchange their Ordinary Shares for cash, securities or other property.
Underwriting Agreement
Simultaneously with the closing our Initial Public Offering, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,300,000 Units at an offering price of $10.00 per unit for an aggregate purchase price of $33,000,000.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5,060,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $8,855,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete our initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Classification
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity ("ASC 480") and ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own Ordinary Shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The warrants included in the Units sold in our Initial Public Offering (the "public warrants") and private placement warrants are equity classified.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Ordinary Shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Ordinary Shares (including Ordinary Shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified in temporary equity. At all other times, Ordinary Shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our public shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the public shares are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable Ordinary Shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Ordinary Shares are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per Ordinary Share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of Ordinary Shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A Ordinary Shares is excluded from net loss per share as the redemption value approximates fair value. Therefore, the earnings per share calculation allocates income and losses shared pro rata between Class A Ordinary Shares and Class B Ordinary Shares. As a result, the calculated net loss per share is the same for Class A Ordinary Shares and Class B Ordinary Shares. We have not considered the effect of the public warrants or rights included in the units in our Initial Public Offering, and private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,631,250 shares in the calculation of diluted net loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants and rights is contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-0) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-convened method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company's financial statements.