Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OR PLAN OF OPERATIONS
Disclaimer Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These include statements about our expectations, beliefs, intentions or strategies for the future, which we indicate by words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “will,” “we believe,” “believes,” “management believes” and similar language. Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and elsewhere in this report are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The factors listed in the section captioned “Risk Factors,” as well as any cautionary language in this report; provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those projected. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Global Pandemic
The impacts associated with the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic and measures to prevent its spread, and the resulting economic uncertainty, continue to affect our business in a number of ways. It will cause delays in production of film and television content of our potential films when production begins, both domestically and internationally and if production is resumed it may be paused again, there would be the impact of incremental costs required to adhere to health and safety protocols and or if and when certain of our content will be released. The full extent of impacts related to the COVID-19 global pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict.
We expect that the ultimate impact of these disruptions, including the extent of any adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition, will depend on, among other things, the duration and spread of the pandemic.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and which require the Company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies that are significant to understanding our results. For additional information, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
The following are deemed to be the most significant accounting policies affecting the Company.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. All significant inter-company balances and transactions are eliminated on consolidation.
Basis of Presentation
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Management further acknowledges that it is solely responsible for adopting sound accounting practices, establishing and maintaining a system of internal accounting control and preventing and detecting fraud. The Company’s system of internal accounting control is designed to assure, among other items, that (1) recorded transactions are valid; (2) all valid transactions are recorded and (3) transactions are recorded in the period in a timely manner to produce financial statements which present fairly the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the company for the respective periods being presented.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. A change in managements’ estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations during the period in which such changes occurred. The more significant estimates and assumptions by management include among others: Estimated revenue of films. The current economic environment has increased the degree of uncertainty inherent in these estimates and assumptions.
Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company’s financial statements reflect all adjustments that management believes are necessary for the fair presentation of their financial condition and results of operations for the periods presented.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification ASC 606 (“ASC 606”), Revenue from Contracts with Customers, using the modified retrospective approach for all contracts not completed as of the date of adoption. Results for the reporting periods beginning on January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with accounting under ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. As a result of adopting ASC 606, amounts reported under ASC 606 were not materially different from amounts that would have been reported under the previous revenue guidance of ASC 605, as such, there was no cumulative adjustment to retained earnings.
The Company generates all of its revenue from contracts with customers. The Company recognizes revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised services to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. The Company determines revenue recognition through the following steps:
1. Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer.
2. Identification of the performance obligations in the contract.
3. Determination of the transaction price.
4. Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
5. Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
At contract inception, the Company assesses the services promised in our contracts with customers and identifies a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a service (or bundle of services) that is distinct. To identify the performance obligations, the Company considers all of the services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. The Company allocates the entire transaction price to a single performance obligation.
The Company provides for an allowance for doubtful accounts based on history and experience considering economic and industry trends. The Company does not have any off-Balance Sheet exposure related to its customers.
The Company recognizes revenue when the distributor confirms to the Company that the film has been delivered to the distributor with all technical and document deliveries received, waived or deferred and the film has been entered into the distributor’s rights system.
The Company evaluates whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of product sales and related costs or the net amount earned as commissions. Generally, when the Company is primarily obligated in a transaction, are subject to inventory risk, have latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, or have several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded at the gross sale price. The Company generally records the net amounts as commissions earned if we are not primarily obligated and do not have latitude in establishing prices. The Company recognizes revenue from the distribution of its films on a net revenue basis as Mar Vista distributes the films to Mar Vista’s end customers.
For the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company had $0 and $38,366, respectively, of recorded revenue.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable, if any are carried at the expected net realizable value. The allowance for doubtful accounts, when determined, will be based on management’s assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts receivable. If there were a deterioration of a major customer’s creditworthiness, or actual defaults were higher than historical experience, our estimates of the recoverability of the amounts due to us could be overstated, which could have a negative impact on operations.
The Company currently does not have any accounts receivable. The above accounting policies will be adopted upon the Company carrying accounts receivable.
Films and Television Costs
The Company capitalizes production costs for films produced in accordance with ASC 926-20, “Entertainment-Films - Other Assets - Film Costs”. Accordingly, production costs are capitalized at actual cost and then charged against revenue quarterly as a cost of production based on the relative fair value of the film(s) delivered and recognized as revenue. The Company evaluates its capitalized production costs annually and limits recorded amounts by its ability to recover such costs through expected future sales.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) No. 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Stock Compensation
In accordance with ASC No. 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), we measure the compensation costs of share-based compensation arrangements based on the grant-date fair value and recognize the costs in the financial statements over the period during which employees are required to provide services. Share-based compensation arrangements include stock options, restricted share plans, performance-based awards, share appreciation rights and employee share purchase plans. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at their fair value. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the option grant. We apply this statement prospectively. Equity instruments (“instruments”) issued to other than employees are recorded on the basis of the fair value of the instruments, as required by ASC 718. ASC No. 505, Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees (“ASC 505”) defines the measurement date and recognition period for such instruments. In general, the measurement date is (a) when a performance commitment, as defined, is reached or (b) when the earlier of (i) the non-employee performance is complete or (ii) the instruments are vested. The measured value related to the instruments is recognized over a period based on the facts and circumstances of each particular grant as defined in ASC 505.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We follow the provisions of ASC 820. This Topic defines fair value, establishes a measurement framework and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
We use fair value measurements for determining the valuation of derivative financial instruments payable in shares of its common stock. This primarily involves option pricing models that incorporate certain assumptions and projections to determine fair value. These require management’s judgment.
Fair Value Measurements
FASB ASC Topic 825, Financial Instruments, requires disclosures about fair value of financial instruments in quarterly reports as well as in annual reports. For the Company, this statement applies to certain investments and long-term debt. Also, the FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, clarifies the definition of fair value for financial reporting, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and requires additional disclosures about the use of fair value measurements.
Various inputs are considered when determining the value of the Company’s investments and long-term debt. The inputs or methodologies used for valuing securities are not necessarily an indication of the risk associated with investing in these securities. These inputs are summarized in the three broad levels listed below.
● Level 1 - observable market inputs that are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
● Level 2 - other significant observable inputs (including quoted prices for similar securities, interest rates, credit risk, etc.).
● Level 3 - significant unobservable inputs (including the Company’s own assumptions in determining the fair value of investments).
The Company’s adoption of FASB ASC Topic 825 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The carrying value of financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value is measured on a recurring or nonrecurring basis. Financial assets and liabilities measured on a non-recurring basis are those that are adjusted to fair value when a significant event occurs. The Company had no financial assets or liabilities carried and measured on a nonrecurring basis during the reporting periods. Financial assets and liabilities measured on a recurring basis are those that are adjusted to fair value each time a financial statement is prepared. The Company had no financial assets and/or liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring basis at April 30, 2022 and 2021. Assets and liabilities approximate fair value due to their short term nature.
The availability of inputs observable in the market varies from instrument to instrument and depends on a variety of factors including the type of instrument, whether the instrument is actively traded, and other characteristics particular to the transaction. For many financial instruments, pricing inputs are readily observable in the market, the valuation methodology used is widely accepted by market participants, and the valuation does not require significant management discretion. For other financial instruments, pricing inputs are less observable in the market and may require management judgment.
Basic and diluted earnings per share
Diluted earnings (loss) per share are computed on the basis of the weighted average number of common shares (including common stock subject to redemption) plus dilutive potential common shares outstanding for the reporting period. In periods where losses are reported, the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding excludes common stock equivalents, because their inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
The total number of potential additional dilutive securities outstanding for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021 was none since the Company had net losses and any additional potential common shares would have an anti-dilutive effect.
Concentrations, Risks, and Uncertainties
The Company did not have a concentration of business with suppliers constituting greater than 10% of the Company’s expenses during 2022 or 2021. In fiscal years 2022 and 2021, all of its revenues were from Mar Vista Entertainment LLC.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have evaluated new accounting pronouncements that have been issued and are not yet effective for us and determined that there are no such pronouncements expected to have an impact on our future financial statements.
Plan of Operations
The Company had a net loss of $95,579 and a net profit of $2,227 for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and historical losses totaling $1,148,773. These factors create substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s management plan to continue as a going concern revolves around its ability to execute its business strategy of distributing digital content, as well as raising the necessary capital to pay ongoing general and administrative expenses of the Company.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 2021
Revenue
For the year ended April 30, 2022 we had revenues of $0 compared to $38,366 for the year ended April 30, 2021. Revenues in fiscal year 2021 were due to distribution fees paid to us by Mar Vista related to the motion pictures “Merry Ex’s” and “Bridal Boot Camp”.
Cost of Sales
For the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, we had no cost of sales.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses increased by $59,440, or 164.5%, to $95,579 in the year ended April 30, 2022 from $36,139 in the year ended April 30, 2021 primarily due to motion picture residual costs of $59,722, an increase in other consulting costs of $9,000, offset partially by a decrease in professional fees of $9,166.
Operating expenses for the year ended April 30, 2022 were comprised primarily of office rent of $2,388, professional fees of $21,469, motion picture residual costs of $59,722, and consulting costs of $12,000.
Operating expenses for the year ended April 30, 2021 were comprised primarily of office rent of $2,388, professional fees of $30,635, consulting costs of $3,000, and $116 of other general and administration costs.
Income (loss) before income taxes
Net loss before income taxes for the year ended April 30, 2022 totaling $95,579 is primarily due to motion picture residual costs, consulting services costs, professional fees, and rent compared to net income for the year ended April 30, 2021 totaling $2,227 is primarily due to revenue of $38,366 offset partially by consulting services costs, professional fees, and rent.
Assets and Liabilities
Total assets were $497 as of April 30, 2022 compared to $14,833 as of April 30, 2021, or a decrease of $14,336, is primarily the result of a decrease in cash of $14,336. Total liabilities as of April 30, 2022 were $177,272 compared to $96,029 as of April 30, 2020, or an increase of $81,243. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in accounts payable - related party of $24,200 and accounts payable of $57,043.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General - Overall, we had a decrease in cash flows of $14,336 in the year ended April 30, 2022 resulting from cash used in operating activities of $22,821 and cash provided by financing activities of $8,485.
The following is a summary of our cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities during the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operations was $22,821 for the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to net cash provide by operations for the year ended April 30, 2021 of $14,379 primarily due to a net loss of $95,579 for the year ended April 30, 2022 and the change in accounts payable - related party of $3,000, offset primarily by expenses paid on behalf of Company - related party of $18,715 and accounts payable and accrued expenses of $57,043.
Net cash provided by operations was $14,379 for the year ended April 30, 2021 primarily due to a net profit of $2,227 for the year ended April 30, 2021, $29,560 in expenses that were paid by others on behalf of the Company, offset primarily by the change in accounts payable - related party of $15,000 and the change in accounts payable of $2,408.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 and $0 for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $8,485 for the year ended April 30, 2022. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0 for the year ended April 30, 2021.
Our cash needs in the year ended April 30, 2023 are estimated to be $200,000. This budget is based on the assumption that we will carry out one project at a time for which we will need about $50,000 in working capital; general and administrative expenses of $150,000 for the costs related to being public, and miscellaneous office expenses. We sold no shares in fiscal years 2022 and 2020. As we move forward with our business plan, we will need to raise additional capital either through the sale of stock or funding from shares and or officers and directors to cover our cash needs through the end of the 2023 fiscal year.
Information included in this report includes forward looking statements, which can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as may, expect, anticipate, believe, estimate, or continue, or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology. The statements in “Risk Factors” and other statements and disclaimers in this report constitute cautionary statements identifying important factors, including risks and uncertainties, relating to the forward-looking statements that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in the forward-looking statements.
Equity Financing
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company did not enter into any private placement memorandums.
During fiscal years 2022 and 2021, the Company has not issued a total of 38,153,269 common shares (6,000,000 common shares due to a third party and 32,153,269 common shares due to related party affiliates). These shares are reflected in the above disclosures.
Advances from related party
The Company borrows funds from the Company’s affiliates for working capital purposes from time to time. The Company has recorded the principal balance due of $8,485 and $0 under Accounts payable - related party in the accompanying Balance Sheets at April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company received advances of $8,485 (from Lamont Roberts of $250, C&R Films of $4,235, and Mike Criscione of $4,000) and $0 and no repayments for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Other
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company made no payments to Lamont Roberts, CEO and acting CFO of the Company, and Mr. Roberts incurred no expenses on behalf of the Company. The Company has a balance owed to Mr. Roberts of $250 at April 30, 2022.
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company made payments of $3,000 and $15,000, respectively, to C&R Films for film production costs and reimbursement of various expenses. C&R paid expenses totaling $3,995 and $12,591 in the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, in operating expenses including rent, filing expenses, and accounting costs on behalf of the Company. C&R Films is controlled by Lamont Roberts, CEO and acting CFO of the Company. The Company has a balance owed to C&R Films of $38,326 at April 30, 2022.
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company made no payments to Dos Cabezas for film production costs and reimbursement of various expenses. Dos Cabezas paid expenses totaling $0 and $7,394 in the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, in operating expenses including accounting costs on behalf of the Company. Dos Cabezas is controlled by Lamont Roberts, CEO and acting CFO of the Company. The Company has a balance owed to Dos Cabezas of $14,394 at April 30, 2022.
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, Kevin Frawley, an affiliate, paid expenses totaling $5,150 and $0, respectively, in operating expenses, including audit fees, on behalf of the Company. The Company has a balance owed to Mr. Frawley of $21,240 at April 30, 2022.
During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, the Company made no payments to Mike Criscione, Director, for reimbursement of various expenses. During the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, Mr. Criscione paid expenses totaling $9,570 and $9,575, respectively, in operating expenses, including audit fees, on behalf of the Company. The Company has a balance owed to Mr. Criscione of $31,900 at April 30, 2022.
Motion Picture Residual Payments
The Company is obligated to pay motion picture residual payments of approximately 3.6% of gross licensing revenues collected by Mar Vista for residual earnings to the pension and health benefit plans on behalf of the actors that performed in the motion pictures. In the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022, the Company made payments totaling $3,750 and has a balance owed of $55,972 at April 30, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Inflation
Management believes that inflation has not had a material effect on the Company’s results of operations.