Item 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Graf Acquisition Corp. IV. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the unaudited condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward- looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 28, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a business combination. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Graf Acquisition Partners IV LLC. On May 25, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 15,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.8 million, of which approximately $5.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. On June 2, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and purchased the 2,161,500 additional units, generating gross proceeds of approximately $21.6 million. We incurred additional offering costs of approximately $1.2 million in connection with the over-allotment (of which approximately $0.8 million was for deferred underwriting fees).
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 4,433,333 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant to our sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $6.7 million. We consummated the second closing of the private placement on June 2, 2021, simultaneously with the closing of the over-allotment, resulting in the sale of an additional 288,200 private placement warrants, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $432,000.
Upon the closing of the IPO, the over-allotment, and the private placement, $171.6 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the IPO and of the private placement warrants in the private placement were placed in the trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO, the over-allotment, and the sale of the private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we have not consummated an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or by May 25, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.7 million in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $642,000.
Our liquidity needs through December 31, 2021 were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to purchase the founder shares, the loan of approximately $67,000 from the sponsor under a promissory note, and the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. We repaid the promissory note in full on May 26, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem necessary in their sole discretion (the “working capital loans”). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board's (“FASB”) accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company may not be able to meet its obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are available to be issued. As such, management has determined that the liquidity condition raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2021, no adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our IPO, and since our IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For period from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $991,000 which consisted of a non-operating loss upon issuance of private placement warrants of approximately $4.2 million, approximately $2.2 million in general and administrative expenses, approximately $185,000 of franchise tax expenses, and related party administrative expenses of approximately $108,000, approximately $34,000 in offering cost allocated to derivative warrant liability, offset by approximately $5.7 million in change in fair value of warrant liability, and approximately $41,000 in income from investments held in trust account.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities at December 31, 2021.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of our founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the IPO. These holders are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company registered such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the IPO to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional units less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On June 2, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $3.4 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO and over-allotment. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $6.0 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Administrative Services Agreement
On May 20, 2021, we entered into an agreement that provided that, commencing on the date that the Company’s securities were first listed on the NYSE through the earlier of consummation of the initial business combination and the liquidation, the Company agreed to pay G-SPAC Management LLC, an affiliate of the sponsor, $15,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial, administrative and support services provided to the Company and members of the management team. For the three months ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company incurred expenses of approximately $45,000 and $108,000, respectively, under this agreement. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no outstanding balance for services in connection with such agreement on the accompanying balance sheet.
In addition, the sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on the Company’s behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. The audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by the Company to the sponsor, officers or directors, or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made from funds held outside the trust account.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these unaudited condensed financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Derivative Warrant Liability
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company will evaluate its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The fair value of the private placement warrants as of December 31, 2021 is determined using Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of IPO (including exercise of the over-allotment option), 17,161,500 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the common stock shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option), the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the IPO (including exercise of the over-allotment option) and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 8,153,833 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the period from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020- 06 on January 28, 2021 using a modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the unaudited condensed financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.