Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors
” and elsewhere in this Report.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report. above. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 4, 2020 (“Inception”) for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from Inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and, subsequent to the IPO, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination, at the earliest. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,676,152, which consisted of operating costs of $3,634,030, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in our trust account of $16,053, and a gain due to a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,941,825.
For the period from March 4, 2020 (inception) through ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $10,949, which consisted of operating costs of $10,949.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 5, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 20,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit, including 2,500,000 units sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 777,500 private units to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per private unit, generating gross proceeds of $7,775,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private units, a total of $200,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $11,755,731 in transaction costs, including $4,000,000 of underwriting fees, $7,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $755,731 of other costs. Of these transaction costs, $344,981 were determined to be allocable to the warrant liabilities and were expensed in formation costs and other operating expenses within the statement of operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $200,016,053 (including $16,053 of interest income) consisting of investments in qualifying money market funds that invest solely in U.S. treasury securities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,672,591. Net loss of $1,676,152 was decreased by interest income on marketable securities held in our trust account of $16,053, increased by transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $344,981, decreased by a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,941,825, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $616,458 of cash.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $371,678 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily for working capital purposes and to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment.
On November 11, 2021, the Sponsor issued an unsecured promissory note to the Company (the “Working Capital Loan”), pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $5,000,000. The Working Capital Loan is non-interest
bearing and will be repaid upon completion of an initial business combination, or, at the Sponsor’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of the balance of the Working Capital Loan may be converted upon completion of an initial business combination into private units at a price of $10.00 per private unit. The Company drew down $1,500,000 on this note as of January 26, 2022.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination within the time period set forth in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
On November 11, 2021, the Sponsor issued an unsecured promissory note to the Company evidencing the Working Capital Loan, pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $5,000,000. The Working Capital Loan is non-interest
bearing and will be repaid upon completion of an initial business combination, or, at the Sponsor’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of the balance of the Working Capital Loan may be converted upon completion of an initial business combination into private units at a price of $10.00 per private unit. The Company drew down $1,500,000 on this note on January 26, 2022.
We have an agreement to pay Affinity Interactive, an affiliate of the Sponsor, a monthly fee of $33,333 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services, reimbursement of a portion of the compensation paid by Affinity Interactive, an affiliate of our Sponsor, to our officers in consideration of the time dedicated to us by each of Ms. Higgins, our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Fiocco, our Chief Operating Officer and Secretary, and Mr. Scrivens, our Chief Financial Officer, and reimbursement of expenses. We began incurring these fees on February 3, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and the Company’s liquidation in accordance with its amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $7,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether they are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the holders of the warrants could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a
component of additional paid-in
capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. As a smaller reporting company, ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.