Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with Greenhill & Co., Inc.’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Greenhill is a leading independent investment bank that provides financial and strategic advice on significant domestic and cross-border mergers and acquisitions, restructurings, financings, capital raising and other transactions to a diverse client base, including corporations, partnerships, private equity sponsors, institutional investors, family offices, and governments globally. We serve as a trusted advisor to our clients throughout the world on a collaborative, globally integrated basis from our offices in the United States, Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
We were established in 1996 by Robert F. Greenhill, the former President of Morgan Stanley and former Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Smith Barney. Since our founding, Greenhill has grown significantly, by recruiting talented and diverse managing directors and other senior professionals, acquiring complementary advisory businesses and training, developing and promoting professionals internally. We have expanded beyond merger and acquisition advisory services to include financing, restructuring, and private capital advisory services, and we have expanded the breadth of our sector expertise to cover substantially all major industries. Since the opening of our original office in New York, we have expanded globally to 15 offices across four continents.
Over our 26 years as an independent investment banking firm, we have sought to opportunistically recruit new managing directors with a range of industry and transaction specialties, as well as high-level corporate and other relationships, from major investment banks, independent financial advisory firms and other institutions. We also have sought to expand our geographic reach both through recruiting managing directors in new locations and through strategic acquisitions. Through our recruiting and acquisition activity, we have significantly increased our geographic reach by adding offices in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, Japan, Australia, Sweden, Hong Kong, Spain, Singapore and France.
During 2021, we recruited 11 additional client facing managing directors. With these recruits we have expanded our global M&A regional experience in Australia, Germany and Latin America and sector expertise in telecom and communications, infrastructure, media and software. Additionally, we rebuilt our private capital advisory team and, as part of that, we have taken steps to build a primary fund raising business. It is our objective to achieve increased productivity by focusing on larger assignments, expanding our client base to financial sponsors and broadening our service offering to including more financial advisory roles. We had 72 client facing managing directors as of December 31, 2021.
Business Environment and Outlook
Economic and global financial conditions can materially affect our operational and financial performance. See “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of some of the factors that can affect our performance.
The volume of announced and completed M&A transactions globally in 2021 increased substantially from the levels in 2020, which had shrunk from previous levels due to the impact of the COVID pandemic. While we had a record level of new client assignments and a record number of deal announcements and clients from whom we earned a fee of $1 million or greater during the year, our revenue result was constrained by the fact that we had fewer large transaction fees than has been the case for us historically or we expect will be the case in future years. The level of M&A dialogues continues to remain strong across most industries and geographies among our client base, including financial sponsors where we continue to expand our business.
Bankruptcy related restructuring activity slowed considerably in 2021 from elevated 2020 levels, mainly driven by a global economic recovery and fiscal and monetary stimulus that continues to drive strong capital markets activities. While there were fewer restructuring opportunities in 2021, we made progress in our initiative to win and execute more financing advisory assignments. We expect over the longer term the pace of restructuring activity will increase due to the level of corporate debt issued over the past two years and the ongoing reduction in monetary and fiscal stimulus relative to the COVID pandemic period.
For our private capital advisory business, our focus in 2021 was rebuilding our team and we had a modest decline in revenues. By year end we had a fully functioning, global team capable of raising private equity, infrastructure, credit and other types of funds and a growing backlog of capital raising assignments.
While the global economy significantly improved in 2021, it remains difficult to predict the future impact that COVID-19 and other economic and geopolitical events may have on the global business environment.
Key Financial Measures
Revenues
We are solely an advisory firm and our revenues are derived from both corporate advisory services related to M&A, financings and restructurings and private capital advisory services related to sales or capital raises pertaining to alternative assets. Revenues from corporate advisory are primarily driven by total deal volume and the size of individual transactions. While fees payable upon the successful conclusion of a transaction generally represent the largest portion of our corporate advisory fees, we also earn other fees, including on-going retainer fees, substantially all of which relate to non-success-based strategic advisory, financing advisory and restructuring assignments, and fees payable upon the commencement of an engagement or upon the achievement of certain milestones such as the announcement of a transaction or the rendering of a fairness opinion. Additionally, we generate private capital advisory revenues from services related to sales of alternative assets in the secondary market and capital raises where we act as private placement agents.
We do not allocate our revenue by type of advice rendered (M&A, financing advisory and restructuring, strategic advisory, or other) because of the complexity of the assignments for which we earn revenue and because a single transaction can encompass multiple types of advice. For example, a restructuring assignment can involve, and in some cases end successfully in, a sale of all or part of the financially distressed company. Likewise, an acquisition assignment can relate to a financially distressed target involved in or considering a restructuring, and an M&A assignment can develop from a relationship that we had on a prior restructuring assignment, and vice versa. Further, debt and equity financing assignments can include participation of both M&A and restructuring personnel. While we do separately allocate private capital advisory revenue, we expect involvement of our M&A team as we increase our focus to higher value added assignments.
Operating Expenses
We classify operating expenses as employee compensation and benefits expenses and non-compensation operating expenses. Non-compensation operating expenses include the costs for occupancy and equipment rental, communications, information services, professional fees, recruiting, travel and entertainment, insurance, depreciation and amortization, and other operating expenses.
Employee Compensation and Benefits Expenses. The largest component of our operating expenses is employee compensation and benefits expenses, which we determine annually based on a percentage of revenues. The actual percentage of revenues, which we refer to as our compensation ratio, is determined by management in consultation with the Compensation Committee at each year end and is based on factors such as the relative level of revenues, anticipated compensation requirements to retain and reward our employees, the cost to recruit and exit employees, the charge for amortization of restricted stock and deferred cash compensation awards and related forfeitures, among others.
Our compensation and benefits expenses principally consist of base salary and benefits, annual incentive compensation payable as cash bonus awards, including certain amounts that may be subject to clawback, and amortization of long-term incentive compensation awards of restricted stock units and deferred cash compensation. Base salary and benefits are paid ratably throughout the year. Annual cash bonuses, which are accrued throughout the year, are dependent upon a number of factors, including our financial performance, and are generally paid in the first quarter in respect of the preceding year. Awards of restricted stock units and deferred cash compensation are amortized into compensation expense (based upon the fair value of the award at the time of grant) during the service period over which the award vests, which is generally three to five years for the majority of the awards. We estimate forfeitures as part of our amortized deferred compensation cost based on an estimated rate of forfeitures which we periodically adjust to the actual rate of forfeited awards. As we expense the restricted stock awards, the portion of the restricted stock units amortized is recorded within stockholders’ equity in the consolidated statements of changes in stockholders' equity. The expense associated with our annual and long-term incentive compensation can have a significant impact on compensation expense and may vary from year to year.
Non-Compensation Expenses. Our non-compensation operating expenses such as occupancy, depreciation, and information services are relatively fixed year to year although they may vary depending upon changes in headcount, geographic locations and other factors. Other expenses such as travel, professional fees and other operating expenses vary dependent on the level of business development, recruitment, foreign currency movements and the amount of reimbursable client expenses, which are reported in full in both our revenues and our operating expenses. It is management's objective to maintain consistent comparable non-compensation costs year over year for each jurisdiction in which we operate. We monitor costs based on actual costs incurred in prior periods and on headcount and seek to gain operating efficiencies when possible.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of the weighted average borrowing costs of the secured term loan facility and amortization of original issue discount and deferred financing costs. As part of our 2017 recapitalization plan we substantially increased our leverage and interest expense through the borrowing under a secured term loan facility, which currently bears interest at LIBOR plus 3.25% and is not subject to a LIBOR floor.
Provision for Income Taxes
We are subject to federal, state and local corporate income taxes in the United States. In addition, our non-U.S. subsidiaries are subject to income taxes in their local jurisdictions.
Our effective tax rate is principally comprised of our U.S. federal income tax rate, which is currently 21%, plus the incremental tax rate incurred for foreign, state and local taxes. While state and local taxes generally increase our effective tax rate nominally, foreign taxes can more substantially increase or decrease our effective tax rate depending on the amount of earnings we generate in each jurisdiction. We have historically generated substantial earnings in low tax jurisdictions such as the United Kingdom, and we have historically generated a smaller portion of our annual earnings in high tax jurisdictions such as Australia, Germany and Japan.
Results of Operations
The results of operations below focuses on the results of 2021 versus 2020. For a discussion of 2020 versus 2019, please refer to "Results of Operations" in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth information relating to our operating performance metrics.
Revenues
The following table sets forth data relating to the Firm’s sources of revenues by client location.
2021 versus 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues were $317.5 million compared to $311.7 million in 2020, an increase of $5.8 million, or 2%. The increase in our 2021 revenues, as compared to 2020, resulted from increase in both merger and acquisition transaction completion fees and financing advisory fees, offset by a reduction in European merger and acquisition, restructuring advisory and retainer fees.
By geographic region in 2021, North America, where we generated 64% of our revenues, remained our largest contributor. Revenue from our North American clients increased year over year on an absolute dollar basis and increased as a percentage of total revenues as a result of weaker performance in Europe in 2021 as compared to 2020. In Europe, we derived 19% of our revenues in Europe in 2021, and our absolute revenues declined by nearly half from 2020. We generated 17% of our revenues from clients located in the rest of the world, reflecting increases in both the percentage and absolute dollar amount of total revenue, primarily driven by a strong year in Australia.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total operating expenses were $246.3 million compared to $256.4 million in 2020. The decrease of $10.1 million resulted from both lower compensation and benefits expenses and non-compensation expenses, each as described in more detail below. Our operating profit margin was 22% for 2021 as compared to 18% in 2020.
Compensation and Benefits Expenses
2021 versus 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our employee compensation and benefits expenses were $190.5 million, which reflected a 60% ratio of compensation to revenues. This amount compared to $194.1 million for 2020, which reflected a 62% ratio of compensation to revenues. The modest decrease in expense of $3.6 million, or 2%, principally related to slightly lower base compensation expense and amortization of incentive compensation, partially offset by an increase in accrued year-end bonuses payable in line with higher annual revenues. The ratio of compensation to revenues for 2021 decreased slightly as compared to 2020 as we sought to bring our compensation ratio closer to our target range.
Non-Compensation Operating Expenses
In January 2021, we completed our relocation to our new headquarters in New York, which provided us with higher quality, more efficient, yet lower cost space. During the build out period in 2020, we incurred rental expense on both our former space and our new space, which increased our aggregate occupancy costs. Beginning in the second quarter of 2022, we will begin construction on new space in London. Similar to our New York relocation, during the construction period, which we estimate to be 6-8 months, we will incur rental expense on both our existing space and new space.
During both 2021 and 2020, our travel expenditures were much lower than the amount we incurred annually prior to the travel restrictions imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While our travel and entertainment activity increased during the second half of 2021 as some of the COVID-19 restrictions eased, our spend rate was much less than pre-COVID-19 levels. Over the longer term we expect an increase in our aggregate travel spend but at a reduction from pre-COVID-19 levels and with a higher rate of recovery through reimbursed client expenses.
2021 versus 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our non-compensation operating expenses of $55.7 million compared to $62.3 million in 2020, representing a decrease of $6.6 million, or 11%. The decrease in non-compensation expenses principally resulted from the elimination of the double rent charge in New York as discussed above, lower professional fees and reduced market data costs, partially offset by the absence of a foreign exchange gain, which we benefited from in 2020, and higher deprecation related to our new headquarters space. Non-compensation operating expenses as a percentage of revenues for 2021 decreased to 18% as compared to 20% in 2020 as a result of spreading lower non-compensation operating costs over slightly higher revenues.
Interest Expense
2021 versus 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred interest expense of $12.1 million as compared to $15.5 million in 2020. The decrease in interest expense of $3.4 million during 2021 related to both lower market borrowing rates and lower borrowings outstanding.
In July 2021, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee announced that it is formally recommending the forward-looking SOFR term rate. We expect to convert to a SOFR term rate based facility by mid 2023. However, there can be no assurance the LIBOR phase out will not increase our cost of capital, see “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Provision for Income Taxes
2021 versus 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the provision for income taxes was $16.8 million, reflecting an effective rate of 28%, as compared to a provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $8.4 million, reflecting an effective rate of 21%. The higher effective rate for the full year 2021 principally resulted from both an increase in the proportion of our earnings generated from Australia, which has a higher tax rate than the U.S., and charges related to the vesting of restricted stock unit awards vesting at a value less than the grant price. Our effective tax rate for 2020 benefited from
the generation of a substantial portion of our earnings from the U.K and benefits of the CARES Act, which among other things increased interest deductibility and extended net operating loss carrybacks, partially offset by charges related to the vesting of restricted stock unit awards vesting at a value less than the grant price.
Our effective rate is impacted positively or negatively upon the vesting of restricted stock awards by a charge or benefit for the tax effect of the difference between the grant price value and market price value at vesting of the awards. In 2021 and 2020, the average grant price of the awards vesting during each respective year exceeded the market price of our shares at vesting and we incurred income tax charges of $0.8 million and $3.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Looking forward, during the first quarter of 2022, the market value of awards vesting exceeded the average grant price and we recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $1.1 million. We are not able to predict our future share price, as a consequence, we are not able to estimate the impact that this benefit or charge will have on our provision for income taxes in future periods.
Although we cannot predict our estimated effective tax rate for future periods primarily due to the jurisdiction and amount of earnings, which varies year over year, we expect that our effective tax rate will be around 25% over the next few years, assuming our historical mix of foreign earnings and no changes in the existing tax law, and excluding the impact of the tax charge/benefit resulting from the vesting of restricted stock awards.
Geographic Data
For a summary of the total revenues, income before taxes and total assets by geographic region, see “Note 18 - Business Information” to the consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity position, which consists of cash and cash equivalents, other significant working capital assets and liabilities, debt and other matters relating to liquidity requirements and current market conditions, is monitored by management on a regular basis. We retain our cash in financial institutions with high credit ratings and/or invest in short-term investments that are expected to provide liquidity and as permitted under our credit facility. It is our objective to retain a global cash balance adequate to service our forecast operating and financing needs. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $134.6 million.
We generate substantially all of our cash from advisory fees. We use our cash primarily for recurring operating expenses, the service of our debt, the repurchase of our common shares and other capital needs. Our recurring monthly operating disbursements principally consist of base compensation expense, occupancy, travel and entertainment, and other operating expenses. In addition, we generally make interest payments on our debt on a monthly basis. Our recurring quarterly and annual disbursements consist of cash bonus payments, tax payments, debt service payments, dividend payments, and repurchases of our common stock from our employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities incurred on vesting of restricted stock units. These amounts vary depending upon our profitability and other factors.
Because a portion of the compensation we pay to our employees is distributed in annual cash bonus awards (usually in the first quarter of each year), our net cash balance is typically at its lowest level during the first quarter of each year and generally accumulates from our operating activities throughout the remainder of the year. Our current liabilities primarily consist of accounts payable, which are generally paid monthly, accrued compensation, which includes accrued cash bonuses that are generally paid in the first quarter of the following year to the large majority of our employees, and current taxes payable. Our current assets include accounts receivable, which we generally collect within 60 days, except for fees generated through our primary capital advisory engagements, which are generally paid in installments over a period of three years, and certain restructuring transactions, where collections may take longer due to court-ordered holdbacks. At December 31, 2021, we had fees receivable of $51.5 million, including long-term receivables related to our primary capital advisory engagements of $1.5 million.
In 2017, we announced a leveraged recapitalization to put in place a capital structure designed to enhance long term shareholder value. In 2019, we refinanced the credit facility that was put in place at the time of the recapitalization and entered into a $375.0 million five-year term loan B facility (“TLB”).
Borrowings under the TLB bear interest at either the U.S. Prime Rate plus 2.25% or LIBOR plus 3.25%. Our borrowing rates in 2021 ranged from 3.3% to 3.4%. The FCA, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it will not compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration Limited announced a plan to extend the date as of which most U.S. LIBOR values would cease being computed from December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2023. On July 29, 2021, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee announced that it is formally recommending the forward-looking SOFR term rate. Our credit agreement includes alternative rate fallback provisions, which provides for use of a broadly accepted
market convention to replace LIBOR as the rate of interest and are triggered by a notification from the Administrative Agent. We have not yet received such notification, but currently expect that when we do the TLB will likely be converted to a SOFR term rate based facility. There can be no assurance the LIBOR phase out will not increase our cost of capital.
The TLB requires quarterly principal amortization payments of $4.7 million from September 30, 2019 through March 31, 2024, with the remaining balance due at maturity on April 12, 2024. The TLB permits voluntary principal payments to be made in advance without penalty and such payments are applied to the next successive quarterly installments. In 2021, we made advance payments of $55.0 million on the TLB. As a result of these and other payments made in prior years, we have repaid all required quarterly amortization payments due in advance of maturity and the remaining outstanding principal balance of $271.9 million is due at maturity. Subject to the terms of the credit agreement, we may also be required to repay certain amounts in advance of maturity in connection with an annual excess cash flow calculation, the non-ordinary course sale of assets, receipt of insurance proceeds, and the issuance of debt obligations, subject to certain exceptions.
Future voluntary repayments on the TLB will be applied without penalty or premium. Based on the current outstanding balance of the TLB we have temporarily paused further principal repayments to maintain an appropriate level of trading liquidity in the loan facility in the event we elect to refinance in advance of maturity. We would consider refinancing, modifying or amending the TLB if market conditions were favorable and permitted us to improve some or all of terms, including an extension of the term, a reduction of the borrowing rate, the modification of the restricted payment covenants and other actions to increase our flexibility with respect to our uses of free cash flow. We would consider making further repayments prior to maturity if interest rates increased meaningfully or we otherwise considered it a prudent use of our capital.
The TLB is guaranteed by our existing and subsequently acquired or organized wholly-owned U.S. restricted subsidiaries (excluding any registered broker-dealers) and secured with a first priority perfected security interest in certain domestic assets, 100% of the capital stock of each U.S. subsidiary and 65% of the capital stock of each non-U.S. subsidiary, subject to certain exclusions. The credit facility contains certain covenants that limit our ability above certain permitted amounts to incur additional indebtedness, make certain acquisitions, pay dividends and repurchase shares. The TLB does not have financial covenants, however, we are subject to certain non-financial covenants such as repayment obligations, restricted payment limitations, financial reporting requirements and others. Our failure to comply with the terms of these covenants may adversely affect our operations and could permit lenders to accelerate the maturity of the debt and to foreclose upon any collateral securing the debt. At December 31, 2021, we were compliant with all loan covenants under the credit agreement and we expect to continue to be compliant with all loan covenants in future periods.
Since we announced our recapitalization in 2017, we have used the majority of the TLB borrowing proceeds along with a portion of our excess cash flow over the past several years to repurchase shares of our common stock through open market purchases (including pursuant to 10b5-1 plans) and tender offers. During 2021, we repurchased in the open market 2,041,179 shares of our common stock for $32.8 million and we are deemed to have repurchased 814,020 shares of common stock equivalents from employees at the time of vesting of RSUs to settle withholding tax liabilities for $12.3 million. In aggregate during 2021, we repurchased 2,855,199 shares and share equivalents for $45.1 million at an average price of $15.80 per share. In addition, after year end through January 31, 2022, we repurchased 263,571 shares of common stock for $4.8 million at an average price of $18.23 per share.
For the period beginning February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023, our Board of Directors has authorized $70.0 million in purchases of common shares and share equivalents (via tax withholding on vesting of restricted stock units). There can be no assurances of the price at which we may be able to repurchase our shares or that we will repurchase the full amount authorized for the period ending January 31, 2023 or the amount authorized in any future period. Since our Board authorization in 2022 (as of February 15, 2022), we have repurchased 178,103 shares of our common stock for $3.4 million and we are deemed to have repurchased 581,011 shares of common stock equivalents in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in respect of stock delivered to our employees in settlement of restricted stock units that vested for $10.9 million and had $55.7 million remaining and authorized for repurchase through January 2023.
Since 2017, we have made quarterly dividend payments of $0.05 per share. In February 2022, the Board of Directors increased our quarterly dividend payment to $0.10 per share beginning with the dividend payable March 16, 2022.
Future authorizations to repurchase our common stock and to pay dividends on our common stock are at the discretion of our Board of Directors and depend upon, among other things, general financial conditions, capital requirements and surplus, cash flows, debt service obligations, our recent and expected future operations and earnings, legal and contractual restrictions and other factors as the Board of Directors may deem relevant. Further, under our credit agreement, we are restricted in the amount of cash we may use to repurchase our common stock and common stock equivalents and/or to make dividend distributions. Going forward, we intend to take a balanced approach to our use of available cash, allocating funds for a combination of
deleveraging, share repurchases and dividends depending on such factors as our financial position, capital requirements, results of operations and outlook, as well as any legal, tax, regulatory or contractual constraints and any other factors deemed relevant.
As part of our long-term incentive award program, we may award restricted stock units to managing directors and other employees at the time of hire and/or as part of annual compensation. Awards of restricted stock units generally vest over a three to five-year service period, subject to continued employment on the vesting date. Each restricted stock unit represents the holder’s right to receive one share of our common stock (or at our election, a cash payment equal to the fair value thereof) on the vesting date. Under the terms of our equity incentive plan, we generally repurchase from our employees that portion of restricted stock unit awards used to fund income tax withholding due at the time the restricted stock unit awards vest and pay the remainder of the award in shares of our common stock. Based upon the number of restricted stock unit grants outstanding at February 15, 2022, which takes into account both the early February 2022 vesting of annual awards and the grant of new awards made in 2022 as part of our compensation payable in respect of 2021, we estimate repurchases of our common stock from our employees in conjunction with the cash settlement of tax liabilities incurred on vesting of restricted stock units of approximately $64.7 million (as calculated based upon the closing share price as of February 15, 2022 of $19.05 per share and assuming a withholding tax rate of 45% consistent with our recent experience) over the next five years, of which an additional $12.8 million will be payable later in 2022, $18.7 million will be payable in 2023, $12.8 million will be payable in 2024, $13.1 million will be payable in 2025, $4.5 million will be payable in 2026, and $2.8 million will be payable in 2027. In addition, we expect to make additional restricted stock unit awards related to 2021 in late March 2022 and the estimated repurchase amount for 2023 and beyond will increase. We will realize a corporate income tax deduction concurrently with the vesting of the restricted stock units. While we expect to fund future repurchases of our common stock equivalents (if any) with operating cash flow, we are unable to predict the price of our common stock, and as a result, the timing or magnitude of our share repurchases, which may be limited under the credit agreement. To the extent future repurchases are expected to exceed the amount permitted under the credit agreement we may seek to modify the credit agreement to increase the amount or seek other means to settle the withholding tax liability incurred on the vesting of the restricted stock units.
Also, as part of our long-term incentive award program, we may also award deferred cash compensation to managing directors and other employees at the time of hire and/or as part of annual compensation. Awards of deferred cash compensation generally vest over a three to four year service period, subject to continued employment. Each award provides the employee with the right to receive future cash compensation payments, which are non-interest bearing, on the vesting date. Based upon the value of the deferred cash awards outstanding at February 15, 2022, which takes into account both the February 2022 vesting of annual awards and the grant of new awards made as part of our 2021 compensation, we estimate payments of $42.1 million over the next four years, of which $1.1 million remains payable in 2022, $12.8 million will be payable in 2023, $11.5 million will be payable in 2024, $10.2 million will be payable in 2025, and $6.5 million will be payable in 2026. We will realize a corporate income tax deduction at the time of payment.
Our capital expenditures relate primarily to technology systems and periodic refurbishment of our leased premises, which generally range from $2.0 million to $3.0 million annually. From time to time we incur leasehold improvements related to the build out of new space. In 2020, we relocated our headquarters office to new office space in New York City and incurred build out costs, net of the tenant improvement allowance, of approximately $10.0 million. In 2022, we expect to incur leasehold costs of approximately $8.0 million, excluding the benefit of lease incentives, related to the relocation of our London office. There are no other large leasehold improvement expenditures planned in the near-term.
Under the U.S. federal tax law, we can repatriate foreign cash with minimal or no incremental U.S. tax burden. Subject to any limitations imposed by the Treasury Department and any future changes made to current tax law, we intend to repatriate our foreign cash dependent upon our needs for cash in the U.S. The amount of foreign cash we repatriate is subject to our estimated foreign operating and regulatory needs as well as our global cash management needs. Based on recent regulatory pronouncements in the U.K. and Europe our regulatory capital amounts are expected to modestly increase over the few years.
While we believe that the cash generated from operations during the next twelve months and over the longer term will be sufficient to meet our expected operating needs, which include, among other things, our tax obligations, interest and principal payments on our loan facilities, dividend payments, share repurchases related to the tax settlement payments upon the vesting of the restricted stock units, deferred cash compensation payments, we may adjust our variable expenses and other disbursements, if necessary, to meet our liquidity needs. However, there is no assurance that our cash flow will be sufficient to allow us to meet our operating obligations and make timely principal and interest payments under the credit agreement. If we are unable to fund our operating and debt obligations, we may need to consider taking other actions, including issuing additional securities, seeking strategic investments, reducing operating costs or a combination of these actions, in each case on terms which may not be favorable to us. Further, failure to make timely principal and interest payments under the credit agreement could result in a default. A default of our credit agreement would permit lenders to accelerate the maturity for the debt and to foreclose upon any collateral securing the debt. In addition, the limitations imposed by the financing agreements on our ability to incur additional debt and to take other actions might significantly impair our ability to obtain other financing.
Cash Flows
2021. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $21.9 million from December 31, 2020, net of a decrease of $0.7 million resulting from the effect of the translation of foreign currency amounts into U.S. dollars at the year-end foreign currency conversion rates. We generated $130.7 million from operating activities, which consisted of $92.1 million from operating earnings after giving effect to the non-cash items, $2.2 million of tenant incentives reimbursement received from a landlord, and a net decrease in working capital of $36.4 million, principally from the collection of fees receivables. We used $3.5 million for investing activities to fund leasehold improvements and equipment purchases. We used $104.5 million in financing activities, including $55.0 million for the repayments of term loans, $32.8 million for market purchases of our common stock, $12.3 million for the repurchase of our common stock from employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in settlement of restricted stock units, and $4.4 million for the payment of dividends.
2020. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $1.3 million from December 31, 2019, including a decrease of $1.0 million resulting from the effect of the translation of foreign currency amounts into U.S. dollars at the year-end foreign currency conversion rates. We generated $84.0 million from operating activities, which consisted of $68.3 million from net income after giving effect to the non-cash items, $9.7 million of tenant incentives reimbursement received from a landlord, and a net decrease in working capital of $6.1 million, principally due to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and compensation payable. We used $18.1 million for investing activities, principally to fund leasehold improvements and equipment purchases. We used $66.1 million for financing activities, including $38.8 million for the repayment of term loans, $8.4 million for market purchases of our common stock, $14.8 million for the repurchase of our common stock from employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in settlement of restricted stock units, and $4.1 million for the payment of dividends.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth information relating to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not invest in any off-balance sheet vehicles that provide financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support, or engage in any leasing or hedging activities that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements, except for those as described under “Contractual Obligations” above.
Market Risk
Our business is not capital-intensive and as such, is not subject to significant market or credit risks.
Risks Related to Cash and Short-Term Investments
Our cash and cash equivalents are principally held in depository accounts and money market funds and other short-term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. We maintain our depository accounts with financial institutions with high credit ratings. Although these deposits are generally not insured, management believes we are not exposed to significant credit risk due to the financial position of the depository institutions in which those deposits are held. Further, we do not believe our cash equivalent investments are exposed to significant credit risk or interest rate risk due to the short-term nature and high quality of the underlying investments in which the funds are invested.
Credit Risk
We regularly review our accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable, and the current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay such amounts owed to the Company. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts that, in our opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover losses that may be incurred.
Exchange Rate Risk
We are exposed to the risk that the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies may have an adverse effect on the reported value of our non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Non functional currency related transaction gains and losses are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
In addition, the reported amounts of our revenues may be affected by movements in the rate of exchange between the currency in which an invoice is issued and paid and the U.S. dollar, in which our financial statements are denominated. We do not currently hedge against movements in these exchange rates through the use of derivative instruments or other methods. We analyze our potential exposure to a decline in exchange rates by performing a sensitivity analysis on our net income in those jurisdictions in which we have generated a significant portion of our foreign earnings, which generally include the United Kingdom, Europe, and Australia. During the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, the average value of the U.S. dollar weakened relative to the pound sterling, euro and Australian dollar. In aggregate, there was a minimal impact on our revenues in 2021 as compared to 2020 as a result of the timing of recognition of foreign revenues. Even if the currency rates had changed more materially, the impact would not have been significant to our foreign operations because our operating costs in foreign jurisdictions are denominated in local currency, and consequently we are effectively internally hedged to some extent against the impact in the movements of foreign currency relative to the U.S. dollar. While our earnings are subject to volatility from changes in foreign currency rates, we do not believe we face any material risk in this respect.
Interest Rate Risk
Our TLB bears interest at the U.S. Prime Rate plus 2.25% or LIBOR plus 3.25%. Because we have indebtedness which bears interest at variable rates, our financial results will be sensitive to changes in prevailing market rates of interest. As of December 31, 2021, we had $271.9 million of indebtedness outstanding, all of which bears interest at floating rates. The rate of interest varies from period to period and our interest rate exposure is not currently hedged to mitigate the effect of interest rate fluctuations. Depending upon future market conditions and our level of outstanding variable rate debt, we may enter into interest rate swap or other hedge arrangements (with counterparties that, in our judgment, have sufficient creditworthiness) to hedge our exposure against interest rate volatility. As of December 31, 2021, a 100 basis point increase in LIBOR would have increased our annual borrowing expense by $2.7 million.
The FCA, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it will not compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration Limited announced a plan to extend the date as of which most U.S. LIBOR values would cease being computed from December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2023. On July 29, 2021, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee announced that it is formally recommending the forward-looking SOFR term rate. Our credit agreement includes alternative rate fallback provisions, which provides for use of a broadly accepted market convention to replace LIBOR as the rate of interest and are triggered by a notification from the Administrative Agent. We have not yet received such notification, but expect that when we do the TLB will likely be converted to a SOFR term rate based facility. However, there can be no assurance the LIBOR phase out will not increase our cost of capital.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of its results of operation and financial condition is based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP in the United States, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions regarding future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. Management employs judgment in making these estimates in consideration of historical experience, currently available information and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements. Descriptions of our critical accounting policies and estimates, which we believe are those that are most important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, are set forth below in “Part IV - Item 15 - Notes to consolidated financial statements, Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and are incorporated by reference herein.