ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to highlight and supplement data and information presented elsewhere in this Annual Report, including the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and assumptions and involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report. See also “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Future results could differ significantly from the historical results presented in this section.
Business and Executive Overview
We started our business in 1960 and are among the longest-operating seller servicers in the United States. We are a growth-oriented mortgage company that employs a relationship-based loan sourcing strategy to execute our mission of delivering the promise of homeownership in neighborhoods and communities across the United States. Our business model is centered on providing a personalized mortgage-borrowing experience that is delivered by our knowledgeable loan officers and supported by our diverse product offerings. Throughout these individualized interactions, we work to earn our clients’ trust and confidence as a financial partner that can help them find their way through life’s changes and build for the future. Through steady organic growth and a series of targeted acquisitions, we grew our annual origination volume from $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2007 to $36.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 and grew our servicing portfolio from $2.5 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2007 to $70.9 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2021. Unless otherwise indicated, the UPB of our servicing portfolio excludes any subserviced loans. The historical information below is provided to show compounded annual growth since 2007, when Guild Mortgage Company was purchased from its founder by a management-led partnership that included a majority investment from MCMI.
Guild's Annual Origination Volume
___________________________
(1)CAGR is equal to the compound annual growth rate of Guild’s annual origination volume for the year ended December 31, 2007 through the year ended December 31, 2021.
Servicing Portfolio Growth
(UPB as of period end)
Executive Summary
This executive summary highlights selected financial information that should be considered in the context of the additional discussions below.
•Originated $36.9 billion and $35.3 billion of mortgage loans for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Lower interest rates led to historically higher volumes across the industry throughout 2021 and 2020.
•Servicing portfolio as of December 31, 2021 was $70.9 billion of UPB compared to $60.0 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2020, with the average size of the portfolio increasing 19.8%% over that time.
•Generated $283.8 million and $370.6 million of net income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Generated $258.5 million and $523.8 million of Adjusted Net Income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Generated $366.2 million and $714.3 million of Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Please see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding our use of the non-GAAP measures Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of such measures to net income, the nearest comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
The decreases in net income, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 were primarily due to a decrease in loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net of $279.4 million. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in gain on sale margins on originated loans of 98 basis points or 19.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. While low interest rates and increased demand for mortgage financing characterized each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, capacity constraints in the mortgage origination market were more pronounced during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, leading to higher gain on sale margins during the year ended December 31, 2020. Margins may continue to decrease in the future due to increasing competition among mortgage providers which has placed additional
pressure on pricing, but such changes will depend on future market demand, capacity and other macroeconomic factors.
The decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was partly offset by a decrease in the loss related to the fair value of our MSRs, which was $101.6 million and $296.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fair value of our MSRs is affected by changes in mortgage rates. Declines in average mortgage rates generally results in higher prepayment speeds and a subsequent downward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs for the loans that still exist in our portfolio. However, when rates decline, our origination volume generally increases as refinance opportunities increase.
According to the Mortgage Finance Forecast from the Mortgage Bankers Association (the “MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast”), average 30-year mortgage rates increased by 30 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2021 and decreased by 90 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020. Although interest rates increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 this increase was mostly during the fourth quarter. As such, there was still a high volume of refinance activity throughout 2021 which resulted in a downward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs during 2021. This was partially offset by a decrease in prepayment speeds, which resulted in an increase to the fair value of our MSRs due to model inputs and assumptions.
Management believes that maintaining both an origination segment and a servicing segment provides us with a more balanced business model in both rising and declining interest rate environments, compared to other industry participants that predominately focus on either origination or servicing, instead of both. In addition, one of our business strategies is to seek to recapture mortgage transactions when our borrowers prepay their loans. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a 32% purchase recapture rate, a 63% refinance recapture rate and a 58% overall recapture rate, compared to 26%, 66% and 60%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Recapture rate is calculated as the UPB of our clients that originated a new mortgage with us in a given period, divided by the UPB of our clients that paid off their existing mortgage and originated a new mortgage in the same period. Purchase recapture is calculated based on those clients who originate a new mortgage for the purchase of a home, and refinance recapture is calculated based on those clients who originate a new mortgage to refinance an existing mortgage. Overall recapture rate is calculated as the total of our clients that originate a new mortgage with us divided by the total of our clients that paid off their existing mortgage and originated a new mortgage. This calculation excludes clients to whom we did not actively market due to contractual prohibitions or other business reasons.
Recent Developments
Market and Economic Overview
The Federal Reserve announced in December 2021 their intention to begin raising interest rates in 2022 and have forecasted rate hikes in 2023. We are closely monitoring interest rate movements and anticipate the increases in mortgage interest rates will lead to fewer refinancings and lower prepayment activity in 2022. The Mortgage Bankers Association forecasted mortgage originations for purchases to grow 8% in 2022, to a record of $1.77 trillion and they are predicting refinance originations to slow in 2022, decreasing by 63% to $861 billion from $2.35 trillion in 2021.
Supply chain challenges, including higher costs and delivery delays in building materials, and a tightening labor market continue to impact housing starts. We expect with the limited supply of inventory for both new and existing homes we may experience lower origination in future periods. We continue to experience intense competition in the housing and mortgage markets, and we expect this competition will continue to put pressure on gain on sale margins and profitability.
Acquisition of RMS
On July 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of RMS, which expanded our local presence in the Northeast. The acquisition was funded with a combination of $185.8 million in cash and the issuance of 996,644 shares of our Class A Common stock. See Note 3 - Acquisition in Part II, Item 8 for additional information.
Since the acquisition date our business has increased and we are integrating RMS with our ongoing operations. The integration of RMS' operations is ongoing and is expected to be substantially complete by the end of the first quarter of 2022 and we expect to incur acquisition and integration-related costs throughout the process. Going forward, we expect to realize cost synergies through integration.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Business Operations and Liquidity
We continue to closely monitor the economic impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we experienced record origination volume and increased profit margins in our origination segment during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a slight negative impact on the financial results of our servicing segment. The federal government enacted the CARES Act, which allowed borrowers with federally backed loans to request a temporary mortgage forbearance. In February 2021, FHFA, HUD, the VA, and the USDA announced an extension of the forbearance period of three to six months depending on the loan type. In June 2021, the CFPB finalized a rule that effectively prohibited foreclosures before January 1, 2022, with certain limited exceptions. The final rule became effective on August 31, 2021. As a result of the CARES Act forbearance requirements and the subsequent extension of federal forbearance programs, we may experience increases in our foreclosure loss expenses in the future, depending on future delinquency rates in our servicing portfolio. As of December 31, 2021 the 60-plus day delinquency rate on our servicing portfolio was 1.9%, compared to a 60-plus day delinquency rate of 3.5% as of December 31, 2020.
If we were to experience an increased delinquency rate on our servicing portfolio we may be required to finance substantial amounts of advances of principal and interest, property taxes, insurance premiums and other expenses to protect investors’ interests in the properties securing the loans. Although we have decreased our foreclosure loss reserve due to the decrease in the delinquency rate during the year ended December 31, 2021, this is partially offset by an increase in our estimated per-loan losses due to expected longer foreclosure times as described further below. These advances and payments, coupled with increased servicing costs and lower servicing revenue, have negatively affected and we expect will continue to negatively affect our cash position. We continuously monitor the requirements around these advances and how, if at all, they impact our liquidity. Additionally, we were prohibited through December 31, 2021 from collecting certain servicing-related fees, such as late fees, and initiating foreclosure proceedings. As a result, the effects of the CARES Act forbearance requirements and the subsequent federal forbearance programs reduced our servicing income and increased our servicing expenses.
As of January 31, 2022, approximately 1.1% of the loans in our servicing portfolio had elected the forbearance option compared to the industry average of 1.3%, as reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association and, as of December 31, 2021, approximately 1.1% of the loans in our servicing portfolio had elected the forbearance option compared to the industry average of 1.4%, as reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association. Of the 1.1% of the loans in our servicing portfolio that had elected forbearance as of January 31, 2022, approximately 11.1% remained current on their January payments and, of the 1.1% of the loans in our servicing portfolio that had elected forbearance as of December 31, 2021, approximately 9.8% remained current on their December payments. We believe our portfolio has performed better than the industry average because of our in-house servicing capabilities and timely response to the COVID-19 pandemic and that our performance is a testament to the strength of our client relationships. Our in-house servicing team and local loan officers continue to work with our clients to understand forbearance plans and determine the best paths forward for their unique circumstances. By maintaining relationships with our clients throughout the loan lifecycle, and supporting our clients during times of uncertainty, we position ourselves to capture future business.
Servicing Portfolio Forbearance
(as of period end)
Source: Mortgage Bankers Association.
Increased Liquidity
During 2021, we added one additional loan funding facility with a total facility size of $250.0 million. Effective July 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of RMS. RMS had approximately $400.0 million of warehouse lines of credit outstanding, which were recognized at the date of acquisition at fair value with no change in terms. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate available amount under our loan facilities was approximately $3.5 billion. See “-Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows” for further information regarding our funding facilities.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our business, results of operations and financial condition will ultimately depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic.
Description of Certain Components of Financial Data
The primary components of our revenue and expenses are described below.
Our Components of Revenue
Loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net - This represents all income recognized from the time when a loan is originated until the time when a loan is subsequently sold to an investor and includes cash and non-cash components. Each component is described below:
•Gain (loss) on sale of loans - Net proceeds from the difference between the quoted loan price committed to the client and the price received from the investor at loan sale, net of miscellaneous investor fees charged.
•Loan origination fees - Fees collected from the client, which typically include processing, underwriting, funding, credit report, tax service, flood certification and appraisal fees, net of any associated third-party costs.
•The fair value of the MSRs at time of sale - After a loan for which we continue to act as the servicer is sold to an investor, we record the value of the MSR at fair value. Fair value is estimated based on the present value of future cash flows. We utilize a third-party valuation service to determine this estimated value based on variables such as contractual servicing fees, ancillary fees, estimated prepayment speeds, discount rate and the cost to service.
•Changes in the fair value of IRLC and MLHS - When the client accepts an interest rate lock, we record the estimated fair value of the loan. We also evaluate several factors to determine the likelihood of the loan closing and discount the value of any interest rate lock commitments we consider having a lower probability of closing. The probability of the loan ultimately closing changes as the stage of the loan progresses from application to underwriting submission, loan approval and funding. Loans that close and are held for sale are commonly referred to as mortgage loans held for sale. MLHS are also recorded at fair value. We typically determine the fair value of our MLHS based on investor committed pricing; however, we determine the fair value of any MLHS that is not allocated to a commitment based on current delivery trade prices.
•Changes in the fair value of forward delivery commitments - We enter into forward delivery commitments to hedge against changes in the interest rates associated with our IRLCs and MLHS. Our hedging policies are set by our risk management function and are monitored daily. Typically, when the fair value of an IRLC or MLHS increases, the fair value of any related forward contract decreases.
•Provision for investor reserves - At the time a loan is sold to an investor, we make certain representations and warranties. If defects are subsequently discovered in these representations and warranties that cause a loan to no longer satisfy the applicable investor eligibility requirements, we may be required to repurchase that loan. We are also required to indemnify several of our investors for borrowers’ prepayments and defaults. We estimate the potential for these losses based on our recent and historical loan repurchase and indemnification experience and our success rate on appeals. We also screen market conditions for any indications of a rise in delinquency rates, which may result in a heightened exposure to loss.
•Early pay-off fees - The amount of gain on sale premium received from the investors who purchase our loans that we must return to those investors when loans sold to them are repaid before a specified point in time.
Loan servicing and other fees - Loan servicing and other fees consist of:
•Loan servicing income - This represents the contractual fees that we earn by servicing loans for various investors. Fees are calculated based on a percentage of the outstanding principal balance and are recognized into revenue as related payments are received.
•Other ancillary fees - We may also collect other ancillary fees from the client, such as late fees and nonsufficient funds fees.
•Impound interest - We are required to pay interest to our clients annually based on the average escrow account balances that we hold in trust for the payment of their property taxes and insurance.
Valuation adjustment of mortgage servicing rights - We have elected to recognize MSRs at fair value. This requires that we periodically reevaluate the valuation of our MSRs following our initial analysis at the time of sale. A third party conducts a monthly valuation of our MSRs, and we record any changes to the fair value of our MSRs that result from changes in valuation model inputs or assumptions and collections of servicing cash flows in accordance with such third-party analysis. Changes in the fair value of our MSRs result in an adjustment to the value of our MSRs. See “Critical Accounting Estimates-Mortgage Servicing Rights” for additional information regarding the valuation of our MSRs.
Interest income - Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on MLHS.
Interest expense - Interest expense consists primarily of interest paid on funding and non-funding debt facilities collateralized by our MLHS and MSRs. We define funding debt as all other debt related to operations, such as warehouse lines of credit and our early buyout facility, which we use to repurchase certain delinquent GNMA loans. Non-funding debt includes the note agreements collateralized by our MSRs (our “MSR notes payable”). We also record related bank charges and payoff interest expense as interest expense. Payoff interest expense is equal to the difference between what we collect in interest from our clients and what we remit in interest to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. For loans sold through Agency MBS, we are required to remit a full month of interest to those investors, regardless of the date on which the client prepays during the payoff month, resulting in additional interest expense.
Other income, net - Other income, net typically includes non-operating gains and losses.
Our Components of Expenses
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits - Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense includes all payroll, incentive compensation and employee benefits paid to our employees, as well as expenses incurred in connection with our use of employment and temporary help agencies. Our loan officers are paid incentive compensation based on origination volume, resulting in a variable pay structure that fluctuates.
General and administrative - General and administrative expense primarily includes costs associated with professional services, attendance at conferences and meetings, office expenses, liability insurance, business licenses and other miscellaneous costs.
In addition, within general and administrative expense, we record any adjustments to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions, commonly known as “earn-out payments.” These payments are estimated based on the present value of future cash flows during the earn-out period. The current earn-out periods for our acquisitions span from three to four years, and the earn-out periods for three of our acquisitions are still ongoing.
Occupancy, equipment and communication - Occupancy, equipment and communication includes expenses related to the commercial office spaces we lease, as well as telephone and internet service and miscellaneous leased equipment used for operations.
Depreciation and amortization - We depreciate furniture and equipment on a straight-line basis for a period of up to five years and we record amortization expense related to our leasehold improvements on rented space. That amortization expense is recognized over the shorter of the lease term or the useful life of the asset. We record costs related to the maintenance of software, which consist of both internal and external costs incurred in connection with software development and testing, as well as any costs associated with the implementation of new software. These costs are amortized over a three-year period. We also record amortization expense related to our acquired intangible assets, which are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives.
Provision for foreclosure losses - We may incur a loss on government loans related to unreimbursed interest and costs associated with foreclosure. We reserve for government loans based on historical loss experience as well as for loan-specific issues related to foreclosure.
Income tax expense - We are subject to federal and state income tax. We record this expense based on our statutory federal and state tax rates. These statutory rates are adjusted for permanent non-deductible differences and reconciliation differences from prior years. We also evaluate material temporary differences to determine whether any additional adjustments to this expense are required.
Key Performance Indicators
Management reviews several key performance indicators to evaluate our business results, measure our performance and identify trends to inform our business decisions.
We use these key performance indicators to develop operational goals for managing our business. We believe that these key performance indicators provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects. Summary data for these key performance indicators is listed below. Please refer to “Results of Operations” for additional metrics that management reviews in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements.
__________________________
(1)Includes retail and correspondent loans and excludes brokered loans.
(2)Brokered loans are defined as loans we originate in the retail channel that are processed by us but underwritten and closed by another lender. These loans are typically for products we choose not to offer in-house.
(3)Represents loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net divided by total in-house origination to derive basis points.
(4)Represents loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net divided by pull-through adjusted locked volume. Pull-through adjusted locked volume is equal to total locked volume multiplied by pull-through rates of 91.5% and 87.8% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised. For additional information regarding our total locked volume and pull-through adjusted locked volume for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, see “-Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020-Revenue-Loan Origination Fees and Gain on Sale of Loans, Net.”
(5)Represents the 30-year average conventional conforming note rate published monthly according to the MBA Mortgage Monthly Finance Forecast.
(6)Excludes subserviced portfolios of $844.6 million as of December 31, 2020. During 2021, we sold our subservicing portfolios.
(7)Represents a metric used to determine the relative value of our MSRs in relation to our annualized retained servicing fee. It is calculated by dividing (a) the fair market value of our MSRs as of a specified date by (b) the weighted average annualized retained servicing fee for our servicing portfolio as of such date. We exclude purchased MSRs from this calculation because our servicing portfolio consists primarily
of originated MSRs and, consequently, purchased MSRs do not have a material impact on our weighted average service fee.
(8)Represents the gross amount of UPB paid off from our servicing portfolio.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP and to provide investors with additional information regarding our GAAP financial results, we have presented in this Annual Report Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Return on Equity, which are non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusted Net Income. We define Adjusted Net Income as earnings attributable to Guild before the change in the fair value measurements related to our MSRs, contingent liabilities related to completed acquisitions due to changes in valuation assumptions, amortization of acquired intangible assets and stock-based compensation. We exclude these items because we believe they are non-cash expenses that are not reflective of our core operations or indicative of our ongoing operations. Adjusted Net Income is also adjusted by applying an implied tax effect to these adjustments. In addition we exclude the change in the fair value of MSRs due to changes in model inputs and assumptions from Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA below because we believe this non-cash, non-realized adjustment to net revenues is not indicative of our operating performance or results of operations but rather reflects changes in model inputs and assumptions (e.g., prepayment speed, discount rate and cost to service assumptions) that impact the carrying value of the Company’s MSRs from period to period.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest (without adjustment for net warehouse interest related to loan fundings and payoff interest related to loan prepayments), taxes, depreciation and amortization and net income attributable to the non-controlling interest exclusive of any change in the fair value measurements of the MSRs due to valuation assumptions, contingent liabilities from business acquisitions and stock-based compensation. We exclude these items because we believe they are non-cash expenses that are not reflective of our core operations or indicative of our ongoing operations.
Adjusted Return on Equity. We define Adjusted Return on Equity as annualized Adjusted Net Income as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders’ equity during the period.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets and to develop operational goals for managing our business. These non-GAAP financial measures are designed to evaluate operating results exclusive of fair value adjustments that are not indicative of management’s operating performance. Accordingly, we believe that these financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects.
Our non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures rather than net income (loss) or net income (loss) attributable to Guild, which are the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP for Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA, and Return on Equity, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP for Adjusted Return on Equity. These limitations include that these non-GAAP financial measures are not based on a comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and many of the adjustments to the GAAP financial measures reflect the exclusion of items that are recurring and may be reflected in the Company’s financial results for the foreseeable future. In addition, other companies may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison.
The following tables reconcile Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to Guild, net income and Adjusted Return on Equity to Return on Equity, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
___________________________
(1)Implied tax rate used is 26.7% and 25.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table reconciles the valuation adjustment of mortgage servicing rights from the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income to the change in fair value of MSRs due to model inputs and assumptions included in the reconciliation tables above.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by decreased revenue from loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans. This decrease in gain on sale of loans was primarily due to a decrease in the secondary marketing spread because of greater competition within the mortgage industry and slightly higher interest rates. According to the MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast, average 30-year mortgage rates declined approximately 90 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020, which led to an increase in refinance activity, and increased approximately 30 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2021, leading to slightly lower refinance activity. Refinance activity represented 58.8% of origination volume in the U.S. mortgage market during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 61.4% of origination volume during the year ended December 31, 2020, according to the MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast. As consumer demand for refinancing decreased, our gain on sale margins decreased. Our origination volume increased by $1.6 billion, or 4.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was attributable to the acquisition of RMS. Additionally, our income from loan servicing and other fees increased by $34.5 million or 21.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We experienced a loss in our valuation adjustments of mortgage servicing rights for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020; however, this loss was lower in 2021 due to a gain of $49.4 million on the change in fair value of MSRs due to model inputs and assumptions as compared to a loss of $171.6 million in 2020. In an increasing mortgage interest rate environment, it is typical for us to experience upward MSR valuation adjustments due to the decreased likelihood of prepayments for the loans that still exist in our MSR portfolio. However, when rates increase, originations tend to decrease as refinance opportunities decrease.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increased salaries. The increase in salaries was primarily due to an increase in the number of employees as a result of the RMS acquisition, as well as the full year impact of the employees we hired in 2020. General and administrative expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a downward adjustment to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $5.0 million of expense related to earn-out valuation adjustments compared to $31.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Conversely, there was an increase in legal, accounting, and other costs related to becoming a public company. Occupancy, equipment and occupation expense increased primarily due to our expanded presence in the northeast United States with our recent acquisition of RMS.
Revenue
Loan Origination Fees and Gain on Sale of Loans, Net
The table below provides additional detail regarding the loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net for the periods presented.
The table below provides additional detail regarding the composition of our origination volume and other key performance indicators for the periods presented.
___________________________
(1)Includes retail and correspondent loans and excludes brokered loans.
(2)Represents loans sold for which we continue to act as the servicer.
(3)Represents loans sold for which we do not continue to act as the servicer.
(4)Represents loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net divided by total in-house origination to derive basis points.
(5)Total locked volume represents the aggregate dollar value of the potential loans for which the Company has agreed to extend credit to consumers at specified rates for a specified period of time, subject to certain contingencies that are described in the IRLCs between the Company and each of those consumers. The total locked volume for a given period is representative of the IRLCs that the Company has initially entered into during that period.
(6)Pull-through adjusted lock volume is equal to total locked volume multiplied by pull-through rates of 91.5% and 87.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised.
(7)Represents loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net divided by pull-through adjusted locked volume.
The decrease in total loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by a $170.7 million loss in the recorded fair value of our MLHS and IRLCs compared to a gain of $151.5 million in the recorded fair value for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was partially offset by an increase in loan sales of $3.2 billion or 9.4%. Total volume of IRLCs during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.8 billion compared to $44.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, interest rates decreased which led to significant increases in volume across the mortgage industry. This also led to capacity constraints amongst mortgagors and higher gain on sale margins. In 2021, volume across the industry began to decrease especially towards the end of the year. The capacity constraints amongst mortgagors started to diminish and, as a result, such companies started to lower their margins through pricing. This is reflective in our gain on sale decreasing from 500 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 402 basis points during the year ending December 31, 2021.
Loan Servicing and Other Fees
The table below provides additional details regarding our loan servicing and other fees for the periods presented.
The table below provides additional details regarding our servicing portfolio composition and key performance indicators for the period presented.
___________________________
(1)Excludes subserviced portfolios of $844.6 million at December 31, 2020. During 2021, we sold our subservicing portfolios.
(2)Includes all in-house loans originated in period, irrespective if it is eventually sold, service retained or service released.
(3)Represents loans sold for which we do not continue to act as the servicer of the loan.
(4)Represents the percentage of UPB that will pay off ahead of time in each period, calculated as an annual rate. This estimate is calculated by our third-party valuation provider.
(5)Represents a metric used to determine the relative value of our MSRs in relation to our annualized retained servicing fee. It is calculated by dividing (a) the fair market value of our MSRs as of a specified date by (b) the weighted average annualized retained servicing fee for our servicing portfolio as of such date. We exclude purchased MSRs from this calculation because our servicing portfolio consists primarily of originated MSRs and, consequently, purchased MSRs do not have a material impact on our weighted average service fee.
Total loan servicing and other fees increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the 19.8% increase in our average servicing portfolio over the same time period and the increase in the number of loans serviced. The number of customers in our servicing portfolio who requested forbearance relief under the CARES Act steadily declined during 2021. As customers exited forbearance, we resumed collecting servicing fees and ancillary income from those customers.
Valuation Adjustment of Mortgage Servicing Rights
The table below presents our MSR valuation adjustment for the periods presented.
The fair value of our MSRs generally declines as interest rates decline and prepayments increase. Conversely, the fair value of our MSRs generally increases as interest rates increase and prepayments decrease. The valuation adjustments related to MSRs also include losses related to loan prepayments. During the year
ended December 31, 2020, interest rates declined 90 basis points, which contributed to the higher valuation losses, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021 when interest rates increased 30 basis points. However, the increase in the fair value of our MSRs from slightly higher interest rates was more than offset by high loan prepayments due to a low interest rate environment throughout the first three quarters of 2021, resulting in an overall decrease in the fair value of our MSRs during the year ended December 31, 2021. The fair value of our mortgage servicing rights asset was 95 basis points of our servicing portfolio at December 31, 2021 compared to 75 basis points at December 31, 2020.
Interest Income
The increase in interest income, funding for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 is primarily due to higher daily average loan balances in our mortgage loans held for sale and increases in origination volume.
Interest Expense
The increase in interest expense, funding facilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to increased borrowings on our warehouse lines of credit facilities to support our increased origination volume. The increase in bank servicing charges was due to higher facility fees associated with increasing our warehouse capacity along with additional fees incurred with our change in GNMA custodian during 2021. These increases were partly offset by a decrease in interest expense, other financing due to negotiating more favorable terms on our MSR notes payable.
Summary of Expenses
Salaries, Incentive Compensation and Benefits
Salaries expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in the number of employees following the RMS acquisition and increased payments for variable bonus and overtime to support the increase in our servicing volume during the period. We also hired additional permanent and temporary employees throughout 2020.
Benefits expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in the fair value of the deferred compensation plan for certain executive employees of the Company of $26.1 million. Prior to becoming a public company, the fair value of the deferred compensation plan was based on the Company's net worth. Subsequent to becoming a public company, the fair value of the deferred compensation plan is based on investments held in money market funds, which did not experience a significant change during 2021. Additionally, employment taxes increased approximately $8.0 million and group health insurance and related employee benefits increased approximately $15.4 million due to increased headcount.
General and Administrative
The decrease to the contingent liability fair value adjustment for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to revisions made to the estimated fair value of earn-out obligations as well as the completion of the earn-out period for two of our acquisitions in 2020.
Professional fees increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to approximately $5.2 million in transaction costs in connection with the acquisition of RMS. Additionally, corporate liability insurance expenses increased $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, related to becoming a public company and we have incurred additional legal, accounting, and other costs related to becoming a public company.
Office supplies, travel and entertainment increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in the number of employees following the acquisition of RMS.
Miscellaneous expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a reduction in property inspection costs that are no longer required by certain investors.
Occupancy, Equipment and Communication
Occupancy costs generally consist of fixed costs and remain consistent except for any increases associated with new acquisitions, expansion into new territories and entry into new material building leases.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, equipment expense increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to additional costs for hardware and software licenses and costs for computer hardware to support additional headcount.
Communication expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to additional communication services incurred from the RMS acquisition as well as higher vendor costs to support additional headcount and overall increasing costs for technology services and products.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to $4.0 million in amortization expense related to intangible assets acquired in the RMS acquisition.
Provision for Foreclosure Losses
Although we have experienced a decrease in overall foreclosure starts and sales due to the CARES Act’s foreclosure moratorium and the federal government’s subsequent extension of its mortgage forbearance programs, once the moratorium has ended we anticipate an increase in the time needed to complete a foreclosure due to expected delays throughout the foreclosure process, which in turn increases our estimated per-loan losses. Our reserves decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to decreases in delinquency rates of loans in our servicing portfolio and an increase in loan workouts completed through the year, partially offset by an increase in expected per-loan losses. We continue to monitor foreclosure reserves and potential losses regularly to assess if further changes are needed.
Segment Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our operations are comprised of two distinct but related reportable segments that we refer to as our origination and servicing segments. We operate our origination segment from approximately 260 office locations. Our licensed sales professionals and support staff cultivate deep relationships with our referral partners and clients and provide a customized approach to the loan transaction, whether it is a purchase or a refinance. Although our origination and servicing segments are separated for this presentation, management sees the two segments as intricately related and interdependent. We believe that our servicing segment provides a steady stream of revenue to support our origination segment and that, more importantly, our servicing segment positions us to build longstanding client relationships that drive repeat and referral business back to the origination segment to recapture our clients’ future mortgage transactions. In particular, the growth of our servicing segment is dependent on the continued growth of our origination volume because our servicing portfolio consists primarily of originated MSRs.
We measure the performance of our segments primarily based on their net income (loss). We integrated RMS into our two existing reportable segments for the period after the close of the acquisition on July 1, 2021. Revenues and expenses from our acquisition of RMS are allocated primarily to our origination segment. See below for an overview and discussion of each of our segments’ results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These results do not include unallocated corporate costs. See Note 21 - Segments in Part II, Item 8 for additional information about our segments.
Origination
The decrease in net income allocated to the origination segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was driven by a decrease in gain on sale of loans and an increase in salaries, incentive compensation and benefits as described further below. Additionally, while lower interest rates contributed to an increase in loan sales of $3.2 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, gain on sale margins decreased 98 basis points or 19.6% for the same time period. In comparison, capacity constraints in the mortgage origination market led to higher gain on sale margins in 2020.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 due to increased salaries and benefits expense from hiring additional employees in connection with the acquisition of RMS. We also hired additional employees throughout 2020 to support the increase in our origination volume; therefore, the full effect of these additional salaries is reflected during 2021.
General and administrative expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to a $26.7 million decrease in the adjustment to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our acquisitions, offset by an increase in production technology expenses due to continued investment in our technology resources and additional costs incurred related to the integration of RMS.
Servicing
We recorded a $101.6 million downward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs, compared to a $296.3 million downward adjustment for the same time period in 2020. See discussion above under "Valuation Adjustment of Mortgage Servicing Rights". This resulted in an improvement to net revenue and net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loan servicing and other fees increased due to the increase in our UPB of our servicing portfolio throughout 2021.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to our hiring of additional employees throughout 2020 to support the increase in our servicing volume and those clients electing to accept forbearance relief under the CARES Act.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we increased our provision for foreclosure losses in anticipation of increased foreclosures in 2021 from COVID 19. The delinquency rate decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021; therefore, we have decreased our provision for foreclosure losses accordingly.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have included:
•cash flows from our operations, including:
◦sale of whole loans into the secondary market;
◦loan origination fees;
◦servicing fee income; and
◦interest income on MLHS;
•borrowings on warehouse lines of credit to originate mortgage loans; and
•borrowings on our MSR notes payable.
Historically, our primary uses of funds have included:
•cash flows from our operations, including but not limited to:
◦origination of MLHS;
◦payment of interest expense; and
◦payment of operating expenses, including personnel costs and IT infrastructure;
•repayments on warehouse lines of credit;
•distributions to shareholders prior to our IPO; and
•acquisitions of other mortgage businesses.
We are also subject to contingencies which may have a significant effect on the use of our cash. We believe that our cash flows from operations and other available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our operations and meet our material cash requirements for the next 12 months. We believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of existing cash and cash equivalent balances, cash flow from operations, and amounts available for borrowing under our loan funding facilities.
Debt Obligations
We fund substantially all of the mortgage loans we close through borrowings under our loan funding facilities. Given the uncertainty in the financial markets, our future ability to borrow money to fund our current and future loan production and other cash needs is unknown. Our mortgage origination liquidity could also be affected if our lenders curtail access to uncommitted mortgage warehouse financing capacity or impose higher costs to access such capacity. Our liquidity may be further constrained as there may be less demand by investors to acquire our mortgage loans in the secondary market. In addition, we may be required to use significant amounts of cash to fund advances for loans subject to forbearance requirements or that are delinquent.
In order to originate and aggregate loans for sale into the secondary market, we use our own working capital and borrow or obtain money on a short-term basis, primarily through committed and uncommitted loan funding facilities that we have established with large national and global banks.
Our loan funding facilities are primarily in the form of master repurchase agreements, which we refer to as “warehouse lines of credit.” Loans financed under these facilities are generally financed at approximately 97% to 98% of the principal balance of the loan (although certain types of loans are financed at lower percentages of the principal balance of the loan), which requires us to fund the balance from cash generated from our operations. Once closed, the underlying residential mortgage loan that is held for sale is pledged as collateral for the borrowing or advance that was made under these loan funding facilities. In most cases, the loans will remain in one of the loan funding facilities for only a short time, generally less than one month, until the loans are pooled and sold. During the time the loans are held for sale, we earn interest income from the borrower on the underlying mortgage loan. This income is partially offset by the interest and fees we must pay under the loan funding facilities.
When we sell a pool of loans in the secondary market, the proceeds received from the sale of the loans are used to pay back the amounts we owe on the loan funding facilities. We rely on the cash generated from the sale of loans to fund future loans and repay borrowings under our loan funding facilities. Delays or failures to sell loans in the secondary market could have an adverse effect on our liquidity position.
As discussed in Note 12, Warehouse Lines of Credit to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, as of December 31, 2021, we had twelve different loan funding facilities in different amounts and with various maturities. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate available amount under our loan facilities was approximately $3.5 billion, with combined outstanding balances of approximately $1.9 billion.
As discussed in Note 13, Notes Payable to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, as of December 31, 2021, we had three different MSR notes payable in different amounts with different maturities. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate available amount under our MSR notes payable was $440.0 million, with combined outstanding balances of $250.0 million and unutilized capacity of $61.1 million, based on total committed amounts and our borrowing base limitations. The borrowing capacity under our MSR notes payable is restricted by the valuation of our servicing portfolio.
The amount of financing advanced on each individual loan under our loan funding facilities is determined by agreed upon advance rates but may be less than the stated rate due to fluctuations in the market value of the mortgage loans securing the financings. If the lenders providing the funds under our loan funding facilities determine that the value of the loans serving as collateral for our borrowings under those facilities has decreased, they can initiate a margin call to require us to provide additional collateral or reduce the amount outstanding with respect to those loans. Our inability or unwillingness to satisfy such a request could result in the termination of the related facilities and a potential default under our other loan funding facilities. In addition, a large unanticipated margin call could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity.
The amount owed and outstanding under our loan funding facilities fluctuates significantly based on our origination volume, the amount of time it takes us to sell the loans we originate and the amount of loans we are self-funding with cash. We may from time to time post surplus cash as additional collateral to buy-down the effective interest rates of certain loan funding facilities or to self-fund a portion of our loan originations. As of December 31, 2021, we had posted $46.7 million in cash as additional collateral. We have the ability to draw
back this additional collateral at any time unless a margin call has been made or a default has occurred under the relevant facilities.
We also have an early buyout facility which is included in our warehouse lines of credit. This facility allows us to purchase certain delinquent GNMA loans that we service and finance them on the facility until the loan is cured or subsequently sold. The capacity of this uncommitted facility is $75.0 million and, at December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance on the facility was $33.5 million.
Our loan funding facilities and MSR notes payable generally require us to comply with certain operating and financial covenants and the availability of funds under these facilities are subject to, among other conditions, our continued compliance with these covenants. These financial covenants include, but are not limited to, maintaining a certain (i) minimum tangible net worth, (ii) minimum liquidity and (iii) a maximum ratio of total liabilities or total debt to tangible net worth and satisfying certain pre-tax net income requirements. A breach of these covenants could result in an event of default under our funding facilities, which would allow the related lenders to pursue certain remedies. In addition, each of these facilities includes cross default or cross acceleration provisions that could result in all of our funding facilities terminating if an event of default or acceleration of maturity occurs under any one of them. We were in compliance with each of these covenants as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Our debt obligations are summarized below by facility as of December 31, 2021:
___________________________
(1)Subsequent to December 31, 2021, this facility was reduced to $600.0 million.
(2)Subsequent to December 31, 2021, this facility was extended to March 2022 and is anticipated to undergo a full renewal at that time.
(3)Amounts drawn on the MSR notes payable with this lender reduce the facility size available under the warehouse line of credit with this lender by an equal and offsetting amount.
(4)This facility's maturity date is 30 days from written notice by either the financial institution or the Company.
(5)Subsequent to December 31, 2021, this facility matured and was not renewed.
(6)This facility agreement is due on demand. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, this facility was increased to $300.0 million.
(7)Subsequent to December 31, 2021, this facility was terminated.
(8)Each buyout transaction carries a maximum term of four years from the date of repurchase.
(9)Facility provides for committed amount of $125.0 million, which can be increased up to $175.0 million.
(10)Facility provides for committed amount of $135.0 million, which can be increased up to $200.0 million.
Secondary Market Investors
The investors to whom we sell mortgage loans we originate in the secondary market require us to abide by certain operating and financial covenants. These covenants include maintaining (i) a certain minimum net worth, (ii) a certain minimum liquidity, (iii) a certain minimum of total liquid assets, (iv) a certain maximum ratio of adjusted net worth to total assets and (v) fidelity bond and mortgage servicing errors and omissions coverage. A breach of these covenants could result in an event of default and could disallow us to continue selling mortgage loans to one or all of these investors in the secondary market which, in turn, could have a
significant impact on our liquidity and results of operations. We were in compliance with each of these covenants as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
When we sell loans in the secondary market, we have the option to sell them service released or service retained. The decision whether to sell a loan that we originated service released or service retained is based on factors such as execution and price, liquidity needs and the desire to retain the related client relationship. When we sell a loan service retained, we continue to act as the servicer for the life of the loan. We rely on income from loan servicing and other fees over the life of the loan to generate cash. Certain investors have different rules for the servicer to follow should a loan go into default. As the servicer, we may be legally obligated to make cash payments to the investor who purchased the loan, should the borrower discontinue making payments on the loan. This could have a negative impact to our cash and liquidity; however, we may be able to use other borrower prepayments to cover delinquencies. Should delinquencies significantly increase, or prepayments significantly decrease, we could be forced to use our own cash or borrow on other types of financing in order to make the required monthly payments to the investors who have purchased loans from us. We may also be contractually required to repurchase or indemnify loans with origination defects.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows are summarized below:
Operating activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of inventory of loans held for sale, as shown below:
Cash provided by loans held for sale increased due to a larger increase in proceeds on sale and payments from mortgage loans held for sale compared to cash used for origination of mortgage loans held for sale. The decrease in cash provided by other operating sources was primarily due to increases in valuation adjustments of mortgage servicing rights.
Investing activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of purchases of property and equipment and acquisitions. Cash used in investing activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year period, which was primarily due to $100.2 million used to fund the acquisition of RMS, offset by decreases in cash used for purchases of property and equipment of $3.6 million and certain payments totaling $9.8 million made to Guild Mortgage Company LLC's former parent entity during the year ended December 31, 2020, prior to our restructuring and initial public offering.
Financing activities
Our cash flows from financing activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of warehouse lines of credit used to fund loan originations, which were consistent with the increase in loan origination volume.
The decrease in cash provided by warehouse lines of credit was primarily due to higher net repayments on our warehouse lines of credit. Cash used in other financing sources decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, which was primarily driven by net borrowings of $104.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net repayments of $72.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 on our MSR notes payable and cash dividend payments of $121.1 million during 2021 compared to $37.2 million during 2020.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include servicing our debt obligations as described above and the following contractual obligations.
Repurchase and indemnification obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to liability with respect to certain representations and warranties that we make to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to repurchase mortgage loans, or indemnify the purchaser of such loans for losses incurred, if there has been a breach of these representations and warranties, or in the case of early payment defaults. In addition, in the event of an early payment default, we are contractually obligated to refund certain premiums paid to us by the investors who purchased the related loan. See Note 17, Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8.
Interest rate lock commitments, loan sale and forward commitments
We enter into IRLCs with clients who have applied for residential mortgage loans and who meet certain credit and underwriting criteria. These commitments expose us to market risk if interest rates change during the period of time in which the loan is not economically hedged or committed to be sold to an investor. We are also exposed to credit loss if a loan for which we entered into an IRLC is originated and is not sold to an investor and the related client does not perform. The collateral upon extension of credit typically consists of a first deed of trust in the mortgagor’s residential property. Commitments to originate loans do not necessarily reflect future cash requirements as some commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Total commitments to originate loans, adjusted for pull-through, were approximately $2.2 billion and $4.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Balance Sheet Analysis
The following is a summary of key balance sheet items as of the dates presented.
Total assets decreased by $434.9 million primarily due to the decrease in GNMA loans subject to repurchase right of $546.9 million and an increase in MSRs of $228.3 million. The decrease in GNMA loans subject to repurchase right resulted from decreased delinquency on loans in forbearance under the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $331.0 million of our GNMA loans subject to repurchase right was related to loans in forbearance under the CARES Act. The increase in MSRs was primarily the result of favorable changes in the fair value due to changes in valuation model inputs or assumptions for December 2021 compared to December 2020. Other assets increased due to increases in goodwill and intangibles recorded in connection with the acquisition of RMS.
Total liabilities decreased by $618.9 million primarily due to a $216.0 million decrease in the balances under our warehouse lines of credit and a $547.8 million decrease in GNMA loans subject to repurchase right, partly offset by a $104.5 million increase in notes payable used to fund MSRs. The $547.8 million decrease in GNMA loans subject to repurchase right resulted from decreased delinquency on loans in forbearance under the CARES Act.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Certain of these estimates significantly influence the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and they require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Although we believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements were appropriate given the circumstances at the time they were made, actual results could materially differ from those estimates. Our critical accounting estimates primarily relate to the fair value estimates of our MLHS, MSRs, IRLCs, forward delivery commitments and contingent liabilities due to acquisitions.
See Note 2, Fair Value Measurements to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 for additional information. Below is a summary of our assets recorded at fair value compared to our total assets and stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
As shown above, our consolidated balance sheet is substantially comprised of assets that are measured at or based on their fair values. The increases in the percentage of assets carried at fair value compared to total assets from 2020 to 2021 is due to the increase in the fair value of MSRs of $228.3 million, offset by the decrease in the fair value of IRLCs of $108.2 million at December 31, 2021. The increase in the fair value of MSRs was primarily the result of $337.3 million in capitalized MSRs partially offset by $101.6 million from changes in fair value and $7.4 million decrease from the sale of servicing rights during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The fair value of our contingent liabilities due to acquisitions was $59.5 million and $18.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our acquisition of RMS in July 2021. The percentage of contingent liabilities due to acquisitions was not material to our total liabilities or total stockholders' equity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We believe these critical accounting estimates are subject to uncertainty because of the difficulty in observing certain significant inputs affecting our fair value assets and liabilities. As a result, we are required to make subjective judgments regarding the fair values of these items. Different persons in possession of the same facts may reasonably arrive at different conclusions as to the inputs used in valuing these assets and liabilities and their fair values. Such differences may result in significantly different fair value measurements. Likewise, due to the general illiquidity of some of these assets, subsequent transactions with respect to them may be at values significantly different from those we record.
Due to the difficulty and complexity in measuring certain of our fair value assets and liabilities, we engage third parties to assist management in determining their values. We have also established controls in which management reviews and discusses these valuations with our accounting department and any third parties that we have engaged for this purpose to ensure accuracy over financial reporting. We re-measure the fair value of these assets and liabilities on a monthly or quarterly basis by evaluating certain observable information, which may include current market pricing, recent trade activity, and industry data.
Mortgage Loans Held for Sale
MLHS are classified within Level Two of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their fair value based on secondary market pricing for loans with similar characteristics. We determine the fair value of our MLHS based on either: (i) the fair value of securities backed by similar mortgage loans, adjusted for certain other factors, including credit risk and the value attributable to the related servicing rights, (ii) our investors’ current commitments to purchase loans or (iii) recent observable market trades for similar loans, adjusted for credit risk and other individual loan characteristics.
Mortgage Servicing Rights
MSRs are classified within Level Three of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their fair value based on unobservable inputs and because there is no active market for MSRs. To determine the fair value of our MSRs when they are created, we use our valuation model that calculates the present value of the future cash flows related to them. Our MSR valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating future net servicing income, including estimates of contractual service fees, ancillary income and late fees, the cost of servicing, the discount rate, float value, the inflation rate, estimated prepayment speeds and default rates. A third party conducts a monthly valuation of our MSRs, and we record any changes to the fair value of our MSRs that result from changes in valuation model inputs or assumptions and collections of servicing cash flows in accordance with such third-party analysis and GAAP. Changes in economic and other relevant conditions could cause the assumptions used in valuing our MSRs, such as those with respect to prepayment speeds, to be incorrect and such changes could result in fluctuations in the recorded value of our MSRs. We provide more detailed information on our MSRs in Note 7, Mortgage Servicing Rights to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8.
The following tables illustrate the impact of adverse and favorable changes on the prepayment speeds, discount rate and cost to service at two different data points at December 31, 2021:
Interest Rate Lock Commitments
IRLCs are classified within Level Three of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their value based upon unobservable inputs and because there is no active market for IRLCs. We determine the fair value of our IRLCs based upon the estimated fair value of the underlying mortgage loan, including the expected net future cash flows related to servicing that mortgage loan, net of estimated incentive compensation, and adjusted for: (i) estimated costs to complete and originate the loan and (ii) an adjustment to reflect the estimated percentage of IRLCs that will result in a closed mortgage loan under the original terms of the agreement (the “pull-through rate”). We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised.
Our estimate of the probability that a loan will be funded and market interest rates are updated as the loans move through the funding or purchase process and as market interest rates change and may result in significant changes in our estimates of the fair value of the IRLCs. Such changes are reflected in the change in fair value of IRLCs which is a component of our loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net. The financial effects of changes in these inputs are generally inversely correlated. Increasing interest rates have a positive effect on the fair value of the MSR component of IRLC fair value but increase the pull-through rate for the loan principal and interest payment cash flow component, which decreases in fair value.
We believe that the most significant Level Three input to the measurement of IRLCs is the pull-through rate. At December 31, 2021, we held $22.1 million of IRLC assets at fair value. The following is a quantitative summary of the effect of changes in the pull-through rate input on the fair value of IRLCs at December 31, 2021:
___________________________
(1)The upward shift in input amount on a per-loan basis is limited to the amount of shift required to reach a 100% pull-through rates.
Forward Delivery Commitments
Forward delivery commitments are classified within Level Two of the valuation hierarchy. We determine the fair value of our forward delivery commitments based upon the current agency mortgage-backed security market To-Be-Announced ("TBA") pricing specific to the related loan program, delivery coupon and delivery date of the trade. We also enter into best efforts sales commitments for certain loans at the time the borrower commitment is made. These best-efforts sales commitments are valued by comparing the committed price to the counterparty against the current market price of the IRLC or MLHS.
Business Combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as the useful lives of those acquired intangible assets. Significant estimates and assumptions that we must make in estimating the fair value of the intangible assets and goodwill we have acquired include future cash flows that we expect to generate from the acquired assets and discount rates. In addition, we have estimated the economic lives of certain acquired intangible assets and these lives are used to calculate amortization expense. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Contingent Liabilities Due to Acquisitions
Contingent liabilities due to acquisitions are classified within Level Three of the valuation hierarchy. The fair value of the contingent liabilities due to acquisitions in connection with our acquisitions were initially determined as of the acquisition dates using unobservable inputs. These inputs included the estimated amount and timing of future cash flows, the probability of success (achievement of the various contingent events) and a risk-adjusted discount rate to adjust the probability-weighted cash flows to their present value. Subsequent to the acquisition dates, at each reporting period, the contingent liabilities due to acquisitions will be re-measured with changes recorded in general and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. We engaged an independent, third-party valuation specialist to assist in determining the initial and subsequent fair value of the contingent consideration related to our acquisition of RMS during 2021. See Note 3, Acquisition to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Business, Basis of Presentation, and Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting developments and their expected effects on Guild.