Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The statements contained in the following MD&A and elsewhere throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including any documents incorporated by reference, that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “may,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “estimate,” “target,” “project,” “intend” and similar words or expressions. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections, or other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements, which reflect our management’s beliefs, objectives, and expectations as of the date hereof, are based on the best judgement of our management. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. Such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in such statements, including, without limitation, the following: economic, social and political conditions, global economic downturns resulting from extraordinary events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and other securities industry risks; interest rate risks; liquidity risks; credit risk with clients and counterparties; risk of liability for errors in clearing functions; systemic risk; systems failures, delays and capacity constraints; network security risks; competition; reliance on external service providers; new laws and regulations affecting our business; net capital requirements; extensive regulation, regulatory uncertainties and legal matters; failure to maintain relationships with employees, customers, business partners or governmental entities; the inability to achieve synergies or to implement integration plans and other consequences associated with risks and uncertainties detailed in our filings with the SEC, including our most recent filings on Forms 10-K and 10-Q.
We caution that the foregoing list of factors is not exclusive, and new factors may emerge, or changes to the foregoing factors may occur, that could impact our business. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise these statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except to the extent required by the federal securities laws.
Certain information contained in this discussion and elsewhere in this report may include “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and is subject to the safe harbor created by that act. The safe harbor created by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act will not apply to certain “forward looking statements” because we issued “penny stock” (as defined in Section 3(a)(51) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 3(a)(51-1) under the Exchange Act) during the three year period preceding the date(s) on which those forward looking statements were first made, except to the extent otherwise specifically provided by rule, regulation or order of the Securities and Exchange Commission. We caution readers that certain important factors may affect our actual results and could cause such results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements which may be deemed to have been made in this Report or which are otherwise made by or on our behalf. For this purpose, any statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “explore,” “consider,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” “plan,” or “propose” or the negative variations of those words or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Factors that may affect our results include, but are not limited to, the risks and uncertainties associated with:
·
Our ability to raise capital necessary to sustain our anticipated operations and implement our business plan,
·
Our ability to implement our business plan,
·
Our ability to generate sufficient cash to survive,
·
The degree and nature of our competition,
·
The lack of diversification of our business plan,
·
The general volatility of the capital markets and the establishment of a market for our shares, and
·
Disruption in the economic and financial conditions primarily from the impact of past terrorist attacks in the United States, threats of future attacks, police and military activities overseas and other disruptive worldwide political and economic events and environmental weather conditions.
We are also subject to other risks detailed from time to time in our other filings with Securities and Exchange Commission and elsewhere in this report. Any one or more of these uncertainties, risks and other influences could materially affect our results of operations and whether forward-looking statements made by us ultimately prove to be accurate. Our actual results, performance and achievements could differ materially from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether from new information, future events or otherwise.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
·
have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·
comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
·
submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
·
disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Plan of Operation
The Company was formed as a Nevada corporation on November 26, 2007. The Company was involved in exploration and development of mining properties until September 30, 2013, when it discontinued operations. In June 2017, the Company’s creditors filed a petition in the District Court of Harris County, Texas for the appointment of a receiver. In August of 2017, the court appointed a receiver (who was subsequently appointed as an officer and director of the Company), and in February 2018, the receiver appointed William Alessi as a director of the Company and then resigned as a director and officer of the Company.
On February 6, 2019, the Company acquired trademarks and intellectual property, which includes all rights and trade secrets to the hemp-derived CBD-infused line of consumer beverages sold under the “Good Hemp” brand. Since then, the Company has been conducting operations under the “Good Hemp” trade name and through the http://www.goodhemplivin.com/ website. Information on this website is not a part of this report on Form 10-Q.
On April 30, 2019, the Company acquired from Mr. Spoone the “CANNA HEMP” and “CANNA” trademarks including all rights and trade secrets and related inventory. At June 30, 2021, the Company had not attributed any value to these acquired trademarks.
On August 24, 2020, with an effective date of July 1, 2020, the Company entered into a joint venture agreement with Paul Hervey (“Hervey”), an individual, for the purpose of cultivating hemp on approximately 9 acres of farmland and in approximately 3,700 square feet of greenhouse space in North Carolina (referred to as “Olin Farms”). In October 2021, Olin Farms ceased operations, and the limited liability company joint venture entity was dissolved in North Carolina.
On February 9, 2021, the Company formed Good Hemp Wellness, LLC, a limited liability company formed under the laws of the State of North Carolina, to sell CBD products to customers through chiropractic offices. In October 2021, this company was dissolved in North Carolina, and it is being treated as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements. The Company plans to sell Good Hemp Wellness CBD inventory directly.
On April 1, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to purchase Diamond Creek Group, LLC, a North Carolina limited liability company which sells the Diamond Creek brand of high alkaline water products, for a total purchase price of $643,000. On April 2, 2021, the Company closed the acquisition and paid the initial $500,000 portion of the purchase price, and on April 23, 2021, paid the $143,000 purchase price balance.
The Company is a North Carolina based company that is made up of industry veterans focused on exploiting niche markets in the hemp and beverage industries. The Company’s products include high alkaline water products, hemp-based beverage products under Good Hemp® brand, and CBD softgels under the Good Hemp Wellness brand. Good Hemp® products include two lines of hemp-based beverages described below. Good Hemp® products have been sold throughout the United States since 2016 via Amazon.com, as well as local retailers.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
We had $1,222,067 and $415,796 of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue increased in 2021 as compared to 2020 as a result of increasing sales volumes resulting from increased online advertising efforts and engaging several additional beverage distributors in 2020.
Cost of Sales
We had $1,122,181 and $342,824 of cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as a percentage of revenue, it was 91.8% and 82.5%, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,357,823 and $1,388,074, respectively. The increase in expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 were comprised primarily of amortization of the branding agreement of $1,753,714.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,484,407 and $146,853, respectively. The gain (loss) on derivatives for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was ($1,694,431) and $39,811, respectively.
Net Loss
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4,816,176 and $1,461,955, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a cash balance of $15,121 and negative working capital of $5,053,486 at December 31, 2021 and a cash balance of $21,233 and negative working capital of $2,2,16,462 at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s anticipated capital requirements for the next 12 months will consist of expenses of being a public company and general and administrative expenses all of which we currently estimate will cost $1,500,000, excluding revenue related expenses and salaries. In the event there are unanticipated expenses and we need additional funds, we may seek to raise additional funding that we require in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock. However, we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common stock to fund such additional expenses. We currently do not have any agreements, arrangements or understandings with any person or entity to obtain funds through bank loans, lines of credit or any other sources.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 used $727,660 of net cash. Net cash used in investing activities was $690,600 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities of $1,373,513 was received from the issuance of preferred and common stock and convertible notes payable during the year ended December 31, 2021.Operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 used $121,522 of net cash. Net cash used in investing activities was $63,433 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities of $158,100 was received from the issuance of common stock and shareholder advances during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and some of its earlier plans to further diversify its operations and expand its operating subsidiaries have been paused due to the economic uncertainty.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates in the accompanying financial statements include the amortization period for intangible assets, valuation and impairment valuation of intangible assets, depreciable lives of the web site and property and equipment, valuation of warrant and beneficial conversion feature debt discounts, valuation of share-based payments and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Changes in Accounting Principles. No significant changes in accounting principles were adopted during fiscal 2021 and 2020.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. The Company accounts for long-lived assets in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ASC 360-10, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” This statement requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements. The Company measures their financial assets and liabilities in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. For certain of our financial instruments, including cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses escrow liability and short-term loans the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to their short maturities.
We have adopted accounting guidance for financial and non-financial assets and liabilities. The adoption did not have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity. This standard defines fair value, provides guidance for measuring fair value and requires certain disclosures. This standard does not require any new fair value measurements, but rather applies to all other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements. This guidance does not apply to measurements related to share-based payments. This guidance discusses valuation techniques, such as the market approach (comparable market prices), the income approach (present value of future income or cash flow), and the cost approach (cost to replace the service capacity of an asset or replacement cost). The guidance utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, either directly or indirectly. These include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore developed using estimates and assumptions developed by us, which reflect those that a market participant would use.
Revenue Recognition. In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. ASU 2014-09 was effective for the Company in its first quarter of 2019.
Subsequently, the FASB has issued the following standards related to ASU 2014-09: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations (“ASU 2016-08”); ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing (“ASU 2016-10”); and ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients (“ASU 2016-12”). The Company must adopt ASU 2016-08, ASU 2016-10 and ASU 2016-12 with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the “new revenue standards”).
The new revenue standards may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company adopted the new revenue standards in its first quarter of 2018 utilizing the full retrospective transition method.
Stock-Based Compensation. The Company accounts for stock-based instruments issued to employees in accordance with ASC Topic 718. ASC Topic 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of stock options and other equity-based compensation issued to employees. The Company accounts for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 505-50. The value of the portion of an award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line attribution method. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not had a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of its operations.