ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical nutrition company that develops and distributes clinically supported nutrition, medical foods and dietary supplements. The Company offers a portfolio of science-based, clinically supported products designed to support healthcare professionals and providers, and their patients and consumers.
We see opportunities to grow our business and create value by acquiring, developing and distributing condition-specific, clinically proven nutrition, medical foods and dietary supplements. Our portfolio of science-based, clinically supported products support healthcare professionals, their patients, and consumers in achieving health goals.
Our profile and focus fundamentally changed with the acquisition of Activ Nutritional, LLC (“Activ” or “Viactiv,” as the context requires) in June 2021, the owner and distributor of the Viactiv® line of dietary supplements for bone health, immune health and other applications.
The acquisition and integration of the Viactiv line of products has changed our financial position, market profile and brand focus, and has also expanded our search for additional business opportunities in the short-term, both internal and external.
We believe the Activ acquisition has added valuable attributes, including (1) Viactiv’s brand awareness and acceptance from the consumer; (2) experienced management; (3) established distribution networks and relationships; (4) product development potential; and (5) a long track record of revenue growth and profitability.
● Brand awareness - Viactiv was initially launched by industry leaders Mead Johnson/Johnson & Johnson approximately twenty years ago, and we believe this history, along with the product’s marketing campaigns, taste profile and receipt of consistently positive consumer reviews, have led to strong consumer awareness and acceptance.
● Experienced management - As part of the Activ acquisition, we appointed Craig Sheehan as our Chief Commercial Officer. Mr. Sheehan was the senior executive responsible for the Viactiv brand as a member of the executive leadership team of Adare.
● Established distribution - Viactiv’s products are currently marketed through many of the nation’s largest retailers, including, among others, Walmart (retail and online), Target, CVS and Amazon.
● Track record of profitability - Viactiv generated net revenues of approximately $11,900,000 in 2020 and operating income of approximately $1,200,000 in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, on a pro forma basis, our total revenues would have been approximately $12,766,000 and the Viactiv products would have accounted for 94% of our pro forma total revenues for the year. We expect the acquisition of Viactiv to contribute increasing revenue and consistent operating margins and profitability, as well as a multitude of growth opportunities, to our Company.
Availability of Capital
We may continue to seek to raise additional debt and/or equity capital to fund future operations and acquisitions as necessary, but there can be no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional financing in the amounts necessary to fully fund our operating requirements on acceptable terms or at all. Over time, if we are unable to access sufficient capital resources on a timely basis, we may be forced to reduce or discontinue our product development programs and curtail or cease operations.
The Company will continue to incur significant expenses related to the commercialization of its products and with respect to its efforts to build its infrastructure, expand its operations, and execute on its business plans. Even if profitability is achieved in the future, the Company may not be able to sustain profitability on a consistent basis. The Company expects to continue to incur substantial losses and negative cash flow from operations for the foreseeable future.
The Company does not have any credit facilities as a source of present or future funds. If the Company raises additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of the Company’s stockholders could be significantly diluted, and these newly issued securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if obtained, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting the ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, would increase expenses and may require that Company assets secure such debt.
Recent Developments
Closing of February 2022 Securities Offering
On February 23, 2022, we closed an offering of our securities, and issued and sold (i) 32,550,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $0.30 per share, (ii) Series A Warrants to purchase 37,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.37 per share for a term of five years, (iii) Series B Warrants to purchase 37,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.37 per share for a term of 18 months, and (iv) Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase 4,450,000 shares of common stock at a combined price of $0.30 per share. The net proceeds to us, after deducting the placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $10.0 million. In the event that the Company fails to deliver shares by the required delivery date upon exercise of the warrants, the Company may be subject to cash penalties in an amount up to $20 per trading day for each $1,000 of warrant shares until such shares are delivered. In addition, if the warrant holder purchases shares in the market following the Company’s failure to deliver shares upon exercise of the warrants, the Company will be required to cover the cost of any buy-ins and, at the option of the warrant holder, either reinstate the portion of the warrant for the shares that were not delivered or deliver the number of shares that should have been issued.
Nasdaq Notification of Failure to Satisfy a Continued Listing Rule or Standard
On January 25, 2022, we received a notification from Nasdaq related to our failure to maintain a minimum bid price of $1 per share. Based upon the closing bid price for the last 30 consecutive business days, we no longer meet this requirement. However, the Nasdaq Listing Rules also provide us a compliance period of 180 calendar days in which to regain compliance. Accordingly, if at any time from the date of this notice until July 25, 2022, the closing bid price our common stock is at least $1 for a minimum of ten consecutive business days, Nasdaq will provide us with written confirmation of compliance and the matter will be closed. If we do not regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement by July 25, 2022, we may be afforded a second 180 calendar day period to regain compliance. To qualify, we would be required to meet all other initial listing standards, except for the minimum bid price requirement. In addition, we would be required to notify Nasdaq of our intent to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period. If we do not regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement by the end of the compliance period (or the second compliance period, if applicable), our common stock will become subject to delisting. If we are delisted from Nasdaq, our common stock may be eligible for trading on an over-the-counter market. If we are not able to obtain a listing on another stock exchange or quotation service for our common stock, it may be extremely difficult or impossible for stockholders to sell their shares. We intend to monitor the closing bid price of our common stock and may be required to seek approval from our stockholders to effect a reverse stock split of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock. However, there can be no assurance that the reverse stock split would be approved by our stockholders. Further, there can be no assurance that the market price per new share of our common stock after the reverse stock split will remain unchanged or increase in proportion to the reduction in the number of old shares of our common stock outstanding before the reverse stock split. Even if the reverse stock split is approved by our stockholders, there can be no assurance that we will be able to regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement or will otherwise be in compliance with other Nasdaq listing rules.
Launch of Direct-to-Consumer Online Store for Viactiv Products
During January 2022, we launched our new e-commerce venue through a Shopify store for our Viactiv line of products. The new e-commerce venue offers Viactiv customers the option of shopping via retail outlets (e.g., grocery, pharmacy, etc.) or online through those same retail websites or directly through our new branded website.
Launch of Viactiv® Omega BOOSTTM Gel Bites
We recently launched Viactiv® Omega BOOSTTM Gel Bites, our first expansion of the Viactiv brand since we acquired it in June 2021. The 1,200 mg Omega-3 gel bites are designed to provide total body support, including cardiovascular, brain, joint and eye health. The new dosage form is able to provide the potency of large, hard-to-swallow soft gels, in a great tasting chewable format that has ten times more Omega-3 than the leading fish oil gummies. The gel bite dosage form has been shown to have better absorption and fewer digestive issues than regular soft gel formulas, as well as no unpleasant fishy aftertaste and no sugar, which can all be associated with certain other Omega-3 products.
VectorVision Restructuring
During December 2021, as part of management’s comprehensive evaluation of our business in order to focus on those brands and lines of business that management believes provide the greatest growth opportunities, we determined to restructure the operations of our VectorVision medical device business. The Company has substantially wound down the day-to-day operations of VectorVision, which is expected to significantly reduce costs, and to instead explore various alternative ways to preserve, manage and exploit our various related intellectual property rights, including our U.S. patents, associated with the VectorVision technology, which rights we believe are valuable and marketable. We are exploring both domestic and international business opportunities, such as licensing and distribution arrangements, with experienced parties, which could assist us in the economic exploitation of these intellectual property rights. As a result of this change to the VectorVision business strategy, management believes that it will be able to better focus its efforts and deploy capital to more growth oriented brands and product lines, like Viactiv, and other products in development, that it hopes to expeditiously bring to market in 2022.
Supply Chain Constraints; Inflationary Pressures
We have been experiencing supply chain constraints due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These constraints began in approximately December 2021 and have continued into 2022. These constraints have impacted our ability the Company’s ability to obtain inventory to fulfill customer orders for its Viactiv branded products and may continue to impact its ability to fulfill customer orders going forward which would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business and results of operations. The Company continues to experience challenges to meet customer demands, largely because of broad-based shortages in suppliers’ labor which impact the availability of many critical components in the Company’s supply chain and distribution. The Company is subject to out-of-stock fees to certain retailers in the event that the Company is unable to adequately maintain certain inventory levels of our Viactiv products. Additionally, the Company and its suppliers are experiencing significant broad-based inflation of manufacturing and distribution costs as well as transportation challenges. The Company expects shortages to continue at least through the first half of 2022 and input cost inflation to continue at least throughout 2022.
Strategic Objectives, Goals and Strategies
The Company’s ability to maximize shareholder value requires that we build a solid corporate foundation and demonstrate growth and commercial success on top of that foundation. Guardion took a number of steps in 2021 to strengthen our corporate foundation, including acquiring Viactiv, winding down Vector Vision, hiring key team members and streamlining operations.
Guardion enters 2022 with three primary objectives:
● Demonstrate Commercial Success;
● Strengthen our Commercial Engine; and
● Strengthen our Clinical Nutrition Strategy.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In September 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Credit Losses - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). The standard significantly changes how entities will measure credit losses for most financial assets, including accounts and notes receivables. The standard will replace today’s “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model, under which companies will recognize allowances based on expected rather than incurred losses. Entities will apply the standard’s provisions as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is effective. As a smaller reporting company, ASU 2016-13 will be effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2023, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently assessing the impact of adopting this standard on the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 reduces the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments by eliminating the cash conversion and beneficial conversion models. As a result, a convertible debt instrument will be accounted for as a single liability measured at its amortized cost as long as no other features require bifurcation and recognition as derivatives. For contracts in an entity’s own equity, the type of contracts primarily affected by this update are freestanding and embedded features that are accounted for as derivatives under the current guidance due to a failure to meet the settlement conditions of the derivative scope exception. This update simplifies the related settlement assessment by removing the requirements to (i) consider whether the contract would be settled in registered shares, (ii) consider whether collateral is required to be posted, and (iii) assess shareholder rights. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 for the Company and the provisions of this update can be adopted using either the modified retrospective method or a fully retrospective method. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than January 1, 2021.
At December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a derivative liability of $25,978 related to 10,417 warrants issued in 2019 because the settlement provisions of the warrants contained language that the shares underlying the warrants are required to be registered. Effective January 1, 2021, the Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 using the modified retrospective approach. ASU 2020-06 removed the requirement to consider if the warrants would be settled in registered shares, and accordingly, the adoption of ASU 2020-06 resulted in a decrease to accumulated deficit of $25,978 and a decrease in derivative warrant liability of $25,978 on January 1, 2021.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (“ASU 2021-04”). ASU 2021-04 provides guidance as to how an issuer should account for a modification of the terms or conditions or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option (i.e., a warrant) that remains classified after modification or exchange as an exchange of the original instrument for a new instrument. An issuer should measure the effect of a modification or exchange as the difference between the fair value of the modified or exchanged warrant and the fair value of that warrant immediately before modification or exchange and then apply a recognition model that comprises four categories of transactions and the corresponding accounting treatment for each category (equity issuance, debt origination, debt modification, and modifications unrelated to equity issuance and debt origination or modification). ASU 2021-04 is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity should apply the guidance provided in ASU 2021-04 prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. Early adoption is permitted for all entities, including adoption in an interim period. If an entity elects to early adopt ASU 2021-04 in an interim period, the guidance should be applied as of the beginning of the fiscal year that includes that interim period. The adoption of ASU 2021-04 is not expected to have any impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future financial statements.
Concentration of Risk
Cash balances are maintained at large, well-established financial institutions. At times, cash balances may exceed federally insured limits. Insurance coverage limits are $250,000 per depositor at each financial institution. We have never experienced any losses related to these balances.
Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had two customers that accounted for 50% and 16% of total revenue, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had one customer that accounted for 49% of our total revenue. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Accounts receivable
As of December 31, 2021, we had accounts receivable from one customer which comprised approximately 81% of accounts receivable. As of December 31, 2020, we had accounts receivable from two customers which comprised approximately 50% and 48%, respectively of accounts receivable. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of accounts receivable as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Purchases from vendors
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we utilized one manufacturer for most our production and packaging of clinical nutrition products. Total purchases from this manufacturer accounted for approximately 70% of all purchases. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our largest vendor accounted for approximately 38% all purchases. No other vendor accounted for more than 10% of purchases during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Accounts payable
As of December 31, 2021, one vendor accounted for 46% of total accounts payable. As of December 31, 2020, our largest two vendors accounted for 18% and 13% of the total accounts payable, respectively. No other vendor accounted for more than 10% of accounts payable as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our financial statements included herein include all adjustments, consisting of only normal recurring adjustments, necessary to present fairly our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
The following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Revenue is recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those products or services. We review our sales transactions to identify contractual rights, performance obligations, and transaction prices, including the allocation of prices to separate performance obligations, if applicable.
All products sold by us are distinct individual products and are offered for sale as finished goods only, and there are no performance obligations required post-shipment for customers to derive the expected value from them. Contracts with customers contain no incentives or discounts that could cause revenue to be allocated or adjusted over time.
Shipping and handling activities are performed before the customer obtains control of the goods and therefore represent a fulfillment activity rather than a promised service to the customer. Payments for sales of medical foods and dietary supplements are generally made by approved credit cards. Payments for medical device sales are generally made by check, credit card, or wire transfer. Historically we have not experienced any significant payment delays from customers.
In certain circumstances, returns of products are allowed. A right of return does not represent a separate performance obligation, but because customers are allowed to return products, the consideration to which we expect to be entitled is variable. Upon evaluation of historical product returns, we determined that less than 1% of products are returned, and therefore believe it is probable that such returns will not cause a significant reversal of revenue in the future. Due to the insignificant amount of historical returns as well as the standalone nature of our products and assessment of performance obligations and transaction pricing for our sales contracts, we do not currently maintain a contract asset or liability balance at this time. We assess our contracts and the reasonableness of out conclusions on a quarterly basis.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis. We record adjustments to our inventory for estimated obsolescence or diminution in net realizable value equal to the difference between the cost of the inventory and the estimated net realizable value. The difference is recognized as a loss in the period in which it occurs. Once inventory has been written down, it creates a new cost basis for inventory that is not subsequently written up.
Intangible Assets
Amortizable finite-lived identifiable intangible assets consist of a trade name and customer relationships acquired in the acquisition of Activ, effective June 1, 2021 and are stated at cost less accumulated amortization. The trade name and customer relationships are being amortized over a period of 10 years. We follow ASC 360 in accounting for finite-lived intangible assets, which requires impairment losses to be recorded when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by the assets are less than the assets’ carrying amounts.
In connection with the June 2021 acquisition of Activ we identified amortizable intangible assets totaling $11,900,000, consisting of trade names of $9,200,000 and customer lists of $2,700,000. The trade name and customer relationship are being amortized over their expected useful lives of 10 years.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we also had a trademark for $50,000 classified as an indefinite-lived intangible asset.
Goodwill
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually on December 31, or more frequently if a triggering event occurs. Goodwill impairment exists when the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying value. The Company is the sole reporting unit as of December 31, 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we experienced a sustained decrease in the Company’s share price on NASDAQ, and as of December 31, 2021, our market capitalization was below the carrying value of our net assets. We concluded that this was an impairment triggering event and concluded that there was goodwill impairment of $11,893,134 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Following the impairment, we had no remaining goodwill as of December 31, 2021.
However, we do not believe that the impairment charge reflects a diminution in the economic value of the Viactiv business as determined at the June 1, 2021 acquisition date, or its future performance potential. Although we have experienced certain inventory supply and supply chain challenges during the latter part of 2021 that have continued into 2022, Viactiv’s financial performance for June through December 2021, has generally met management’s expectations.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting where the purchase consideration is allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, based on their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of the purchase consideration over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth and margins, future changes in technology, expected cost and time to develop in-process research and development, brand awareness and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions that management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Stock-Based Compensation
We periodically issue stock-based compensation to officers, directors, contractors and consultants for services rendered. Such issuances vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date.
Stock-based payments to officers, directors, consultants, contractors, and employees, which include grants of employee stock options, are recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. Stock option grants, which are generally time or performance vested, are measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The fair value of stock options is determined utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which is affected by several variables, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected dividend yield, the expected life of the equity award, the exercise price of the stock option as compared to the fair market value of the common stock on the grant date and the estimated volatility of the common stock over the term of the equity award.
Recent Trends - Market Conditions
We have been experiencing supply chain constraints due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These constraints began in approximately December 2021 and have continued into 2022. These constraints have impacted our ability to obtain inventory to fulfill customer orders for our Viactiv brand and may continue to impact our ability to fulfill customer orders going forward. We continue to experience challenges to meet customer demands, largely because of broad-based shortages in suppliers’ labor which impact the availability of many critical components in our supply chain and distribution. We are subject to out-of-stock fees to certain retailers in the event that we are unable to adequately maintain certain inventory levels of our Viactiv products. Additionally, we and our suppliers are experiencing significant broad-based inflation of manufacturing and distribution costs as well as transportation challenges. We expect shortages to continue at least through the first half of 2022 and input cost inflation to continue at least throughout 2022.
Plan of Operations
General Overview
We are focused on building a leading clinical nutrition company with the objective that we become a top performing growth company. Our team continues to assess the business, the core fundamentals, and the market opportunity for our products and services. With the acquisition of Viactiv brand and business in June 2021, management believes that we will be able to accelerate our growth and development.
Our team is focused on building a strong foundation by developing a business model and infrastructure that is designed for long-term commercial success. This process will take time, but we are taking important steps required to build a stronger company. Based on the availability of sufficient funding, we intend to increase our commercialization and business development activities, including engaging in new product development and further strategic acquisitions, to capitalize on growth opportunities.
Over the long-term, we believe one of the critical keys to our success will be to create value in well-differentiated and robust brands through strong clinically proven claims that address consumer needs in growing markets, both domestically and internationally. We are committed to bringing compelling products to market under meaningful and differentiated brands supported by strong science.
We are currently working on a number of initiatives that we believe will help achieve these long-term goals. These include the initiatives described below.
Growth initiatives focused on increasing revenue and bringing compelling products to market under meaningful and differentiated brands that are supported by strong science.
● Strengthen our Clinical Nutrition Strategy: success with this objective requires that we continue to advance clinical evidence around our existing and future products, work with manufacturers and suppliers to leverage our partner’s innovations and increase awareness of our products and efforts with the healthcare community.
● Brand Strategy - Brands are an important part of our strategy, and our team is evaluating the best ways to manage our brand portfolio. In particular, we are seeking to develop a strategy that best leverages Viactiv’s strong consumer awareness and acceptance.
● Scientific Work - Our team continuously evaluates scientific journals and clinical evidence to improve the science behind our existing products and drive our product development process. In addition, we are working with health care professionals to increase clinical evidence on existing products.
● Product Strategy - Our team is evaluating our current product portfolio and seeking opportunities to improve or discontinue certain of our existing products and technologies and develop new ones. We are focused on differentiated formulations, product taste, compelling product formats, and competitive cost structures.
● Sales Channels - Our team is evaluating opportunities to increase product commercialization through better access to sales channels. The Viactiv products enjoy established distribution through traditional retailers and third-party E-Commerce retailers. Our other clinical nutrition products are sold directly to consumers via our website. By leveraging our collective experience selling in these channels, we seek to increase the distribution of our products.
● Existing Business Lines - Our team is evaluating our non-Viactiv business lines to determine their fit in the strategic direction of our Company. Product development and successful commercialization can be an expensive and time-consuming process. Management intends to focus on those products and technologies that possess the greatest chance for commercial success within a reasonable period of time and with a reasonable deployment of capital.
Results of Operations
Through December 31, 2021, we have primarily been engaged in product development, commercialization, integration of Activ and raising capital. We have incurred and will continue to incur significant expenditures for the development of our products and intellectual property, which includes nutrition, medical foods and supplements. These products support healthcare professionals, their patients and consumers in achieving health goals. With the acquisition of the Viactiv brand and business effective June 1, 2021, and its successful integration into our operations since that date, we have established a significant baseline level of gross revenues.
At December 31, 2021, we ceased operations of VectorVision. The Company plans to explore various alternative ways to preserve, manage and exploit the various related intellectual property rights, including our U.S. patents, associated with the VectorVision technology, which rights we believe are valuable and marketable.
We previously had two reportable segments, a Clinical Nutrition Segment and a Medical Devices Segment. In December 2021, we announced the winding down of VectorVision, which, while representing the bulk of the medical device business, only accounted for approximately 4% of total Company revenue in 2021. As a result, the Company no longer expects to generate any material revenues or expenses in the Medical Devices Segment, and accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the Company is the sole reporting unit.
The results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 are not comparable to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, as our 2021 operations included the Viactiv business for the seven months ended December 31, 2021.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue from product sales was approximately $7,233,000 compared to revenue of approximately $1,890,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an increase of approximately $5,343,000 or 283%. The increase is primarily driven by the approximate $6,473,000 of revenue generated during the year by our Viactiv product line.
Cost of Goods Sold
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of goods sold was approximately $4,123,000 compared to cost of goods sold of approximately $1,947,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an increase of approximately $2,176,000 or 112%. This increase is primarily driven by the approximate $3,482,000 cost of sales related to our Viactiv product line.
Gross Profit (Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, gross profit was approximately $3,110,000 compared to gross loss of approximately $(57,000) for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an increase of approximately $3,167,000 or 5,577%. Gross profit (loss) represented 43% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021. Approximately $2,991,000 or 96% of the 2021 gross profit was generated from the sale of the Viactiv products. Gross profit (loss) represented (3)% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2020 we recorded an inventory write down of approximately $972,000 which was attributable to the deterioration of the forecasted marketability of certain of the Company’s inventory.
Research and Development
For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development costs were approximately $64,000 compared to costs of approximately $161,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a decrease of approximately $97,000 or 60%. Research and development costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 consist primarily of clinical studies related to our medical foods and nutraceuticals, as compared to costs of engineering efforts related to our medical devices during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Sales and Marketing
For the year ended December 31, 2021, sales and marketing expenses were approximately $2,325,000 compared to expenses of approximately $1,450,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses of approximately $874,000 or 60% compared to the prior period was primarily due to the addition of our Viactiv line of products.
General and Administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses were approximately $11,205,000 compared to expenses of approximately $7,450,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of approximately $3,755,000 or 50% compared to the prior period was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation of approximately $251,000, general and administrative costs associated with Activ of approximately $585,000, an increase in professional fees of approximately $177,000, and an increase in directors’ and officers’ insurance premiums of approximately $161,000.
Acquisition Transaction Costs
For the year ended December 31, 2021, acquisition transaction costs were approximately $2,104,000, all of which relate to our acquisition of Activ. We did not have any acquisition costs in 2020.
Goodwill Impairment
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually on December 31, or more frequently if a triggering event occurs. Goodwill impairment exists when the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying value. The Company is the sole reporting unit as of December 31, 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we experienced a sustained decrease in the Company’s share price on NASDAQ, and as of December 31, 2021, our market capitalization was below the carrying value of our net assets. We concluded that this was an impairment triggering event and concluded that there was goodwill impairment of $11,893,134 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Following the impairment charge, we had no remaining goodwill as of December 31, 2021.
However, we do not believe that the impairment charge reflects a diminution in the economic value of the Viactiv business as determined at the June 1, 2021 acquisition date, or its future performance potential. Although we have experienced certain inventory supply and supply chain challenges during the latter part of 2021 that that have continued into 2022, Viactiv’s financial performance for June through December 2021, has generally met management’s expectations.
Costs Related to Resignation of Former Officer
Effective June 15, 2020, Michael Favish resigned as Chief Executive Officer and as an employee of our Company and resigned from our board of directors. Terms of the settlement agreement included the continuation of his previous annual salary of $325,000 during the twelve months following his termination. The full amount of stock compensation costs was recorded in costs related to resignation of former officer.
Mr. Favish’s unvested options at the time of his separation were forfeited. All compensation from prior periods related to these unvested options was reversed, resulting in an adjustment to stock compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $(965,000) that was recorded in costs related to resignation of former officer.
In connection with Mr. Favish’s separation, the expiration date of his vested stock options was extended for twelve months from June 15, 2020. In accounting for the modification, we calculated the fair value of the vested options immediately before modification and immediately following the modification and recorded incremental stock compensation charge of approximately $24,000 in costs related to resignation of former officer.
Impairment Loss on Equipment
During June 2020, in an effort to reduce costs and focus management’s attention on other aspects of our business, we began to wind down the TCD business. The wind down was completed in the third quarter of 2020. The business held a group of ultrasound machines as fixed assets. We sold the machines in the year ended December 31, 2020. An impairment charge of approximately $31,000 was recorded in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. There was no similar charge recorded in 2021.
Loss on Disposal of Fixed Assets
For the year ended December 31, 2021, loss on disposal of fixed assets was approximately $160,000 as compared to a loss of approximately $19,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $142,000 or 766% compared to the prior period. The current year losses are attributable to the termination of our headquarters lease in San Diego, California, and disposal of related fixed assets.
Loss on Lease Termination
For the year ended December 31, 2021, impairment loss on lease termination was approximately $106,000. During 2021, we terminated our corporate office and warehouse lease in San Diego, California and recorded a loss on lease termination. There was no comparable charge in the prior period.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense was approximately $7,000. There was no interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2020, the interest expense resulted from the financing of certain insurance policies of the Company.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Warrants
During 2020, an increase in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $13,000 was recorded, and at December 31, 2020, the balance of derivative warrant liabilities was $0.
Net Loss
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $24,745,000 compared to a net loss of approximately $8,572,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net loss of approximately $16,173,000 or 189% compared to the prior year period was primarily due to goodwill impairment of approximately $11,893,000, transaction costs associated with the acquisition of Activ of approximately $2,104,000, coupled with general and administrative costs added as a result of the acquisition.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $24,745,000 and used cash in operating activities of approximately $10,644,000. At December 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of approximately $4,094,000, short term investments of approximately $4,996,000 and working capital of approximately $10,910,000.
On February 23, 2022, we closed an offering of our securities, and issued and sold (i) 32,550,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $0.30 per share, (ii) Series A Warrants to purchase 37,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.37 per share for a term of five years, (iii) Series B Warrants to purchase 37,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.37 per share for a term of 18 months, and (iv) Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase 4,450,000 shares of common stock at a combined price of $0.30 per share. The net proceeds to us, after deducting the placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $10.0 million. In the event that the Company fails to deliver shares by the required delivery date upon exercise of the warrants, the Company may be subject to cash penalties in an amount up to $20 per trading day for each $1,000 of warrant shares until such shares are delivered. In addition, if the warrant holder purchases shares in the market following the Company’s failure to deliver shares upon exercise of the warrants, the Company will be required to cover the cost of any buy-ins and, at the option of the warrant holder, either reinstate the portion of the warrant for the shares that were not delivered or deliver the number of shares that should have been issued.
Notwithstanding the net loss for 2021, management believes that our current cash balance is sufficient to fund operations for in excess of one year from the date of the Company’s 2021 financial statements are issued.
Our financing has historically come primarily from the issuance of convertible notes, promissory notes and from the sale of common and preferred stock. We will continue to incur significant expenses for continued commercialization activities related to our clinical nutrition product lines and building our infrastructure. Development and commercialization of clinical nutrition products involves a lengthy and complex process. Additionally, our long-term viability and growth may depend upon the successful development and commercialization of new complementary products or product lines.
We may continue to seek to raise additional debt and/or equity capital to fund future operations and acquisitions as necessary, but there can be no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional financing in the amounts necessary to fully fund our operating requirements on acceptable terms or at all. Over time, if we are unable to access sufficient capital resources on a timely basis, we may be forced to reduce or discontinue our product development programs and curtail or cease operations.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth the Company’s major sources and uses of cash for each of the following periods:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $10,644,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to approximately $8,014,000 used during the comparable prior year period. The change in operating activities stems primarily from our acquisition of the Viactiv business, the associated purchases of inventory and increases in directors and officers insurance, professional fees and consulting and labor costs during 2021.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $31,011,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and approximately $35,000 for the year ended December 30, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased approximately $71,000,000 in U.S. Treasury Bills which was offset by sales and maturities of those U.S. Treasury Bills of approximately $66,000,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $5,000,000 in U.S. Treasury Bills representing the net of those purchases and sales, which is recorded as short-term investments on our Balance Sheet. In 2021, we also used cash of approximately $26,000,000 for the acquisition of Activ and $77,000 for purchases of property and equipment. The net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $35,000 and was primarily for the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $37,231,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of the sale of common stock with net proceeds of approximately $33,663,000 and warrant exercises during the period with proceeds of approximately $3,568,000. Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $5,452,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and is all attributable to the exercise of warrants.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have chosen to take advantage of the extended transition periods available to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies provided under the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with public company effective dates for complying with new or revised accounting standards.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain of these exemptions, including, without limitation, (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our initial public offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.
PRINCIPAL COMMITMENTS
Appointment of CEO
Effective as of January 6, 2021, the Board of Directors appointed Bret Scholtes as President and Chief Executive Officer and as a director of the Company.
The Company and Mr. Scholtes entered into an employment pursuant to which Mr. Scholtes’ annual base salary is $400,000. The Employment Agreement provides that Mr. Scholtes shall have an annual target cash bonus opportunity of no less than $400,000 (the “Bonus”) based on the achievement of Company and individual performance objectives to be determined by the Board of Directors.
If Mr. Scholtes’ employment is terminated by the Company without cause (as defined in the Employment Agreement), if the Term expires after a notice of non-renewal is delivered by the Company or if Mr. Scholtes’ employment is terminated following a change of control (as defined in the Incentive Plan), Mr. Scholtes will be entitled to (a) twelve months’ base salary, (b) the prorated portion of the Bonus for the year in which the termination occurs, based on actual performance and (c) base salary and benefits accrued through the date of termination.
Office lease
In July, 2021 the Company entered into a month-to-month lease for its primary corporate office space located in Houston, Texas, with lease payments of approximately $1,700 per month.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Other than as discussed above, we are not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on our financial condition.