Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on September 14, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination with one or more target businesses. We completed our Public Offering on March 1, 2021.
We presently have no revenue, have had losses since inception from incurring formation costs and have had no operations other than the active solicitation of a target business with which to complete a business combination.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination
On December 13, 2021, Gores Holdings VIII, Inc. entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among the Company, Frontier Merger Sub, Inc. (“First Merger Sub”), Frontier Merger Sub II, LLC (“Second Merger Sub”), and Footprint International Holdco, Inc. (“Footprint”), which provides for, among other things: (a) the merger of First Merger Sub with and into Footprint, with Footprint continuing as the surviving corporation (the “First Merger”); and (b) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, the merger of Footprint with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub continuing as the surviving entity (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”). The transactions set forth in the Merger Agreement, including the Mergers, will constitute a “Business Combination” as contemplated by the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were unanimously approved by the Board of Directors of the Company and the Board of Directors of Footprint (the “Footprint Board”) on December 13, 2021.
The Merger Agreement
Merger Consideration
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the First Merger, (a) each share of (i) Footprint’s common stock, par value $0.000001 per share (“Footprint Common Stock”), including shares of Footprint Common Stock issuable pursuant to the exercise of warrants to purchase Footprint Common Stock (“Footprint Warrants”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Company Class A Stock”), equal to the Per Share Company Common Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement), (ii) Footprint’s Class A preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Footprint Class A Preferred Stock”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of Company Class A Stock equal to the Per Share Company Class A Preferred Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement), (iii) Footprint’s Class B preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Footprint Class B Preferred Stock”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of Company Class A Stock equal to the Per Share Company Class B Preferred Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement), and (iv) Footprint’s Class C preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Footprint Class C Preferred Stock”), will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of Company Class A Stock equal to the Per Share Company Class C Preferred Stock Consideration (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and (b) each of the promissory notes outstanding that entitle the holder thereof to convert outstanding amounts into shares of capital stock of Footprint (“Footprint Convertible Promissory Notes”) will be converted into the right to receive a number of newly-issued shares of Company Class A Stock set forth on the Company Closing Certificate (as defined in the Merger Agreement). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Company is required to use reasonable best efforts to cause the shares of Company Class A Common Stock to be issued in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Merger
Agreement to be listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market (the “NASDAQ”) at the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the aggregate merger consideration payable at the closing of the Proposed Business Combination to all of the stockholders, holders of stock options of Footprint, holders of Footprint Warrants and holders of Footprint Convertible Promissory Notes will be an aggregate of 161,776,650 shares of Company Class A Stock (deemed to have a value of $10.00 per share).
In addition to the consideration to be paid at the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, certain stockholders and holders of stock options of Footprint will be entitled to receive, pursuant to the Merger Agreement or the Parent Performance Plan (as defined in the Merger Agreement), additional shares of Company Class A Stock or performance-based restricted stock units from the Company, as applicable, subject to the terms provided in the Merger Agreement or the Parent Performance Plan.
Treatment of Footprint’s Stock Options
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, each of Footprint’s stock options, to the extent then outstanding and unexercised, will automatically be converted into an option to acquire a certain number of shares of Company Class A Stock and at an adjusted exercise price per share as determined pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement. Each such converted option will be subject to the same terms and conditions as were applicable to the corresponding Footprint stock option as of immediately prior to the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants
The parties to the Merger Agreement have made representations, warranties and covenants that are customary for transactions of this nature. The representations and warranties of the respective parties to the Merger Agreement will not survive the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Covenants
The Merger Agreement includes customary covenants of the parties with respect to operation of their respective businesses prior to consummation of the Proposed Business Combination and efforts to satisfy conditions to consummation of the Proposed Business Combination. The Merger Agreement also contains additional covenants of the parties, including, among others, (a) covenants providing for the Company and Footprint to use their reasonable best efforts to obtain all necessary regulatory approvals and (b) covenants providing for the Company and Footprint to cooperate in the preparation of the Registration Statement and Proxy Statement (as each such term is defined in the Merger Agreement) required to be filed in connection with the Proposed Business Combination. The covenants of the parties to the Merger Agreement will not survive the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, except for those covenants that by their terms expressly apply in whole or in part after the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Conditions to Consummation of the Proposed Business Combination
The consummation of the Proposed Business Combination is conditioned upon, among other things, (a) the expiration or termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, (b) the absence of any governmental order, statute, rule or regulation enjoining or prohibiting the consummation of the Proposed Business Combination, (c) the Company having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets (as determined in accordance with Rule 3a51-1(g)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) remaining after the completion of the contemplated redemption offer in relation to Company Class A Stock in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement, (d) receipt of the required Company stockholder approval, (e) the adoption of the Merger Agreement and the approval of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement by holders of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares of Footprint Common Stock (the “Footprint Stockholder Approval”), (f) the effectiveness of the Registration Statement under the Securities Act, (g) the receipt of the approval for listing by NASDAQ of the Company Class A Stock to be issued in connection with the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, subject only to (i) the requirement to have a sufficient number of round lot holders and
(ii) official notice of listing, and (h) the Closing Parent Cash (as defined in the Merger Agreement) being equal to or exceeding $550,000,000.
Following approval of the Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby by the Footprint Board, and receipt of the recommendation of the Footprint Board to adopt the Merger Agreement and approve the transactions contemplated thereby, Footprint stockholders holding a sufficient amount of Footprint Common Stock delivered a written consent adopting the Merger Agreement and approving the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, and no further approval of Footprint’s stockholders is required with respect to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
Termination
The Merger Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the consummation of the Mergers (whether before or after the required Company stockholder vote and Footprint Stockholder Approval has been obtained) by mutual written consent of the Company and Footprint and in certain other circumstances, including if the Proposed Business Combination has not been consummated by July 13, 2022 (the “Outside Date”) and the delay in closing prior to such date is not due to the breach of the Merger Agreement by the party seeking to terminate.
The foregoing description of the Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the Mergers, does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 2.1 and is incorporated herein by reference. The Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants that the respective parties made to each other as of the date of such agreement or other specific dates. The assertions embodied in those representations, warranties and covenants were made for purposes of the contract among the respective parties to the Merger Agreement and are subject to important qualifications and limitations agreed to by the contracting parties in connection with negotiating the Merger Agreement. The Merger Agreement has been attached to provide investors with information regarding its terms. It is not intended to provide any other factual information about the Company or any other party to the Merger Agreement. In particular, the representations, warranties, covenants and agreements contained in the Merger Agreement, which were made only for purposes of the Merger Agreement and as of specific dates, were solely for the benefit of the respective parties to the Merger Agreement, may be subject to limitations agreed upon by the contracting parties (including being qualified by confidential disclosures made for the purposes of allocating contractual risk between the respective parties to the Merger Agreement instead of establishing these matters as facts) and may be subject to standards of materiality applicable to the contracting parties that differ from those applicable to the Company’s investors and security holders. Company investors and security holders are not third-party beneficiaries under the Merger Agreement and should not rely on the representations, warranties or covenants of any party to the Merger Agreement. Moreover, information concerning the subject matter of the representations and warranties may change after the date of the Merger Agreement, which subsequent information may or may not be fully reflected in the Company’s public disclosures.
PIPE Investment; Subscription Agreements
On December 13, 2021, the Company entered into subscription agreements (each, a “Subscription Agreement” and collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors, including certain individuals (each, an “Individual Investor Subscription Agreement”), institutional investors (each, an “Institutional Investor Subscription Agreement”) and Gores Sponsor VIII LLC (the “Sponsor Subscription Agreement,” and, together with the Individual Investor Subscription Agreement and the Institutional Investor Subscription Agreement, the “PIPE Subscription Agreements”), pursuant to which the investors have agreed to purchase an aggregate of 31,055,000 shares of Company Class A Stock in a private placement for $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Investment”).
Each Subscription Agreement will terminate with no further force and effect upon the earliest to occur of: (a) such date and time as the Merger Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms; (b) upon the mutual written agreement of the parties to such Subscription Agreement; (c) if any of the conditions to closing set forth in such Subscription Agreement are not satisfied or waived on or prior to the closing and, as a result thereof, the transactions contemplated by such Subscription Agreement are not consummated at the closing; and (d) 30 days after the Outside Date, if the closing of the Proposed Business Combination shall not have occurred by such date other than as a result of a breach of the investor’s obligations under the Subscription Agreement. As of the date hereof, the shares of Company Class A Stock to be issued pursuant to the Subscription Agreements have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Company will, within 30 days after the closing, file with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (“SEC”) a registration statement (the “Post-Closing Registration Statement”) registering the resale of such shares of Class A Common Stock and will use its commercially reasonable efforts to have such Post-Closing Registration Statement declared effective as soon as practicable after the filing thereof.
The Sponsor Subscription Agreement is substantially similar to the Individual Investor Subscription Agreements, except that the Sponsor has the right to assign its commitment to purchase the Company Class A Stock under the Sponsor Subscription Agreement in advance of the closing of the Proposed Business Combination. The Institutional Investor Subscription Agreement is substantially similar to the Individual Investor Subscription Agreement.
The foregoing description of the PIPE Subscription Agreements does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by the terms and conditions of the PIPE Subscription Agreements, a form of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 10.1 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Waiver and Share Surrender Agreement
On December 13, 2021, the Company entered a Waiver and Share Surrender Agreement (the “Waiver Agreement”) with the Sponsor and each holder (including the Sponsor) (each, a “Class F Holder,” and, collectively, the “Class F Holders”) of the Company’s Class F Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class F Common Stock”), pursuant to which (a) the Class F Holders have agreed to waive certain of the anti-dilution rights in respect of their Class F Common Stock and (b) the Sponsor has agreed to irrevocably surrender 1,501,650 shares of Class F Common Stock, in each case, in connection with, and subject to, the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
The foregoing description of the Waiver Agreement does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by the terms and conditions of the Waiver Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 10.2 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
For the period from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of ($8,679,466), of which 3,421,208 is a non-cash expense related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability. Our business activities during the year mainly consisted of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates for a Business Combination. We believe that we have sufficient funds available to complete our efforts to effect a Business Combination with an operating business by March 1, 2023. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination.
As indicated in the accompanying unaudited financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $317,220 in cash and deferred offering costs of $12,075,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure investors that our plans to complete our Business Combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 11, 2021, the Sponsor purchased 8,625,000 shares of Class F Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of the Company (the “Founder Shares”) for $25,000, or approximately $0.003 per share. The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 1,125,000 shares subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor depending on the extent to which the underwriter’s over-allotment is exercised. As a result of the underwriter’s election to fully exercise its over-allotment option, 1,125,000 Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture. The number of Founder Shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares upon completion of the Public Offering. On February 23, 2021, the Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of the independent directors at their original purchase price.
On March 1, 2021, the Company consummated its Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, including 4,500,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s partial exercise of their over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. On the IPO Closing Date, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 2,966,666 Private Placement Warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at $11.50 per share, to
our Sponsor, at a price of $3.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $8,900,000. After deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions (excluding the Deferred Discount, which amount will be payable upon consummation of the Business Combination, if consummated) and the estimated offering expenses, the total net proceeds from our Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were $347,000,000, of which $345,000,000 (or $10.00 per share sold in the Public Offering) was placed in the Trust Account. The amount of proceeds not deposited in the Trust Account was $2,000,000 at the closing of our Public Offering. Interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
Prior to the completion of the Public Offering, the Sponsor loaned the Company an aggregate of $300,000 by the issuance of an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”) issued by the Company in favor of the Sponsor to cover organization expenses and expenses related to the Public Offering. The Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of January 31, 2022 or the completion of the Public Offering. The Note was repaid upon completion of the Public Offering.
On March 19, 2021, the Sponsor made available to the Company a loan of up to $4,000,000 pursuant to a promissory note issued by the Company to the Sponsor. The proceeds from the note will be used for ongoing operational expenses and certain other expenses in connection with the Business Combination. The note is unsecured, non-interest bearing and matures on the earlier of: (i) February 11, 2023 or (ii) the date on which the Company consummates the Business Combination. As of December 31, 2021, the amount advanced by Sponsor to the Company was $1,350,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held outside of the Trust Account of $317,220, which is available to fund our working capital requirements. Additionally, interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
In addition, at December 31, 2021, the Company had current liabilities of $19,501,774 and working capital of ($18,094,276), the balances of which are primarily related to warrants we have recorded as liabilities as described in Notes 2 and 3. Other amounts are related to accrued expenses owed to professionals, consultants, advisors and others who are working on seeking a Business Combination as described in Note 1. Such work is continuing after December 31, 2021 and amounts are continuing to accrue. Additionally, the warrant liability will not impact the Company’s liquidity until a Business Combination has been consummated, as they do not require cash settlement until such event has occurred.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of Regulatory Withdrawals and taxes payable) to consummate our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of shares of our Class A Common Stock upon completion of a Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to consummate our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in our Trust Account, if any, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategy. Following the closing of a Business Combination, we do not expect there to be remaining proceeds in our Trust Account.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities. In connection with the Public Offering, we entered into an administrative services agreement to pay monthly recurring expenses of $20,000 to The Gores Group for office space, utilities and secretarial support. The administrative services agreement terminates upon the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
The underwriter is entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5% ($18,975,000), of which 2.0% ($6,900,000) was paid at the IPO Closing Date, and 3.5% ($12,075,000) was deferred. The Deferred Discount will
become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriter is not entitled to any interest accrued on the Deferred Discount.
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the accounting and disclosure rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), and reflect all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair presentation of the financial position as of December 31, 2021 and the results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented. Operating results for the period ended December 31, 2021 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for the full year or any other period.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of the Accounting Standards Codification (the “ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to our Public Offering and were charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of our Public Offering. Accordingly, offering costs totaling $19,405,785 (including $18,975,000 in underwriter’s fees), and were charged to stockholders’ equity.
Net loss per common share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A Common Stock and the Founders Shares. Net income/(loss) per common share is computed utilizing the two-class method. The two-class method is an earnings allocation formula that determines earnings per share separately for each class of common stock based on an allocation of undistributed earnings per the rights of each class. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income/(loss) per common share is the same as basic net income/(loss) per common share for the period.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
For those liabilities or benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax liabilities as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties at December 31, 2021.
The Company may be subject to potential examination by U.S. federal, states or foreign jurisdiction authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income amounts in various tax jurisdictions and compliance with U.S. federal, states or foreign tax laws.
The Company is incorporated in the State of Delaware and is required to pay franchise taxes to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a business combination is completed where the impact could be material.
Going Concern Consideration
If the Company does not complete its Business Combination by March 1, 2023, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the common stock sold as part of the units in the Public Offering, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of franchise and income taxes payable and less up to $100,000 of such net interest which may be distributed to the Company to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining stockholders and the Company’s Board of Directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the initial public offering price per unit in the Public Offering. In addition, if the Company fails to complete its Business Combination by March 25, 2023, there will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless.
In addition, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had current liabilities of $19,501,774 and $1,200 and working capital of ($18,094,276) and ($1,200), respectively, the balances of which are primarily related to warrants we have recorded as liabilities as described in Notes 2 and 3. Other amounts are related to accrued expenses owed to professionals, consultants, advisors and others who are working on seeking a Business Combination as described in Note 1. Such work is continuing after December 31, 2021 and amounts are continuing to accrue. Additionally, the warrant liability will not impact the Company’s liquidity until a Business Combination has been consummated, as they do not require cash settlement until such event has occurred.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Company utilizes a Monte Carlo simulation methodology to value the warrants at each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations. The key assumptions in the option pricing model utilized are assumptions related to expected share-price volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The expected volatility as of the IPO Closing Date was derived from observable public warrant pricing on comparable ‘blank-check’ companies that went public in 2020 and 2021. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interpolated U.S. Constant Maturity Treasury yield. The expected term of the warrants is assumed to be six months until the closing of a Business Combination, and the contractual five year term subsequently. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.