ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
As used in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation,” except where the context otherwise requires, the term “we,” “us,” “our,” or “the Company,” refers to the business of Global Innovative Platforms Inc.
Our cash balance is $262 as of our fiscal year end of September 30, 2021. Our cash balance is not sufficient to fund our limited levels of operations for any period of time.
Our net loss for our fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was $73,273 and was attributable to general and administrative expenses.
We have been utilizing and may utilize funds from a minority shareholder, Vikki Cook, and entities under her control including Path-Guard Network, Inc. and Animal Breath Analytics, Inc., informally advanced funds “on a need be basis” to allow us to pay for filing fees and professional fees that we may incur. Vikki Cook has no formal commitment, arrangement or legal obligation to advance or loan funds to the company, and the advances are required to be repaid by the Company. As a start-up stage company, we have a very limited operating history.
We are a start-up stage company and have not generated any revenue to date. Long term financing is required to fully implement our business plan. The exact amount of funding will depend on funding required for full implementation of our business plan.
It should be noted that our plans for monetization and marketing of our application are the same as those expressed at our fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, but as of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, these plans have not yet been realized in any capacity
The Company was incorporated in Delaware on September 15, 2020, which was a result of a Delaware holding company reorganization from a predecessor corporation, Alexandria Advantage Warranty Company, formerly a Colorado corporation which was merged into a subsidiary and thereupon divested.
We are a publicly quoted shell company seeking to merge with other entities with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create values for our shareholders. No potential merger candidate has been identified at this time.
Summary of Financial and Operating Performance
Comparisons of the current year with the prior period (which was only 15 days) are of limited value because of the time differential among other reasons. The Company’s net loss of $73,273 for fiscal 2021 from a profit as compared to 2020 is primarily due to segment disposal, which although discussed below, would make comparison of limited value.
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company had no revenues. Operating expenses incurred related primarily to personnel costs of officers, as well as the activities necessary to support corporate and shareholder duties and are detailed in the following table.
Results of Operations
Significant items affecting net income (loss) other than time differential are noted below:
Professional Fees for fiscal 2021 increased as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the cost of going public and complying with reporting requirements.
Other operating expenses include investor relations, general office expenditures, and other miscellaneous costs. Costs also increased in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to costs incurred in searching for potential merger candidates.
Other significant items impacting the change in the Company’s net loss are noted below:
Gain on disposal of Segment was not recurring and the underlying segment had no operation in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have no revenue generating operations from which we can internally generate funds. To date, our ongoing operations have been financed by advances from related parties. While we believe we will be able to secure additional financings in the future, we cannot predict the size or pricing of any such financings. In addition, we may raise funds through mergers with operating companies that may believe they would benefit from being publicly traded, although current market conditions and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic have reduced the number of potential merger partners of any such interests.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company had cash of $262 and a working capital deficit of $28,898, compared to no cash and a working capital deficit of $6,629 on September 30, 2020. The working capital deficit for 2021 is less than the loss incurred, as it was partially offset by forgiveness of related party debt as part of a change in control.
We expect that the Company will operate at a loss for the foreseeable future. The Company’s current planned operational needs are approximately $35,000 until September 30, 2022, due to the cost of being public. However, this may be revised if we are successful in merging with an entity that has ongoing operations.
In addition to outstanding accounts payable and short-term liabilities, our average monthly expenditures are approximately $3,000 per month where approximately $1,000 is for corporate overhead, and approximately $2,000 per month is planned for expenditures relating to direct costs of being public including professional fees and public entity costs. The Company’s ability to continue operations and fund our current work plan is dependent on management’s ability to secure additional financing.
We currently have no further material funding commitments or arrangements for additional financing at this time and there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on acceptable terms, if at all. There is significant uncertainty that we will be able to secure any additional financing in the current equity or debt markets. The quantity of funds to be raised and the terms of any proposed equity or debt financing that may be undertaken will be negotiated by management as opportunities to raise funds arise. Management intends to pursue funding sources of both debt and equity financing, including but not limited to the issuance of equity securities in the form of Common Shares, warrants, subscription receipts, or any combination thereof in units of the Company pursuant to private placements to accredited investors or pursuant to equity lines of credit or public offerings in the form of underwritten/brokered offerings, at-the-market offerings, registered direct offerings, or other forms of equity financing and public or private issuances of debt securities including secured and unsecured convertible debt instruments or secured debt project financing. Management does not currently know the terms pursuant to which such financings may be completed in the future, but any such financings will be negotiated at arm’s-length. Future financings involving the issuance of equity securities or derivatives thereof will likely be completed at a discount to the then-current market price of the Company’s securities and will likely be dilutive to current shareholders.
Based on the conditions described within, management has concluded and the audit opinion and notes that accompany our financial statements for the year ended September 30, 2021, disclose that substantial doubt exists as to our ability to continue in business. The financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern. We are an exploration stage company and we have incurred losses since our inception. The Company anticipates that it may not have sufficient cash subsequent to September 30, 2021, to continue to fund basic operations for the next twelve months, therefore, additional funds are likely to be necessary to continue. While the COVID-19 pandemic did negatively impact our ability to obtain project financing during fiscal 2021, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and our precautionary measures may continue to impact our business will depend on future developments, which continue to be highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. These include, but are not limited to, the duration and geographic spread of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, future spikes of COVID-19 infections resulting in additional preventative measures to contain or mitigate the spread of the virus, the effectiveness, distribution and acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines, including the vaccines’ efficacy against emerging COVID-19 variants, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. We believe that the going concern uncertainty cannot be alleviated with confidence until the Company has entered into a business climate where funding of its planned ongoing operating activities is secured.
Operating Activities
During the period from September 15, 2020 (Inception) to September 30, 2020, we earned a net income of $8,859 which after an adjustment for the non-cash gain of $14,488 on the sale of our subsidiary company, a $2,965 increase in accounts payable and a $2,500 increase in accruals - related party resulted in net cash of $164 being used in operations.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company’s operating activities generated $262 million of cash (2020: $0). The cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2021 reflects the Company’s funding of losses of $73,273, partially offset by minor non-cash adjustments due to forgiveness of related party expenses arising from a change in control and changes in working capital items. Overall, fiscal 2021 operational outflows increased of outstanding accounts payable balances during fiscal year 2021 and related party advances of a minority shareholder.
Investing Activities
During the period from September 15, 2020 (Inception) to September 30, 2020, we paid $1,000 as an inducement for the purchaser of AAWC Corporation. to acquire the subsidiary company.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company did not have any investing activities.
Financing Activities
During the period from September 15, 2020 (Inception) to September 30, 2020, we received $1,164 by way of loan from one of our chief financial officer, director and officers and principal shareholder resulting in a total of $1,164 generated from financing operations. We had no financing activities for the year ended September 30, 2021
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling shareholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
Cash Flow Considerations
The Company has historically relied upon equity financings, and to a lesser degree, debt financings, to satisfy its capital requirements and will continue to depend heavily upon equity capital to finance its activities. The Company may pursue debt financing in the medium term if it is able to procure such financing on terms more favorable than available equity financing; however, there can be no assurance the Company will be able to obtain any required financing in the future on acceptable terms.
The Company has limited financial resources compared to its proposed expenditures, no source of operating income, and no assurance that additional funding will be available to it for current or future projects, although the Company has been successful in the past in financing its activities through related party advances.
It is our current intention to seek to raise debt and/or equity financing to meet ongoing operating expenses and attempt to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. There is no assurance that this series of events will be satisfactorily completed.
Future losses are likely to occur as, until we are able to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders, we have no sources of income to meet our operating expenses. As a result of these, among other factors, we received from our registered independent public accountants in their report for the financial statements for the year ended September 30, 2021 and from the period from September 15, 2020 (Inception) to September 30, 2020, an explanatory paragraph stating that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s related party agreements are informal, so the Company was in compliance with its lenders as of September 30, 2021. A deterioration of our relationship with our lenders would provide stress for greater capital, possibly on adverse terms for our shareholders.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Per SEC regulations, we are required to disclose our off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, such as changes in financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Environmental
Not applicable.
Forward-Looking Statements
The foregoing discussion and analysis, as well as certain information contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, and are intended to be covered by the safe harbor created thereby. See the discussion in “Forward-Looking Statements” in Item 1., “Business.”
Accounting Developments
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
A summary of our significant accounting policies is detailed in Note 3 to the Financial Statements. We have outlined below those policies identified as being critical to the understanding of our business and results of operations and that require the application of significant management judgment. All companies are required to include a discussion of critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of their financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Carrying Value of Long-Lived Assets
The recoverability of the carrying values of mineral properties is dependent upon economic reserves being discovered or developed on the properties, permitting, financing, start-up, and commercial production from, or the sale/lease of, or other strategic transactions related to these properties. Development and/or start-up of a project will depend on, among other things, management’s ability to raise sufficient capital for these purposes. We assess the carrying cost of our mineral properties for impairment whenever information or circumstances indicate the potential for impairment. This would include events and circumstances such as our inability to obtain all the necessary permits, changes in the legal status of our mineral properties, government actions, the results of exploration activities and technical evaluations and changes in economic conditions, including the price of commodities or input prices. Such evaluations compare estimated future net cash flows with our carrying costs and future obligations on an undiscounted basis. If it is determined that the estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the property, an impairment loss will be recorded. Where estimates of future net cash flows are not determinable and where other conditions indicate the potential for impairment, management uses available market information and/or third-party valuation experts to assess if the carrying value can be recovered and to estimate fair value.
We review and evaluate our long-lived assets, other than mineral properties, for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is measured and recorded based on the estimated fair value of the long-lived assets being tested for impairment and their carrying amounts.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method, recognizing certain temporary differences between the financial reporting basis of our liabilities and assets and the related income tax basis for such liabilities and assets. This method generates a net deferred income tax liability or asset, as measured by the statutory tax rates in effect. We derive our deferred income tax expense or benefit by recording the change in the net deferred income tax liability or asset balance for the year. With respect to the earnings we derive from the operations of our subsidiaries, in those situations where the earnings are indefinitely reinvested, no deferred taxes have been provided on the unremitted earnings (including the excess of the carrying value of the net equity of such entities for financial reporting purposes over the tax basis of such equity) of our subsidiaries.
We are subject to reviews of our income tax filings and other tax payments, and disputes can arise with the taxing authorities over the interpretation of its contracts or laws. We recognize and record potential tax liabilities and record tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be different than the ultimate assessment, an additional expense or benefit would result. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in Income tax benefit (expense). In certain jurisdictions, we must pay a portion of the disputed amount to the local government in order to formally appeal the assessment. Such payment is recorded as a receivable if we believe the amount is ultimately recoverable.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
Our deferred income tax assets include certain future tax benefits. We record a valuation allowance against any portion of those deferred income tax assets when we believe, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized. We review the likelihood that we will realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets and therefore the need for valuation allowances on a quarterly basis, or more frequently if events indicate that a review is required. In determining the requirement for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial results of the legal entity or group recording the net deferred tax asset is considered, along with all other available positive and negative evidence.
Other
The Company has one class of shares, being Common Shares. It has 619,085 outstanding shares, with no share options, warrants, and convertible debt options outstanding as of September 30, 2021.