Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Please see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a newly organized Private-to-Public Equity (PPE) company, also known as a blank check company or special purpose acquisition vehicle, incorporated in the State of Delaware and formed for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, or engaging in any other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds from the sale of Public Units in our initial public offering (the “Offering” or “IPO”), the sale of the Private Placement Units to our Founder and Underwriters, the sale of common stock to our Founder, our common equity or any preferred equity that we may create in accordance with the terms of our charter documents, debt, or a combination of cash, common or preferred equity and debt. The Public Units sold in the Offering each consisted of one share of common stock, and one-half (1/2) of one redeemable warrant to purchase our common stock (no fractional shares will be issued upon exercise of the warrants). The Private Placement Units were substantially similar to the Public Units sold in the Offering, but for certain differences in the warrants included in each of them. For clarity, the warrants included in the Public Units are referred to herein as the “public warrants”, and the warrants included in the Private Placement Units are referred to herein as the “private warrants.”
The issuance of additional shares of common stock or the creation of one or more classes of preferred stock during our initial business combination:
▪
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the Offering who would not have pre-emption rights in respect of any such issue;
▪
may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if the rights, preferences, designations and limitations attaching to the preferred shares are senior to those afforded our shares of common stock;
▪
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
▪
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
▪
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our shares of common stock.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
▪
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after our initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
▪
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
▪
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
▪
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if any document governing such debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
▪
our inability to pay dividends on our shares of common stock;
▪
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
▪
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
▪
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
▪
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. For the period from February 23, 2021 (date of inception) through December 31, 2021, our only activities have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Offering and to search for a target business for the business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account at Oppenheimer & Co., Inc. in New York, New York with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, which was funded after the Offering to hold an amount of cash and marketable securities equal to that raised in the Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 23, 2021 (date of inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $2,472,432, which consisted of operating expenses of $2,457,527, a provision for income taxes of $3,414 and other expense from the change in fair value of warrant liability of $22,933, that were partially offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $11,442.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the period from February 23, 2021 (date of inception) to December 31, 2021, the Founder purchased 5,735,000 Founder Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, or $0.0043592 per share. The Company also issued 5,000 Insider Shares to Mr. Weightman, its Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to the Insider Shares Grant Agreement dated May 18, 2021, between the Company and Mr. Weightman. The 5,000 shares granted to Mr. Weightman are subject to forfeiture and cancellation if he resigns or the services are terminated for cause prior to the completion of the business combination. The Company also issued 10,000 Insider Shares to Interest Solutions, LLC, a Connecticut limited liability company and an affiliate of ICR, LLC, an investor relations firm providing services to the Company (“ICR”). The 10,000 Insider Shares granted to ICR are not subject to forfeiture. The grant date fair value of the 10,000 shares was expensed upon issuance.
On May 28, 2021, the Underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option resulting in the forfeiture of 525,000 Founder Shares. On May 18, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO of 20,000,000 Public Units. On May 28, 2021, the Company completed the issuance of 900,000 additional Public Units as a result of the Underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option. The Public Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $209,000,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we held cash and marketable securities in the amount of $211,099,649 (including $9,649 of interest earned) in the Trust Account. In addition, there was interest receivable to the Trust Account of $1,793. The marketable securities consisted of money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940 which invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. Interest income earned
from the funds held in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. As of December 31, 2021, tax relating to interest earned on the Trust Account totaled $3,414.
For the period February 23, 2021 (date of inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,173,510, consisting of a net loss of $2,472,432, interest received on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $9,649, interest receivable of $1,793, plus an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $805,390 and an increase in other long term assets of $103,091, that were partially offset by the increase in liabilities of $1,101,212, due to increase in accounts payable of $32,821, payable to related parties of $18,934, accrued liabilities of $1,046,043, and other current liabilities of $3,414, and an increase in the fair value of the warrant liability of $22,933 and stock-based compensation of $94,700.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable by us). We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations to be approximately $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to affect our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our initial business combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $875,435 held outside the Trust Account. We believe that the proceeds not held in the Trust Account will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least 15 months from the closing date of the Offering (or 21 months if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a business combination), assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Over this time period, we intend to use these funds primarily for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In order to finance operating and/or transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Founder, executive officers, directors, or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units.
Following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $30,000 for office space, administrative services and secretarial support. We began incurring these fees on May 19, 2021, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination or our liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when an accounting standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, will adopt the new or revised accounting standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Our statement of operations and comprehensive loss includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted, for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account by the weighted-average number of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted-average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period, basic and diluted.
When calculating our diluted net loss per share, we have not considered the effect of (i) the incremental number of shares of common stock to settle warrants sold in the Offering and Private Placement, as calculated using the treasury stock method and (ii) the shares issued to Mr. Weightman subject to forfeiture representing 5,000 shares of common stock underlying a restricted stock award for the periods it was outstanding. Since we were in net loss position during the period after deducting net income attributable to common stock subject to redemption, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the period presented as the inclusion of all potential common shares outstanding would have been anti-dilutive.
In accordance with the two-class method, our net loss is adjusted for net income that is attributable to common stock subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the income of the Trust Account and not our losses. Accordingly, net loss per common share, basic and diluted, is calculated as follows:
Common Stock subject to possible redemption
Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for warrants for shares of the Company’s common stock that are not indexed to its own stock as liabilities at fair value on the balance sheet. The warrants are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value is recognized as a component of other expense on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the common stock warrants. At that time, the portion of the warrant liability related to the common stock warrants will be reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020,
including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 19, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The Company does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.