Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
(this “Annual Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Cartesian Growth Corporation, a Cayman Islands exempted company. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “sponsor” refer to our sponsor, CGC Sponsor LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability Company. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from these anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Risk Factors” in Part I Item 1A of this Annual Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 18, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company, for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, or reorganization or engaging in any other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities.
We may pursue our initial business combination in any business industry or sector, we intend to focus on seeking high-growth businesses with proven or potential transnational operations or outlooks in order to capitalize on the experience, reputation, and network of our management team. Furthermore, we intend to seek target business where we believe we will have an opportunity to drive ongoing value creation after our initial business combination is completed, as our management team has done with multiple investments over a wide range of sectors, industries and geographical locations.
We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants to our sponsor that occurred simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering (the “private placement”), our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt.
We have incurred, and in the event the Proposed Business Combination (as defined below) is not consummated, expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination, including the Proposed Business Combination, will be successful.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination
On September 19, 2021, we, Tiedemann Wealth Management Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“TWMH”), TIG Trinity GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“TIG GP”), TIG Trinity Management, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“TIG MGMT” and, together with TIG GP, the “TIG Entities”), Alvarium Investments Limited, an English private limited company (“Alvarium” and, together with TWMH and the TIG Entities, the “Target Companies” and each a “Target Company”), Rook
MS LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Umbrella Merger Sub”) and Alvarium Tiedemann Capital, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Umbrella”) entered into a business combination agreement (as may be amended, supplemented, or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), pursuant to which we will hold Umbrella, a newly formed Delaware limited liability company for purposes of effecting the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, which will hold the businesses of the Target Companies.
Business Combination Agreement
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, among other things, (i) prior to the closing of the Business Combination Agreement (the “Closing” and, the date on which the Closing occurs, the “Closing Date”), TWMH and the TIG Entities shall take, or cause to be taken, all actions necessary to implement a reorganization such that TWMH and the TIG Entities shall be wholly owned direct or indirect subsidiaries of Umbrella and Umbrella shall be owned solely by the members of TWMH, the members of TIG GP and the members of TIG MGMT (the “TWMH/TIG Entities Reorganization”); (ii) prior to the Closing, Alvarium will take, or cause to be taken, all actions necessary to implement a reorganization such that Alvarium will be the wholly owned indirect subsidiary of a newly formed Isle of Man entity (“Alvarium Topco”), and Alvarium Topco will be owned solely by the shareholders of Alvarium (the “Alvarium Reorganization”); (iii) on the business day prior to the Closing Date, we will domesticate as a corporation formed under the laws of the State of Delaware and deregister as an exempted company incorporated under the laws of the Cayman Islands (the “Domestication”), each of our outstanding Class A ordinary shares shall be converted into the right to receive one share of Class A common stock of us (the “Class A Common Stock”) and we will be renamed “Alvarium Tiedemann Holdings, Inc.”; (iv) at the Closing, TIG MGMT, TIG GP and Umbrella will enter into a distribution agreement, pursuant to which (a) TIG MGMT will distribute to Umbrella all of the issued and outstanding shares or partnership interests, as applicable, that it holds with each of its Affiliated Managers, and (b) TIG GP will distribute to Umbrella all of the issued and outstanding shares or interests that it holds with its Affiliated Manager; (v) at the Closing, each shareholder of Alvarium Topco will exchange his, her or its (a) ordinary shares of Alvarium Topco and (b) class A shares of Alvarium Topco for Class A Common Stock (the “Alvarium Exchange”) and upon the consummation of the Alvarium Exchange, Alvarium Topco will become a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company; (vi) immediately following the effective time of the Alvarium Exchange, Umbrella Merger Sub will merge with and into Umbrella, with Umbrella surviving such merger as a direct subsidiary of us (the “Umbrella Merger”); (vii) at the Closing, following the Alvarium Exchange and the Umbrella Merger, we will contribute all of the issued and outstanding shares of Alvarium Topco that we hold to Umbrella (the “Alvarium Contribution”) and upon the consummation of the Alvarium Contribution, Alvarium Topco will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Umbrella; and (viii) following the Closing, Alvarium Topco will be liquidated and Alvarium Holdings LLC (to be renamed Alvarium Tiedemann Holdings, LLC) will become the wholly owned direct subsidiary of Umbrella (collectively, the “Proposed Business Combination”).
The consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement is subject to customary conditions, representations and warranties, covenants and closing conditions in the Business Combination Agreement, including, but not limited to, approval by our shareholders of the Business Combination Agreement, the effectiveness of a registration statement on Form S-4
(File No. 333-262644)
(the “Form S-4”),
which was initially filed with the SEC on February 11, 2022, in connection with the Business Combination, and other customary closing conditions, including the receipt of certain regulatory approvals. The transaction is expected to close in the second or third quarter of 2022.
Subscription Agreements
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (the “PIPE Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (each a “PIPE Investor”) to purchase, following the Domestication, Class A Common Stock (such shares, collectively, “PIPE Shares”) in an aggregate value of $164,999,807, representing 16,836,715 PIPE Shares at a price of $9.80 per share.
The closing of the sale of PIPE Shares (the “PIPE Closing”) will occur immediately prior to the Closing. The PIPE Closing will be subject to customary conditions, including, but not limited to:
i. all representations and warranties of us and the PIPE Investor contained in the relevant PIPE Subscription Agreement will be true and correct in all material respects (other than representations and warranties that are qualified as to materiality or Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the PIPE Subscription Agreements), which representations and warranties will be true in all respects) at, and as of, the PIPE Closing;
ii. all conditions precedent to the Closing will have been satisfied or waived; and
iii. without the consent of the PIPE Investor, the Business Combination Agreement cannot be amended, modified or waived in a manner that reasonably would be expected to materially and adversely affect the economic benefits the PIPE Investor reasonably would expect to receive under the PIPE Subscription Agreement.
Pursuant to the PIPE Subscription Agreements, we agreed that, within 45 calendar days after the consummation of the Proposed Business Combination, we will file with the SEC a registration statement registering the resale of the PIPE Shares, and we will use our commercially reasonable efforts to have such registration statement declared effective as soon as practicable after the filing thereof; provided, however, that our obligations to include the shares held by a PIPE Investor in such registration statement will be contingent upon the respective PIPE Investor furnishing in writing to us such information regarding the PIPE Investor, the securities held by such PIPE Investor and the intended method of disposition of the shares, as will be reasonably requested by us to effect the registration of such shares, and will execute such documents in connection with such registration, as us may reasonably request that are customary of a selling stockholder in similar situations.
Each PIPE Subscription Agreement will terminate upon the earlier to occur of (i) such date and time as the Business Combination Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms, (ii) upon the mutual written agreement of each of the parties to the PIPE Subscription Agreement; or (iii) if any of the conditions to PIPE Closing set forth in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 of such PIPE Subscription Agreement are not satisfied on or prior to the Closing Date and, as a result thereof, the transactions contemplated by such PIPE Subscription Agreement are not consummated at the PIPE Closing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and, after our initial public offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of an initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account established for the benefit of our public shareholders. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $1.0 million, which included a loss from operations of $1.0 million, offering cost expense allocated to warrants of $0.9 million, an expense for the fair value in excess of cash received for private placement warrants of $3.1 million, and a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3.9 million. For the period from December 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $7,948, which included operating costs of $7,948.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern Consideration
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial subscription of Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share (the “founder shares”), by the sponsor for an aggregate subscription price of $25,000 and loans from the sponsor.
On February 26, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 34,500,000 units at $10.00 per unit, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 4,500,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated a private placement of an aggregate of 8,900,000 private placement warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $8,900,000.
Following the initial public offering, including the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the private placement, a total of $345,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $19,540,060 in transaction costs, including $6,900,000 of underwriting commissions, $12,075,000 of deferred underwriting commissions and $565,060 of other offering costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.6 million in cash, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the trust account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $345,031,308 consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we
did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account to pay our taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete an initial business combination and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including $12,075,000 payable to Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. for deferred underwriting commissions upon consummation of our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our share capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $0.6 million held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our initial shareholders, officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from the trust account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into private warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. Such private warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of an initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of an initial business combination. If we are unable to complete an initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we are within 12 months of our mandatory liquidation date of February 26, 2023. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with ASU 2014-15,
“Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we anticipate the consummation of the Proposed Business Combination in the second or third quarter of 2022 alleviating the concern about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or February 26, 2023, the date we are required to liquidate.
Our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on February 23, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of an initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of the Initial Public Offering are entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of $0.35 per unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate. Subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement, (i) the deferred underwriting commission was placed in the trust account and will be released to the underwriters only upon the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the deferred underwriting commission will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for our public warrants and private placement warrants (collectively, the “warrants”, which are discussed in Note 3, Note 4 and Note 8 to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K)
in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815-40,“Derivatives
and Hedging, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (ASC “815-40”),
and concluded that a provision in the warrant agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815-40,
the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the Initial Public Offering) and at each reporting date in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1. Offering
costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating
expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were charged to shareholders’ equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with an initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our amended and restated articles of association. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99,
redemption provisions not solely within our control require ordinary shares subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of FASB ASC 480. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 all Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Company has two classes of shares, Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. We have not considered the effect of the 20,400,000 ordinary shares underlying the 11,500,000 warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the 8,900,000 private placement warrants sold in the private placement, in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share for the period presented.
Our statement of operations applies the two-class
method in calculating net income per share. Basic and diluted net income per Class A ordinary share and Class B ordinary share is calculated by dividing net income attributable to us by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of shares.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.