ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”,” “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All references to year, unless otherwise noted, refers to our fiscal year, which ends on December 31. As used in this Form 10-K, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “Globalink” refer to Globalink Investment Inc.
Overview
We were formed on March 24, 2021 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to any particular industry or geographic region, although we intend to focus our search on target businesses in in North America, Europe, South East Asia, and Asia (excluding China, Hong Kong and Macau), in the e-commerce and payments industry. We shall not undertake our initial business combination with any entity with its principal business operations in China (including Hong Kong and Macau). We intend to utilize cash derived from the proceeds of the IPO and the private placement of the private units, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt, in.
The issuance of additional shares of common stock or preferred stock in our initial business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of our investors in the IPO who would not have pre-emption rights in respect of any such issuance;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is issued and outstanding;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our shares of common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO and identifying a target company for our initial business combination at the earliest. Following the IPO, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents in the form of specified U.S. government treasury bills or specified money market funds after the IPO. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. Until the completion of our initial business combination, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $ 135,550, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $ 99, partially offset by general and administrative expenses of $ 135,649.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The registration statement on Form S-1 for the Company’s IPO was declared effective on December 6, 2021. On December 9, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 10,000,000 units. Each Unit consists of one share of common stock, $0.001 par value, one right to receive one-tenth (1/10) of a share of common stock upon the consummation of an initial business combination and one redeemable warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one-half (1/2) of a share of common stock at a price of $11.50 per whole share. The units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $100,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 517,500 private units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating total proceeds of $5,175,000.
On December 9, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full, and the closing of the Over-Allotment Units occurred on December 13, 2021. The total aggregate issuance by the Company of 1,500,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit resulted in total gross proceeds of $15,000,000. On December 13, 2021, simultaneously with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, we consummated the private sale of an additional 52,500 private units, generating gross proceeds of $525,000. Since the underwriter’s over-allotment was exercised in full, the sponsor did not forfeit any insider shares.
Offering costs for the IPO and the exercise of the underwriters’ Over-allotment Option Units amounted to $6,887,896, consisting of $2,300,000 of underwriting fees, $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting fees payable (which are held in the trust account) and $562,896 of other costs. The $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting fee payable is contingent upon the consummation of an initial business combination by March 9, 2023, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Following the closing of the IPO (including the Over-Allotment Units), $116,725,000 ($10.15 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the IPO, Over-Allotment Units, and the private units was placed in a trust account established for the benefit of the Company’s public stockholders at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee and will be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 180 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by the Company meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $324,872. Net loss was $135,550 mainly consisting of General and administration expenses offset partially by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $99.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investment held in the trust account of $116,725,099. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, no amount was withdrawn from the trust account to pay for taxes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $812,232 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete initial business combination.
Ding Jie Lin, a member of the sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the IPO pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no borrowings under the Note which was repaid on December 13, 2021.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial Business Combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required. If the Company completes an initial Business Combination, the Company will repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to the Company. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans, but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into units of the post initial business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the private units. As of December 31, 2021, there were no working capital loans outstanding.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than the Support service charges of $7,000 payable to our Sponsor.
Promissory Notes
On October 7, 2021, we issued an unsecured Note to Ding Jie Lin, a member of the sponsor, pursuant to which we could borrow up to an aggregate of $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Public Offering. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no borrowings under the Note which was repaid in full on December 13, 2021.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 1,500,000 units to cover over-allotment. On December 13, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the option and purchased 1,500,000 Over-Allotment Units, generating gross proceeds of $11,500,000. The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting commissions of $0.35 per unit, or $4,025,000 from the closing of the IPO and the Over-Allotment Units. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely if the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Right of First Refusal
Subject to certain conditions, we granted Chardan, the representative of the underwriters in the IPO, for a period of 18 months after the date of the consummation of our business combination, a right of first refusal to act as book-running manager, with at least 30% of the economics, for any and all future public and private equity and debt offerings. In accordance with FINRA Rule 5110(f)(2)(c)(i), such right of first refusal shall not have a duration of more than three years from the effective date of the registration statement for the IPO.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Net Loss Per Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share.” In order to determine the net loss attributable to both the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares, the Company first considered the undistributed loss allocable to both the redeemable ordinary shares and non-redeemable ordinary shares and the undistributed loss is calculated using the total net loss less any dividends paid. The Company then allocated the undistributed loss ratably based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding between the redeemable and non-redeemable ordinary shares. Any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the ordinary shares subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the public shareholders. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the period. Weighted average shares were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 375,000 common stock that are subject to forfeiture if the underwriters’ over-allotment option is not exercised by the underwriters. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering to purchase an aggregate of 7,242,000 shares in the calculation of diluted net loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive and the Company did not have any other dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.
Accounting for Warrants
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the instruments’ specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the instruments are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the instruments meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instruments are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the instrument holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the instruments are outstanding. The Company determined that upon further review of the warrant agreement, management concluded that the public warrants and private warrants issued pursuant to the warrant agreement qualify for equity accounting treatment.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company.” We choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.