Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of Global Partners LP should be read in conjunction with the historical consolidated financial statements of Global Partners LP and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
This section generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a master limited partnership formed in March 2005. We own, control or have access to one of the largest terminal networks of refined petroleum products and renewable fuels in Massachusetts, Maine, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania (collectively, the “Northeast”). We are one of the region’s largest independent owners, suppliers and operators of gasoline stations and convenience stores. As of December 31, 2021, we had a portfolio of 1,595 owned, leased and/or supplied gasoline stations, including 295 directly operated convenience stores, primarily in the Northeast. We are also one of the largest distributors of gasoline, distillates, residual oil and renewable fuels to wholesalers, retailers and commercial customers in the New England states and New York. We engage in the purchasing, selling, gathering, blending, storing and logistics of transporting petroleum and related products, including gasoline and gasoline blendstocks (such as ethanol), distillates (such as home heating oil, diesel and kerosene), residual oil, renewable fuels, crude oil and propane and in the transportation of petroleum products and renewable fuels by rail from the mid-continent region of the United States and Canada.
Collectively, we sold approximately $12.7 billion of refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels and crude oil for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, we had other revenues of approximately $0.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 from convenience store and prepared food sales at our directly operated stores, rental income from dealer leased and commissioned agent leased gasoline stations and from cobranding arrangements, and sundries.
We base our pricing on spot prices, fixed prices or indexed prices and routinely use the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”), Chicago Mercantile Exchange (“CME”) and Intercontinental Exchange (“ICE”) or other counterparties to hedge the risk inherent in buying and selling commodities. Through the use of regulated exchanges or derivatives, we seek to maintain a position that is substantially balanced between purchased volumes and sales volumes or future delivery obligations.
Our Perspective on Global and the COVID-19 Pandemic
Overview
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to make its presence felt at home, in the office workplace, at our retail sites and terminal locations and in the global supply chain. We remain active in responding to the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to provide essential products and services while prioritizing the safety of our employees, customers and vendors in the communities where we operate.
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an economic downturn, restricted travel to, from and within the states in which we conduct our businesses, and in decreases in the demand for gasoline and convenience store products. Social distancing guidelines and directives limiting food operations at our convenience stores contributed to a reduction in in-store traffic and sales. The demand for diesel fuel was similarly (but not as drastically) impacted. While market conditions have improved, the pandemic continues to impact our operations and financial performance. We remain well positioned to pivot and address directives from federal, state and municipal authorities designed to mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and promote the continuing economic recovery. However, uncertainties surrounding the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and demand at the pump, inside our stores and at our terminals remain.
Moving Forward - Our Perspective
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operating results remains uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and may continue to have, material adverse consequences for general economic, financial and business conditions, and could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations and those of our customers, suppliers and other counterparties.
Our inventory management is dependent on the use of hedging instruments which are managed based on the structure of the forward pricing curve. Daily market changes may impact periodic results due to the point-in-time valuation of these positions. Volatility in the oil markets resulting from COVID-19 and geopolitical events may impact our results.
Business operations today reflect changes which may remain for an indefinite period of time. In these uncertain times and volatile markets, we believe that we are operationally nimble and that our portfolio of assets may continue to provide us with opportunities.
Recent Developments
Acquisitions-On February 1, 2022, we acquired substantially all of the retail motor fuel assets in Virginia and North Carolina from Miller Oil Co., Inc. The acquisition includes 21 company-operated Miller’s Neighborhood Market convenience stores and 2 fuel sites that are either owned or leased, including lessee dealer and commissioned agent locations, all located in Virginia, and 34 fuel supply only sites, primarily in Virginia.
On January 25, 2022, we acquired substantially all of the assets from Connecticut-based Consumers Petroleum of Connecticut, Incorporated. The acquisition includes 26 company-owned Wheels convenience stores and related fuel operations located in Connecticut (after the disposition of one site pursuant to the terms of the Federal Trade Commission’s consent order) and 22 fuel-supply only sites located in Connecticut and New York. The purchase price, subject to post-closing adjustments, was approximately $151.0 million. The acquisition was funded with borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Revere Terminal Purchase and Sale Agreement-On November 24, 2021, we entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Revere MA Owner LLC (the “Revere Buyer”) pursuant to which the Revere Buyer will acquire our terminal located on Boston Harbor in Revere, Massachusetts (the “Revere Terminal”) for a purchase price of $150.0 million in cash. Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement we entered into with the Initial Seller in 2015 to acquire the Revere Terminal, the Initial Seller will receive a portion of the net proceeds that we will receive from the sale of the Revere Terminal. We estimate that proceeds to us from the sale of the Revere Terminal after closing costs and consideration of amounts due to the Initial Seller will be in excess of $100.0 million. In connection with closing under the Purchase Agreement, we will enter into a leaseback agreement with the Revere Buyer pursuant to which we will lease back key infrastructure at the Revere Terminal, including certain tanks, dock access rights, and loading rack infrastructure, to allow us to continue business operations at the Revere Terminal post-closing. The disposition is expected to close in the first half of 2022 and is subject to customary closing conditions.
Amended Credit Agreement-On May 5, 2021, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into the fifth amendment to third amended and restated credit agreement which, among other things, increased the total aggregate commitment to $1.25 billion and extended the maturity date to May 6, 2024. On November 29, 2021, we and certain of our subsidiaries agreed with the lenders to increase the working capital revolving credit facility in an amount equal to $100.0 million, which increased the total available commitments under the credit agreement to $1.35 billion.
Series B Preferred Unit Offering-On March 24, 2021, we issued 3,000,000 9.50% of the Series B Preferred Units at a price of $25.00 per Series B Preferred Unit. Distributions on the Series B Preferred Units are payable quarterly and are cumulative from and including the date of original issue at a fixed rate of 9.50% per annum of the stated liquidation preference of $25.00. We used the proceeds, net of underwriting discount and expenses, of $72.2 million to reduce indebtedness under our credit agreement.
2020 Event
2029 Notes Offering and 2023 Notes Redemption-On October 7, 2020, we and GLP Finance Corp. (the “Issuers”) issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”) to several initial purchasers (the “2029 Notes Initial Purchasers”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). We used the net proceeds from the offering to fund the redemption of our 7.00% senior notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) and to repay a portion of the borrowings outstanding under our credit agreement. The redemption of the 2023 Notes occurred on October 23, 2020. Please read “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Senior Notes” for additional information on the 2029 Notes.
Operating Segments
We purchase refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels and crude oil primarily from domestic and foreign refiners and ethanol producers, crude oil producers, major and independent oil companies and trading companies. We operate our businesses under three segments: (i) Wholesale, (ii) Gasoline Distribution and Station Operations (“GDSO”) and (iii) Commercial.
Wholesale
In our Wholesale segment, we engage in the logistics of selling, gathering, blending, storing and transporting refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels, crude oil and propane. We transport these products by railcars, barges, trucks and/or pipelines pursuant to spot or long-term contracts. From time to time, we aggregate crude oil by truck or pipeline in the mid-continent region of the United States and Canada, transport it by rail and ship it by barge to refiners. We sell home heating oil, branded and unbranded gasoline and gasoline blendstocks, diesel, kerosene and residual oil to home heating oil retailers and wholesale distributors. Generally, customers use their own vehicles or contract carriers to take delivery of the gasoline, distillates and propane at bulk terminals and inland storage facilities that we own or control or at which we have throughput or exchange arrangements. Ethanol is shipped primarily by rail and by barge.
In our Wholesale segment, we obtain Renewable Identification Numbers (“RIN”) in connection with our purchase of ethanol which is used for bulk trading purposes or for blending with gasoline through our terminal system. A RIN is a renewable identification number associated with government-mandated renewable fuel standards. To evidence that the required volume of renewable fuel is blended with gasoline, obligated parties must retire sufficient RINs to cover their Renewable Volume Obligation (“RVO”). Our U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) obligations relative to renewable fuel reporting are comprised of foreign gasoline and diesel that we may import and blending operations at certain facilities.
Gasoline Distribution and Station Operations
In our GDSO segment, gasoline distribution includes sales of branded and unbranded gasoline to gasoline station operators and sub-jobbers. Station operations include (i) convenience store and prepared food sales, (ii) rental income from gasoline stations leased to dealers, from commissioned agents and from cobranding arrangements and (iii) sundries (such as car wash sales and lottery and ATM commissions).
As of December 31, 2021, we had a portfolio of owned, leased and/or supplied gasoline stations, primarily in the
Northeast, that consisted of the following:
At our company-operated stores, we operate the gasoline stations and convenience stores with our employees, and we set the retail price of gasoline at the station. At commissioned agent locations, we own the gasoline inventory, and we set the retail price of gasoline at the station and pay the commissioned agent a fee related to the gallons sold. We receive rental income from commissioned agent leased gasoline stations for the leasing of the convenience store premises, repair bays and/or other businesses that may be conducted by the commissioned agent. At dealer-leased locations, the dealer purchases gasoline from us, and the dealer sets the retail price of gasoline at the dealer’s station. We also receive rental income from (i) dealer-leased gasoline stations and (ii) cobranding arrangements. We also supply gasoline to locations owned and/or leased by independent contract dealers. Additionally, we have contractual relationships with distributors in certain New England states pursuant to which we source and supply these distributors’ gasoline stations with ExxonMobil-branded gasoline.
Commercial
In our Commercial segment, we include sales and deliveries to end user customers in the public sector and to large commercial and industrial end users of unbranded gasoline, home heating oil, diesel, kerosene, residual oil and bunker fuel. In the case of public sector commercial and industrial end user customers, we sell products primarily either through a competitive bidding process or through contracts of various terms. We respond to publicly issued requests for product proposals and quotes. We generally arrange for the delivery of the product to the customer’s designated location. Our Commercial segment also includes sales of custom blended fuels delivered by barges or from a terminal dock to ships through bunkering activity.
Seasonality
Due to the nature of our businesses and our reliance, in part, on consumer travel and spending patterns, we may experience more demand for gasoline during the late spring and summer months than during the fall and winter months. Travel and recreational activities are typically higher in these months in the geographic areas in which we operate, increasing the demand for gasoline. Therefore, our volumes in gasoline are typically higher in the second and third quarters of the calendar year. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on gasoline demand and the extent and duration of that impact remains uncertain. As demand for some of our refined petroleum products, specifically home heating oil and residual oil for space heating purposes, is generally greater during the winter months, heating oil and residual oil volumes are generally higher during the first and fourth quarters of the calendar year. These factors may result in fluctuations in our quarterly operating results.
Outlook
This section identifies certain risks and certain economic or industry-wide factors, in addition to those described under “-Our Perspective on Global and the COVID-19 Pandemic,” that may affect our financial performance and results of operations in the future, both in the short-term and in the long-term. Our results of operations and financial condition depend, in part, upon the following:
● Our businesses are influenced by the overall markets for refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels, crude oil and propane and increases and/or decreases in the prices of these products may adversely impact our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders and the amount of borrowing available for working capital under our credit agreement. Results from our purchasing, storing, terminalling, transporting, selling and blending operations are influenced by prices for refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels, crude oil and
propane, price volatility and the market for such products. Prices in the overall markets for these products may affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders. Our margins can be significantly impacted by the forward product pricing curve, often referred to as the futures market. We typically hedge our exposure to petroleum product and renewable fuel price moves with futures contracts and, to a lesser extent, swaps. In markets where future prices are higher than current prices, referred to as contango, we may use our storage capacity to improve our margins by storing products we have purchased at lower prices in the current market for delivery to customers at higher prices in the future. In markets where future prices are lower than current prices, referred to as backwardation, inventories can depreciate in value and hedging costs are more expensive. For this reason, in these backward markets, we attempt to reduce our inventories in order to minimize these effects. Our inventory management is dependent on the use of hedging instruments which are managed based on the structure of the forward pricing curve. Daily market changes may impact periodic results due to the point-in-time valuation of these positions. Volatility in oil markets may impact our results. When prices for the products we sell rise, some of our customers may have insufficient credit to purchase supply from us at their historical purchase volumes, and their customers, in turn, may adopt conservation measures which reduce consumption, thereby reducing demand for product. Furthermore, when prices increase rapidly and dramatically, we may be unable to promptly pass our additional costs on to our customers, resulting in lower margins which could adversely affect our results of operations. Higher prices for the products we sell may (1) diminish our access to trade credit support and/or cause it to become more expensive and (2) decrease the amount of borrowings available for working capital under our credit agreement as a result of total available commitments, borrowing base limitations and advance rates thereunder. When prices for the products we sell decline, our exposure to risk of loss in the event of nonperformance by our customers of our forward contracts may be increased as they and/or their customers may breach their contracts and purchase the products we sell at the then lower market price from a competitor.
● We commit substantial resources to pursuing acquisitions and expending capital for growth projects, although there is no certainty that we will successfully complete any acquisitions or growth projects or receive the economic results we anticipate from completed acquisitions or growth projects. We are continuously engaged in discussions with potential sellers and lessors of existing (or suitable for development) terminalling, storage, logistics and/or marketing assets, including gasoline stations, convenience stores and related businesses, and also consider organic growth projects. Our growth largely depends on our ability to make accretive acquisitions and/or accretive development projects. We may be unable to execute such accretive transactions for a number of reasons, including the following: (1) we are unable to identify attractive transaction candidates or negotiate acceptable terms; (2) we are unable to obtain financing for such transactions on economically acceptable terms; or (3) we are outbid by competitors. Many of these transactions involve numerous regulatory, environmental, commercial and legal uncertainties beyond our control. Required approvals, permits and licenses may not be obtained, may be delayed or may be obtained with conditions that materially alter the expected return associated with the underlying projects. In addition, we may consummate transactions that we believe will be accretive but that ultimately may not be accretive. If any of these events were to occur, our future growth and ability to increase or maintain distributions on our common units could be limited. We can give no assurance that our transaction efforts will be successful or that any such efforts will be completed on terms that are favorable to us.
● The condition of credit markets may adversely affect our liquidity. In the past, world financial markets experienced a severe reduction in the availability of credit. Possible negative impacts in the future could include a decrease in the availability of borrowings under our credit agreement, increased counterparty credit risk on our derivatives contracts and our contractual counterparties could require us to provide collateral. In addition, we could experience a tightening of trade credit from our suppliers.
● We depend upon marine, pipeline, rail and truck transportation services for a substantial portion of our logistics activities in transporting the products we sell. Implementation of regulations and directives related to these aforementioned services as well as disruption in any of these transportation services could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution
to our unitholders. Hurricanes, flooding and other severe weather conditions could cause a disruption in the transportation services we depend upon and could affect the flow of service. In addition, accidents, labor disputes between providers and their employees and labor renegotiations, including strikes, lockouts or a work stoppage, shortage of railcars, trucks and barges, mechanical difficulties or bottlenecks and disruptions in transportation logistics could also disrupt our business operations. These events could result in service disruptions and increased costs which could also adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders. Other disruptions, such as those due to an act of terrorism or war, could also adversely affect our businesses.
● We have contractual obligations for certain transportation assets such as railcars, barges and pipelines. A decline in demand for (i) the products we sell or (ii) our logistics activities, could result in a decrease in the utilization of our transportation assets, which could negatively impact our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders.
● Our gasoline financial results in our GDSO segment can be lower in the first and fourth quarters of the calendar year due to seasonal fluctuations in demand. Due to the nature of our businesses and our reliance, in part, on consumer travel and spending patterns, we may experience more demand for gasoline during the late spring and summer months than during the fall and winter months. Travel and recreational activities are typically higher in these months in the geographic areas in which we operate, increasing the demand for gasoline. Therefore, our results of operations in gasoline can be lower in the first and fourth quarters of the calendar year. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on gasoline demand and in-store traffic, and the extent and duration of that impact remains uncertain.
● Our heating oil and residual oil financial results can be lower in the second and third quarters of the calendar year. Demand for some refined petroleum products, specifically home heating oil and residual oil for space heating purposes, is generally higher during November through March than during April through October. We obtain a significant portion of these sales during the winter months.
● Warmer weather conditions could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Weather conditions generally have an impact on the demand for both home heating oil and residual oil. Because we supply distributors whose customers depend on home heating oil and residual oil for space heating purposes during the winter, warmer-than-normal temperatures during the first and fourth calendar quarters can decrease the total volume we sell and the gross profit realized on those sales.
● Our gasoline, convenience store and prepared food sales could be significantly reduced by a reduction in demand due to the impact of COVID-19, higher prices and new technologies and alternative fuel sources, such as electric, hybrid, battery powered, hydrogen or other alternative fuel-powered motor vehicles. Technological advances and alternative fuel sources, such as electric, hybrid, battery powered, hydrogen or other alternative fuel-powered motor vehicles, may adversely affect the demand for gasoline. We could face additional competition from alternative energy sources as a result of future government-mandated controls or regulations which promote the use of alternative fuel sources. A number of new legal incentives and regulatory requirements, and executive initiatives, including various government subsidies including the extension of certain tax credits for renewable energy, have made these alternative forms of energy more competitive. Changing consumer preferences or driving habits could lead to new forms of fueling destinations or potentially fewer customer visits to our sites, resulting in a decrease in gasoline sales and/or sales of food, sundries and other on-site services. In addition, higher prices could reduce the demand for gasoline and the products and services we offer at our convenience stores and adversely impact our sales. A reduction in our sales could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders.
● Energy efficiency, higher prices, new technology and alternative fuels could reduce demand for our heating oil and residual oil. Increased conservation and technological advances have adversely affected the demand for home heating oil and residual oil. Consumption of residual oil has steadily declined over the last four decades. We could face additional competition from alternative energy sources as a result of future
government-mandated controls or regulations further promoting the use of cleaner fuels. End users who are dual-fuel users have the ability to switch between residual oil and natural gas. Other end users may elect to convert to natural gas. During a period of increasing residual oil prices relative to the prices of natural gas, dual-fuel customers may switch and other end users may convert to natural gas. During periods of increasing home heating oil prices relative to the price of natural gas, residential users of home heating oil may also convert to natural gas. As described above, such switching or conversion could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders.
● Changes in government usage mandates and tax credits could adversely affect the availability and pricing of ethanol and renewable fuels, which could negatively impact our sales. The EPA has implemented a RFS pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. The RFS program seeks to promote the incorporation of renewable fuels in the nation’s fuel supply and, to that end, sets annual quotas for the quantity of renewable fuels (such as ethanol) that must be blended into transportation fuels consumed in the United States. A RIN is assigned to each gallon of renewable fuel produced in or imported into the United States. We are exposed to volatility in the market price of RINs. We cannot predict the future prices of RINs. RIN prices are dependent upon a variety of factors, including EPA regulations related to the amount of RINs required and the total amounts that can be generated, the availability of RINs for purchase, the price at which RINs can be purchased, and levels of transportation fuels produced, all of which can vary significantly from quarter to quarter. If sufficient RINs are unavailable for purchase or if we have to pay a significantly higher price for RINs, or if we are otherwise unable to meet the EPA’s RFS mandates, our results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected. Future demand for ethanol will be largely dependent upon the economic incentives to blend based upon the relative value of gasoline and ethanol, taking into consideration the EPA’s regulations on the RFS program and oxygenate blending requirements. A reduction or waiver of the RFS mandate or oxygenate blending requirements could adversely affect the availability and pricing of ethanol, which in turn could adversely affect our future gasoline and ethanol sales. In addition, changes in blending requirements or broadening the definition of what constitutes a renewable fuel could affect the price of RINs which could impact the magnitude of the mark-to-market liability recorded for the deficiency, if any, in our RIN position relative to our RVO at a point in time. Changes proposed by EPA for the renewable volume obligations may increase the cost to consumers for transportation fuel, which could result in a decline in demand for fuels and lower revenues for our business.
● Governmental action and campaigns to discourage smoking and use of other products may have a material adverse effect on our revenues and gross profit. Congress has given the FDA broad authority to regulate tobacco and nicotine products, and the FDA, states and some municipalities have enacted and are pursuing enaction of numerous regulations restricting the sale of such products. These governmental actions, as well as national, state and municipal campaigns to discourage smoking, tax increases, and imposition of regulations restricting the sale of flavored tobacco products, e-cigarettes and vapor products, have and could result in reduced consumption levels, higher costs which we may not be able to pass on to our customers, and reduced overall customer traffic. Also, increasing regulations related to and restricting the sale of flavored tobacco products, e-cigarettes and vapor products may offset some of the gains we have experienced from selling these types of products. These factors could materially affect the sale of this product mix which in turn could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash available for distribution to our unitholders.
● New, stricter environmental laws and other industry-related regulations or environmental litigation could significantly impact our operations and/or increase our costs, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Our operations are subject to federal, state and municipal laws and regulations regulating, among other matters, logistics activities, product quality specifications and other environmental matters. The trend in environmental regulation has been towards more restrictions and limitations on activities that may affect the environment over time. For example, President Biden signed an executive order calling for new or more stringent emissions standards for new, modified and existing oil and gas facilities. Our businesses may be adversely affected by increased costs and liabilities resulting from such stricter laws and regulations. We try to anticipate future regulatory requirements that might be
imposed and plan accordingly to remain in compliance with changing environmental laws and regulations and to minimize the costs of such compliance. Risks related to our environmental permits, including the risk of noncompliance, permit interpretation, permit modification, renewal of permits on less favorable terms, judicial or administrative challenges to permits by citizens groups or federal, state or municipal entities or permit revocation are inherent in the operation of our businesses, as it is with other companies engaged in similar businesses. We may not be able to renew the permits necessary for our operations, or we may be forced to accept terms in future permits that limit our operations or result in additional compliance costs. There can be no assurances as to the timing and type of such changes in existing laws or the promulgation of new laws or the amount of any required expenditures associated therewith. Climate change continues to attract considerable public and scientific attention. In recent years environmental interest groups have filed suit against companies in the energy industry related to climate change. Should such suits succeed, we could face additional compliance costs or litigation risks.
Results of Operations
Evaluating Our Results of Operations
Our management uses a variety of financial and operational measurements to analyze our performance. These measurements include: (1) product margin, (2) gross profit, (3) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and Adjusted EBITDA, (4) distributable cash flow, (5) selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”), (6) operating expenses and (7) degree days.
Product Margin
We view product margin as an important performance measure of the core profitability of our operations. We review product margin monthly for consistency and trend analysis. We define product margin as our product sales minus product costs. Product sales primarily include sales of unbranded and branded gasoline, distillates, residual oil, renewable fuels and crude oil, as well as convenience store and prepared food sales, gasoline station rental income and revenue generated from our logistics activities when we engage in the storage, transloading and shipment of products owned by others. Product costs include the cost of acquiring products and all associated costs including shipping and handling costs to bring such products to the point of sale as well as product costs related to convenience store items and costs associated with our logistics activities. We also look at product margin on a per unit basis (product margin divided by volume). Product margin is a non-GAAP financial measure used by management and external users of our consolidated financial statements to assess our business. Product margin should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flow from operations, or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, our product margin may not be comparable to product margin or a similarly titled measure of other companies.
Gross Profit
We define gross profit as our product margin minus terminal and gasoline station related depreciation expense allocated to cost of sales.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures used as supplemental financial measures by management and may be used by external users of our consolidated financial statements, such as investors, commercial banks and research analysts, to assess:
● our compliance with certain financial covenants included in our debt agreements;
● our financial performance without regard to financing methods, capital structure, income taxes or historical cost basis;
● our ability to generate cash sufficient to pay interest on our indebtedness and to make distributions to our partners;
● our operating performance and return on invested capital as compared to those of other companies in the wholesale, marketing, storing and distribution of refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels, crude oil and propane, and in the gasoline stations and convenience stores business, without regard to financing methods and capital structure; and
● the viability of acquisitions and capital expenditure projects and the overall rates of return of alternative investment opportunities.
Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA further adjusted for gains or losses on the sale and disposition of assets and goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income, operating income, cash flow from operating activities or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA exclude some, but not all, items that affect net income, and these measures may vary among other companies. Therefore, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Distributable Cash Flow
Distributable cash flow is an important non-GAAP financial measure for our limited partners since it serves as an indicator of our success in providing a cash return on their investment. Distributable cash flow as defined by our partnership agreement is net income plus depreciation and amortization minus maintenance capital expenditures, as well as adjustments to eliminate items approved by the audit committee of the board of directors of our general partner that are extraordinary or non-recurring in nature and that would otherwise increase distributable cash flow.
Distributable cash flow as used in our partnership agreement also determines our ability to make cash distributions on our incentive distribution rights. The investment community also uses a distributable cash flow metric similar to the metric used in our partnership agreement with respect to publicly traded partnerships to indicate whether or not such partnerships have generated sufficient earnings on a current or historic level that can sustain distributions on preferred or common units or support an increase in quarterly cash distributions on common units. Our partnership agreement does not permit adjustments for certain non-cash items, such as net losses on the sale and disposition of assets and goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges.
Distributable cash flow should not be considered as an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flow from operations, or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, our distributable cash flow may not be comparable to distributable cash flow or similarly titled measures of other companies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our SG&A expenses include, among other things, marketing costs, corporate overhead, employee salaries and benefits, pension and 401(k) plan expenses, discretionary bonuses, non-interest financing costs, professional fees and information technology expenses. Employee-related expenses including employee salaries, discretionary bonuses and related payroll taxes, benefits, and pension and 401(k) plan expenses are paid by our general partner which, in turn, are reimbursed for these expenses by us.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are costs associated with the operation of the terminals, transload facilities and gasoline stations and convenience stores used in our businesses. Lease payments, maintenance and repair, property taxes, utilities, credit card fees, taxes, labor and labor-related expenses comprise the most significant portion of our operating expenses. While the majority of these expenses remains relatively stable, independent of the volumes through our system, they can fluctuate depending on the activities performed during a specific period. In addition, they can be impacted by new directives issued by federal, state and local governments.
Degree Days
A “degree day” is an industry measurement of temperature designed to evaluate energy demand and consumption. Degree days are based on how far the average temperature departs from a human comfort level of 65°F. Each degree of temperature above 65°F is counted as one cooling degree day, and each degree of temperature below 65°F is counted as one heating degree day. Degree days are accumulated each day over the course of a year and can be compared to a monthly or a long-term (multi-year) average, or normal, to see if a month or a year was warmer or cooler than usual. Degree days are officially observed by the National Weather Service and officially archived by the National Climatic Data Center. For purposes of evaluating our results of operations, we use the normal heating degree day amount as reported by the National Weather Service at its Logan International Airport station in Boston, Massachusetts.
Key Performance Indicators
The following table provides a summary of some of the key performance indicators that may be used to assess our results of operations. These comparisons are not necessarily indicative of future results (gallons and dollars in thousands):
(1) EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures which are discussed above under “-Evaluating Our Results of Operations.” The table below presents reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
(2) Distributable cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure which is discussed above under “-Evaluating Our Results of Operations.” As defined by our partnership agreement, distributable cash flow is not adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as net losses on the sale and disposition of assets and goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges. The table below presents reconciliations of distributable cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
(3) EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow for 2021 include a $6.6 million expense for compensation and benefits resulting from the passing of our general counsel in May of 2021 and $3.1 million expense for compensation resulting from the retirement of our former chief financial officer in August of 2021. The $6.6 million expense relates to contractual commitments including the acceleration of grants previously awarded as well as a discretionary award in recognition of service.
(4) EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow includes a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7.2 million in 2020 related to the 2023 Notes and $13.1 million in 2019 related to the 2022 Notes (defined below).
(5) Distributable cash flow for 2020 includes a $6.3 million income tax benefit related to the CARES Act net operating loss carryback provisions.
(6) Segment reporting results for 2020 and 2019 have been reclassified between our Wholesale and Commercial segments to conform to our current presentation.
(7) Other oils and related products primarily consist of distillates and residual oil.
(8) Crude oil consists of our crude oil sales and revenue from our logistics activities.
(9) Station operations consist of convenience store and prepared food sales, rental income and sundries.
(10) Product margin is a non-GAAP financial measure which is discussed above under “-Evaluating Our Results of Operations.” The table above includes a reconciliation of product margin on a combined basis to gross profit, a directly comparable GAAP measure.
The following table presents reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures on a historical basis (in thousands):
(1) EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for 2021 include a $6.6 million expense for compensation and benefits resulting from the passing of our general counsel in May of 2021 and $3.1 million expense for compensation resulting from the retirement of our former chief financial officer in August of 2021. The $6.6 million expense relates to contractual commitments including the acceleration of grants previously awarded as well as a discretionary award in recognition of service. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA include a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7.2 million in 2020 related to the 2023 Notes and $13.1 million in 2019 related to the 2022 Notes (defined below).
The following table presents reconciliations of distributable cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures on a historical basis (in thousands):
(1) Distributable cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure which is discussed above under “-Evaluating Our Results of Operations.” As defined by our partnership agreement, distributable cash flow is not adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as net losses on the sale and disposition of assets and goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges.
(2) Distributable cash flow for 2021 includes a $6.6 million expense for compensation and benefits resulting from the passing of our general counsel in May of 2021 and $3.1 million expense for compensation resulting from the retirement of our former chief financial officer in August of 2021. The $6.6 million expense relates to contractual commitments including the acceleration of grants previously awarded as well as a discretionary award in recognition of service. Distributable cash flow includes a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7.2 million in 2020 related to the 2023 Notes and $13.1 million in 2019 related to the 2022 Notes (defined below).
(3) Distributable cash flow for 2020 includes a 6.3 million income tax benefit related to the CARES Act net operating loss carryback provisions.
(4) Distributions to preferred unitholders represent the distributions payable to the Series A preferred unitholders and the Series B preferred unitholders earned during the period. These distributions are cumulative and payable quarterly in arrears on February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15 of each year.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Sales
Our total sales were $13.2 billion and $8.3 billion for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $4.9 billion, or 59%, primarily due to an increase in prices. Our aggregate volume of product sold was 5.6 billion gallons and 5.5 billion gallons for 2021 and 2020, respectively, increasing 55 million gallons consisting of increases of 186 million gallons and 101 million gallons in our GDSO and Commercial segments, respectively, offset by a decrease of 232 million gallons in our Wholesale segment due to a decline in gasoline and gasoline blendstocks and crude oil, partially offset by an increase in other oils and related products.
Our total sales were $8.3 billion and $13.1 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $4.8 billion, or 36%, due to decreases in prices and volume sold. Our aggregate volume of product sold was 5.5 billion gallons and
6.5 billion gallons for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of 1.0 billion gallons in part due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in volume sold includes a decrease of 640 million gallons in our Wholesale segment due to a decline in gasoline and gasoline blendstocks, partially offset by increased volume in other oils and related products and crude oil, and decreases of 262 million gallons in our GDSO segment and 89 million gallons in our Commercial segment.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit was $719.3 million and $721.1 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $1.8 million, primarily due to less favorable market conditions in our Wholesale segment during the second quarter of 2021. Lower fuel margin (cents per gallon) in our GDSO segment also contributed to the year-over-year decrease in gross profit, partially offset by an increase in fuel volume and in station operations due to an increase in activity at our convenience stores.
Our gross profit was $721.1 million and $662.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $58.4 million, or 9%, primarily due to more favorable market conditions in our Wholesale segment and higher fuel margins (cents per gallon) in gasoline distribution in our GDSO segment which offset a decrease in GDSO fuel volume and a decrease in our station operations product margin. The increase in gross profit was offset by a decline in our Commercial segment largely due to a decrease in bunkering activity.
Results for Wholesale Segment
Gasoline and Gasoline Blendstocks. Sales from wholesale gasoline and gasoline blendstocks were $5.3 billion and $3.2 billion for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $2.1 billion, or 65%, primarily due to an increase in prices, partially offset by a decline in volume sold. Our gasoline and gasoline blendstocks product margin was $86.3 million and $101.8 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $15.5 million, or 15%, primarily due to less favorable market conditions in gasoline. During the second quarter of 2020, there was a significant recovery in the supply/demand imbalance that occurred at the end of the first quarter of 2020 caused by the COVID-19 pandemic related demand destruction and geopolitical events. The forward product pricing curve flattened during the second quarter of 2020 which positively impacted our product margins.
Sales from wholesale gasoline and gasoline blendstocks were $3.2 billion and $5.9 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $2.7 billion, or 45%, due to decreases in prices and volume sold. Our gasoline and gasoline blendstocks product margin was $101.8 million and $86.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $15.1 million, or 17%. During the second quarter of 2020, there was a significant recovery in the supply/demand imbalance at the end of the first quarter. The forward product pricing curve flattened which positively impacted our product margins. Our product margin also benefitted due to more favorable market conditions in gasoline in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 which was negatively impacted due to unfavorable market conditions. In the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia caused a rapid decline in prices, steepening the forward product pricing curve which negatively impacted our product margin in gasoline.
Other Oils and Related Products. Sales from other oils and related products were $2.5 billion and $1.6 billion for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $0.9 billion, or 56%, primarily due to an increase in prices. Our product margin from other oils and related products was $65.4 million and $84.9 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $19.5 million, or 23%, primarily due to less favorable market conditions. During the second quarter of 2020, there was a significant recovery in the supply/demand imbalance that occurred at the end of the first quarter of 2020 caused by the COVID-19 pandemic related demand destruction and geopolitical events. The forward product pricing curve flattened during the second quarter of 2020 which positively impacted our product margins.
Sales from other oils and related products (primarily distillates and residual oil) were $1.6 billion and $2.1 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $0.5 billion, or 24%, in part due to a decline in prices, partially offset by an increase in volume sold. Our product margin from other oils and related products was $84.9 million and $53.4 million and for 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $31.5 million, or 59%. During the second quarter
of 2020, there was a significant recovery in the supply/demand imbalance at the end of the first quarter. The forward product pricing curve flattened which positively impacted our product margins. Our product margin also benefitted from more favorable market conditions in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, largely in distillates. In the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia caused a rapid decline in prices, steepening the forward product pricing curve, which negatively impacted our product margins.
Crude Oil. Crude oil sales and logistics revenues were $61.8 million and $84.0 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $22.2 million, or 26%, primarily due to a decrease in volume sold. Our crude oil product margin was ($12.8 million) and ($0.7 million) for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $12.1 million, due to less favorable market conditions. Our crude oil product margin in 2020 benefitted from more favorable market conditions, largely in the second quarter including the flattening of the forward product pricing curve.
Crude oil sales and logistics revenues were $84.0 million and $96.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $12.4 million, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in prices, partially offset by an increase in volume sold. Our crude oil product margin was ($0.7 million) and ($13.0 million) for 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $12.3 million, or 95%, primarily due to more favorable market conditions largely in the second quarter including the flattening of the forward product pricing curve.
Results for Gasoline Distribution and Station Operations Segment
Gasoline Distribution. Sales from gasoline distribution were $4.1 billion and $2.5 billion for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $1.6 billion, or 64%, due to increases in prices and volume sold. Our product margin from gasoline distribution was $413.7 million and $398.0 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $15.7 million, or 4%, primarily due to an increase in volume sold, partially offset by lower fuel margins (cents per gallon). Our product margin for 2021 was negatively impacted as wholesale gasoline prices rose during most of the year. Rising wholesale gasoline prices typically compress our gasoline product margin, the extent of which depends on the magnitude and duration of that rise. In contrast, for 2020, wholesale gasoline prices declined, primarily in March of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical events, which improved our product margin.
Sales from gasoline distribution were $2.5 billion and $3.8 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $1.3 billion, or 34%, due to decreases in prices and volume sold largely due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our product margin from gasoline distribution was $398.0 million and $374.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $23.5 million, or 6%, primarily due to higher fuel margins (cents per gallon) which more than offset the decline in volume sold. Our product margin for 2020 benefitted from declining wholesale prices in the first quarter of 2020, primarily in March due to the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical events. Declining wholesale gasoline prices can improve our gasoline distribution product margin, the extent of which depends on the magnitude and duration of the decline.
Station Operations. Our station operations, which include (i) convenience stores and prepared food sales at our directly operated stores, (ii) rental income from gasoline stations leased to dealers or from commissioned agents and from cobranding arrangements and (iii) sale of sundries, such as car wash sales and lottery and ATM commissions, collectively generated revenues of $476.4 million and $431.0 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $45.4 million, or 10%. Our product margin from station operations was $233.9 million and $205.9 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $28.0 million, or 14%. The increases in sales and product margin are primarily due to increases in activity at our convenience stores, including the sales of sundries.
Revenues from our station operations were $431.0 million and $466.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $35.7 million, or 8%. Our product margin from station operations was $205.9 million and $225.1 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $19.2 million, or 9%. The decreases in sales and product margin are primarily due to less activity at our convenience stores, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results for Commercial Segment
Our commercial sales were $0.7 billion and $0.4 billion for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $0.3 billion due to increases in prices and volume sold. Our commercial product margin was $15.6 million and $12.3 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $3.3 million, or 27%, primarily due to an increase in volume sold and improved margins.
Our commercial sales were $0.4 billion and $0.7 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $0.3 billion, or 43%, due to decreases in prices and volume sold. Our commercial product margin was $12.3 million and $24.1 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $11.8 million, or 49%, largely due to a decrease in bunkering activity.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses were $212.9 million and $192.5 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $20.4 million, or 11%, consisting of a $6.6 million expense for compensation and benefits resulting from the passing of our general counsel and a $3.1 million expense for compensation resulting from the retirement of our former chief financial officer in recognition of service and increases of $9.6 million in wages and benefits, $2.5 million in acquisition costs and $4.2 million in various other SG&A expenses, offset by a decrease of $5.6 million in accrued discretionary incentive compensation and. The $6.6 million expense relates to contractual commitments including the acceleration of grants previously awarded as well as a discretionary award in recognition of service.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were $353.6 million and $323.3 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $30.3 million, or 9%, including an increase of $28.3 million associated with our GDSO operations, primarily due to increased credit card fees related to the increases in volume and price, higher rent expense and higher salary expense due in part to greater activity at our stores. Operating expenses associated with our terminal operations also increased $2.0 million.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense related to our intangible assets was $10.7 million and $10.8 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net Gain (Loss) on Sale and Disposition of Assets
Net gain (loss) on sale and disposition of assets was $0.5 million and ($0.3 million) for 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to the sale of GDSO sites. Included in the net gain (loss) on sale and disposition of assets is approximately $0.6 million and $0.9 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, of goodwill derecognized as part of the site divestitures.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
In 2021, we recognized an impairment charge primarily relating to certain developmental assets for raze and rebuilds in the amount of $0.4 million which was allocated to the GDSO segment.
In 2020, we recognized an impairment charge relating to certain right-of-use assets in the amount of $1.9 million, of which $1.7 million was allocated to the Wholesale segment and $0.2 million was allocated to the GDSO segment.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $80.1 million and $83.5 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of
$3.4 million, or 4%, due in part to lower average balances on our revolving credit facility and to lower interest rates, partially offset by a $0.4 million write-off of deferred financing fees associated with the amendment to our credit agreement in May 2021.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt
In 2020 as a result of the redemption of the 2023 Notes, we recorded a $7.2 million loss from early extinguishment of debt, consisting of a $5.3 million cash call premium and a $1.9 million non-cash write-off of remaining unamortized deferred financing fees.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax (expense) benefit was ($1.3 million) and $0.1 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, which reflects the income tax expense (benefit) from the operating results of GMG, which is a taxable entity for federal and state income tax purposes. For 2020, the income tax benefit consists of an income tax benefit of $6.3 million (discussed below) offset by an income tax expense of ($6.2 million).
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law. The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package that includes spending and tax breaks to strengthen the United States economy and fund a nationwide effort to curtail the effect of COVID-19. The CARES Act includes the temporary removal of certain limitations on the utilization of net operating losses, permitting the carryback of net operating losses generated in 2018, 2019 or 2020 to the five preceding taxable years. As a result, we recognized a benefit of $6.3 million related to the CARES Act net operating loss carryback provisions for 2020. On January 15, 2021, we received cash refunds totaling $15.8 million associated with the carryback of losses generated in 2018 with respect to the 2016 and 2017 tax years.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
In February 2013, we acquired a 60% membership interest in Basin Transload, LLC (“Basin Transload”). In connection with the terms of an agreement between us and the minority members of Basin Transload, on September 29, 2020, we acquired the minority members’ collective 40% interest in Basin Transload. The net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest was $0.5 million for 2020 which represents the 40% noncontrolling ownership of the net loss reported.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our primary liquidity needs are to fund our working capital requirements, capital expenditures and distributions and to service our indebtedness. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations, amounts available under our working capital revolving credit facility and equity and debt offerings. Please read “-Credit Agreement” for more information on our working capital revolving credit facility.
Working capital was $225.5 million and $283.9 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $58.4 million. Changes in current assets and current liabilities decreasing our working capital primarily include increases of $170.3 million in the current portion of our working capital revolving and $145.4 million in accounts payable, primarily due to higher prices. The decrease in working capital was offset by increases of $183.9 million in accounts receivable and $125.1 million in inventories, also primarily due to higher prices.
Cash Distributions
Common Units
During 2021, we paid the following cash distributions to our common unitholders and our general partner:
In addition, on January 25, 2022, the board of directors of our general partner declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.5850 per unit ($2.34 per unit on an annualized basis) on all of our outstanding common units for the period from October 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021 to our common unitholders of record as of the close of business February 8, 2022. On February 14, 2022, we paid the total cash distribution of approximately $20.9 million.
Series A Preferred Units
During 2021, we paid the following cash distributions to holders of the Series A Preferred Units:
In addition, on January 18, 2022, the board of directors of our general partner declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.609375 per unit ($2.4375 per unit on an annualized basis) on the Series A Preferred Units for the period from November 15, 2021 through February 14, 2022 to our preferred unitholders of record as of the opening of business on February 1, 2022. On February 15, 2022, we paid the total cash distribution of approximately $1.7 million.
Series B Preferred Units
On May 17, 2021, we paid the initial quarterly cash distribution of $0.3365 per unit on the Series B Preferred Units, covering the period from March 24, 2021 (the issuance date of the Series B Preferred Units) through May 14, 2021, totaling approximately $1.0 million. On August 16, 2021, we paid the quarterly cash distribution of $0.59375 per unit covering the period from May 15, 2021 through August 14, 2021, totaling approximately $1.8 million. On November 15, 2021, we paid the quarterly cash distribution of $0.59375 per unit covering the period from August 15, 2021 through November 14, 2021, totaling approximately $1.8 million.
In addition, on January 18, 2022, the board of directors of our general partner declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.59375 per unit ($2.375 per unit on an annualized basis) on the Series B Preferred Units for the period from November 15, 2021 through February 14, 2022 to holders of record as of the opening of business on February 1, 2022. On February 15, 2022, we paid the total cash distribution of approximately $1.8 million.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations that are required to be settled in cash. The amounts of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 were as follows (in thousands):
(1) Includes principal and interest on our working capital revolving credit facility and our revolving credit facility at December 31, 2021 and assumes a ratable payment through the expiration date. Our credit agreement has a contractual maturity of May 6, 2024 and no principal payments are required prior to that date. However, we repay amounts outstanding and reborrow funds based on our working capital requirements. Therefore, the current portion of the working capital revolving credit facility included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets is the amount we expect to pay down during the course of the year, and the long-term portion of the working capital revolving credit facility is the amount we expect to be outstanding during the entire year. Please read “-Credit Agreement” for more information on our working capital revolving credit facility.
(2) Includes principal and interest on our senior notes. No principal payments are required prior to maturity. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Senior Notes” for additional information.
(3) Includes operating lease obligations related to leases for office space and computer equipment, land, gasoline stations, railcars and barges. See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(4) Includes amounts related to our brand fee agreement and amounts related to our pipeline connection agreements, access right agreements and our pension and deferred compensation obligations.
(5) Includes lease rental payments in connection with (i) the acquisition of Capitol Petroleum Group (“Capitol”) related to properties previously sold by Capitol within two sale-leaseback transactions; and (ii) the sale of real property assets and convenience stores. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Obligations” for additional information .
See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements with respect to sublease information related to certain lease agreements and Note 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements with respect to purchase commitments.
Capital Expenditures
Our operations require investments to maintain, expand, upgrade and enhance existing operations and to meet environmental and operational regulations. We categorize our capital requirements as either maintenance capital expenditures or expansion capital expenditures. Maintenance capital expenditures represent capital expenditures to repair or replace partially or fully depreciated assets to maintain the operating capacity of, or revenues generated by, existing assets and extend their useful lives. Maintenance capital expenditures also include expenditures required to maintain equipment reliability, tank and pipeline integrity and safety and to address certain environmental regulations. We anticipate that maintenance capital expenditures will be funded with cash generated by operations. We had approximately $43.2 million and $47.0 million in maintenance capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are included in capital expenditures in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows, of which approximately $38.5 million and $37.3 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, are related to our investments in our gasoline station business. Repair and maintenance expenses associated with existing assets that are minor in nature and do not extend the useful life of existing assets are charged to operating expenses as incurred.
Expansion capital expenditures include expenditures to acquire assets to grow our businesses or expand our existing facilities, such as projects that increase our operating capacity or revenues by, for example, increasing dock capacity and tankage, diversifying product availability, investing in raze and rebuilds and new-to-industry gasoline stations and convenience stores, increasing storage flexibility at various terminals and by adding terminals to our storage network. We have the ability to fund our expansion capital expenditures through cash from operations or our credit agreement or by issuing debt securities or additional equity. We had approximately $58.5 million and $29.3 million in
expansion capital expenditures, including acquisitions, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily related to investments in our gasoline station business.
In 2021, the $58.5 million in expansion capital expenditures included approximately $53.8 million, in part to raze and rebuilds, expansion and improvements at retail gasoline stations, new leased sites and new-to-industry sites and $4.7 million in other expansion capital expenditures, primarily related to investments at our terminals.
In 2020, the $29.3 million in expansion capital expenditures included approximately $23.7 million in raze and rebuilds, expansion and improvements at retail gasoline stations and new-to-industry sites and $5.6 million in other expansion capital expenditures, primarily related to investments at our terminals and information technology projects.
We currently expect maintenance capital expenditures of approximately $45.0 million to $55.0 million and expansion capital expenditures, excluding acquisitions, of approximately $50.0 million to $60.0 million in 2022, relating primarily to investments in our gasoline station business. These current estimates depend, in part, on the timing of completion of projects, availability of equipment and workforce, weather, the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and unanticipated events or opportunities requiring additional maintenance or investments.
We believe that we will have sufficient cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity under our credit agreement and the ability to issue additional equity and/or debt securities to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations, contingencies and anticipated capital expenditures. However, we are subject to business and operational risks, including uncertainties related to the extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical events, each of which could adversely affect our cash flow. A material decrease in our cash flows would likely have an adverse effect on our borrowing capacity as well as our ability to issue additional equity and/or debt securities.
Cash Flow
The following table summarizes cash flow activity for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities generally reflects our net income, balance sheet changes arising from inventory purchasing patterns, the timing of collections on our accounts receivable, the seasonality of parts of our businesses, fluctuations in product prices, working capital requirements and general market conditions.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $50.2 million and $312.5 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, for a year-over-year in cash flow from operating activities of $262.3 million.
Except for net income, the primary drivers of the changes in operating activities include the following for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
In 2021, the increases in accounts receivable, inventories and accounts payable are largely due to the increase in prices.
In 2020, the decreases in accounts receivable, inventories and accounts payable are largely due to the decrease
in prices, primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical events.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $115.1 million for 2021 and included $58.5 million in expansion capital expenditures, $43.2 million in maintenance capital expenditures, $18.0 million in acquisitions, primarily related to company-operated gasoline stations and convenience stores, and $1.7 million in seller note issuances which represent notes we received from buyers in connection with the sale of certain of our gasoline stations. Net cash used in investing activities was offset by $6.3 million in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $69.7 million for 2020 and included $47.0 million in maintenance capital expenditures, $29.3 million in expansion capital expenditures and $1.6 million in seller note issuances, offset by $8.2 million in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Please read “-Capital Expenditures” for a discussion of our capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Net provided by financing activities was $66.0 million for 2021 and included $170.3 million in net borrowing from our working capital revolving credit facility due primarily to the increase in prices and $72.2 million in net proceeds from the issuance of the Series B Preferred Units which were used to pay down the revolving credit facility, offset by $91.9 million in cash distributions to our limited partners (preferred and common unitholders) and our general partner, $78.6 million in net payments on our revolving credit facility, $3.8 million in the repurchase of common units pursuant to our repurchase program for future satisfaction of our LTIP obligations and $2.2 million in LTIP units withheld for tax obligations related to awards that vested in 2021.
Net cash used in financing activities was $245.1 million for 2020 and included $306.5 million in payments in connection with the redemption of the 2023 Notes and the issuance of the 2029 Notes, $139.5 million in net payments on our working capital revolving credit facility primarily due to lower prices and an increase in net income, $71.3 million in cash distributions to our limited partners (preferred and common unitholders) and our general partner, $70.7 million in net payments on our revolving credit facility, $1.6 million related to the acquisition of our noncontrolling interest at Basin Transload, $0.3 million in the repurchase of common units pursuant to our repurchase program for future satisfaction of our LTIP obligations and $0.3 million in LTIP units withheld for tax obligations related to awards that vested in 2020. Net cash used in financing activities was offset by $344.7 million in proceeds in connection with the issuance of the 2029 Notes and $0.4 million in capital contributions from our noncontrolling interest at Basin Transload.
See Note 8 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement for supplemental cash flow information related to our working capital revolving credit facility and revolving credit facility for 2021 and 2020.
Credit Agreement
Certain subsidiaries of ours, as borrowers, and we and certain of our subsidiaries, as guarantors, have a $1.35 billion senior secured credit facility. We repay amounts outstanding and reborrow funds based on our working capital requirements and, therefore, classify as a current liability the portion of the working capital revolving credit facility we expect to pay down during the course of the year. The long-term portion of the working capital revolving credit facility is the amount we expect to be outstanding during the entire year. The credit agreement matures on May 6, 2024.
There are two facilities under the credit agreement:
● a working capital revolving credit facility to be used for working capital purposes and letters of credit in the principal amount equal to the lesser of our borrowing base and $900.0 million; and
● a $450.0 million revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate purposes.
In addition, the credit agreement has an accordion feature whereby we may request on the same terms and conditions then applicable to the credit agreement, provided no Event of Default (as defined in the credit agreement) then exists, an increase to the working capital revolving credit facility, the revolving credit facility, or both, by up to another $200.0 million, in the aggregate, for a total credit facility of up to $1.55 billion. Any such request for an increase must be in a minimum amount of $25.0 million. We cannot provide assurance, however, that our lending group will agree to fund any request by us for additional amounts in excess of the total available commitments of $1.35 billion.
In addition, the credit agreement includes a swing line pursuant to which Bank of America, N.A., as the swing line lender, may make swing line loans in U.S. dollars in an aggregate amount equal to the lesser of (a) $75.0 million and (b) the Aggregate WC Commitments (as defined in the credit agreement). Swing line loans will bear interest at the Base Rate (as defined in the credit agreement). The swing line is a sub-portion of the working capital revolving credit facility and is not an addition to the total available commitments of $1.35 billion.
Availability under the working capital revolving credit facility is subject to a borrowing base which is redetermined from time to time and based on specific advance rates on eligible current assets. Under the credit agreement, borrowings under the working capital revolving credit facility cannot exceed the then current borrowing base. Availability under the borrowing base may be affected by events beyond our control, such as changes in petroleum product prices, collection cycles, counterparty performance, advance rates and limits and general economic conditions. These and other events could require us to seek waivers or amendments of covenants or alternative sources of financing or to reduce expenditures. We can provide no assurance that such waivers, amendments or alternative financing could be obtained or, if obtained, would be on terms acceptable to us.
Borrowings under the working capital revolving credit facility bear interest at (1) the Eurocurrency rate plus 2.00% to 2.50%, (2) the cost of funds rate plus 2.00% to 2.50%, or (3) the base rate plus 1.00% to 1.50%, each depending on the Utilization Amount (as defined in the credit agreement). Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest at (1) the Eurocurrency rate plus 1.75% to 2.75%, (2) the cost of funds rate plus 1.75% to 2.75%, or (3) the base rate plus 0.75% to 1.75%, each depending on the Combined Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the credit agreement).
The average interest rates for the credit Agreement were 2.4% and 2.9% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
On March 5, 2021, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority announced that it intends to stop persuading or compelling banks to submit LIBOR rates after December 31, 2021 for the 1-week and 2-month U.S. dollar settings and after June 30, 2023 for the remaining U.S. dollar settings. Our credit agreement includes provisions to determine a replacement rate for LIBOR if necessary during its term based on the secured overnight financing rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We currently do not expect the transition from LIBOR to have a material impact on us.
The credit agreement provides for a letter of credit fee equal to the then applicable working capital rate or then applicable revolver rate (each such rate as defined in the credit agreement) per annum for each letter of credit issued. In addition, we incur a commitment fee on the unused portion of each facility under the credit agreement, ranging from 0.35% to 0.50% per annum.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total borrowings outstanding under the credit Agreement of $398.1 million, including $43.4 million outstanding on the revolving credit facility. In addition, we had outstanding letters of credit of $156.0 million. Subject to borrowing base limitations, the total remaining availability for borrowings and letters of credit was $795.9 million and $778.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The credit agreement is secured by substantially all of our assets and the assets of our wholly owned subsidiaries and is guaranteed by us and certain of our subsidiaries.
The credit agreement also includes certain baskets, including (i) a $25.0 million general secured indebtedness basket, (ii) a $25.0 million general investment basket, (iii) a $75.0 million secured indebtedness basket to permit the borrowers to enter into a Contango Facility (as defined in the credit agreement), (iv) a Sale/Leaseback Transaction (as defined in the credit agreement) basket of $100.0 million, and (v) a basket of $150.0 million in an aggregate amount for the purchase of our common units, provided that no Event of Default exists or would occur immediately following such purchase(s).
In addition, the credit agreement provides the ability for the borrowers to repay certain junior indebtedness, subject to a $100.0 million cap, so long as no Event of Default has occurred or will exist immediately after making such repayment.
The credit agreement imposes financial covenants that require us to maintain certain minimum working capital amounts, a minimum combined interest coverage ratio, a maximum senior secured leverage ratio and a maximum total leverage ratio. We were in compliance with the foregoing covenants at December 31, 2021.
Senior Notes
6.875% Senior Notes Due 2029
On October 7, 2020, we and GLP Finance Corp. (the “Issuers”) issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”) to several initial purchasers (the “2029 Notes Initial Purchasers”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements under the Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”). We used the net proceeds from the offering to fund the redemption of our 7.00% senior notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) and to repay a portion of the borrowings outstanding under our credit agreement.
In connection with the private placement of the 2029 Notes, the Issuers and the subsidiary guarantors and Regions Bank, as trustee, entered into an indenture as may be supplemented from time to time (the “2029 Notes Indenture”).
The 2029 Notes mature on January 15, 2029 with interest accruing at a rate of 6.875% per annum. Interest is payable beginning July 15, 2021 and thereafter semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year. The 2029 Notes are guaranteed on a joint and several senior unsecured basis by each of the Issuers and the subsidiary guarantors to the extent set forth in the 2029 Notes Indenture. Upon a continuing event of default, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the 2029 Notes may declare the 2029 Notes immediately due and payable, except that an event of default resulting from entry into a bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization with respect to the Issuers, any restricted subsidiary of ours that is a significant subsidiary or any group of our restricted subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a significant subsidiary of ours, will automatically cause the 2029 Notes to become due and payable.
The Issuers have the option to redeem up to 35% of the 2029 Notes prior to October 15, 2023 at a redemption price (expressed as a percentage of principal amount) of 106.875% plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any. The Issuers have the option to redeem the 2029 Notes, in whole or in part, at any time on or after January 15, 2024, at the redemption prices of 103.438% for the twelve-month period beginning on January 15, 2024, 102.292% for the twelve-month period beginning January 15, 2025, 101.146% for the twelve-month period beginning January 15, 2026, and 100% beginning on January 15, 2027 and at any time thereafter, together with any accrued and unpaid interest to the date of redemption. In addition, prior to January 15, 2024, the Issuers may redeem all or any part of the 2029 Notes at a redemption price equal to the sum of the principal amount thereof, plus a make whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. The holders of the 2029 Notes may require the Issuers to repurchase the 2029 Notes following certain asset sales or a Change of Control Triggering Event (as defined in the 2029 Notes Indenture) at the prices and on the terms specified in the 2029 Notes Indenture.
The 2029 Notes Indenture contains covenants that limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred securities, make certain dividends and distributions, make certain investments and other
restricted payments, restrict distributions by its subsidiaries, create liens, sell assets or merge with other entities. Events of default under the 2029 Notes Indenture include (i) a default in payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, the 2029 Notes, (ii) breach of our covenants under the 2029 Notes Indenture, (iii) certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, (iv) any payment default or acceleration of indebtedness of ours or certain subsidiaries if the total amount of such indebtedness unpaid or accelerated exceeds $50.0 million and (v) failure to pay within 60 days uninsured final judgments exceeding $50.0 million.
7.00% Senior Notes Due 2027
On July 31, 2019, the Issuers issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 7.00% senior notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”) to several initial purchasers (the “2027 Notes Initial Purchasers”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements under the Securities Act. We used the net proceeds from the offering to fund the repurchase of our 6.25% senior notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) in a tender offer and to repay a portion of the borrowings outstanding under our credit agreement.
In connection with the private placement of the 2027 Notes on July 31, 2019, the Issuers and the subsidiary guarantors and Regions Bank (as successor trustee to Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas), as trustee, entered into an indenture as may be supplemented from time to time (the “2027 Notes Indenture”).
The 2027 Notes mature on August 1, 2027 with interest accruing at a rate of 7.00% per annum and payable semi-annually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, commencing February 1, 2020. The 2027 Notes are guaranteed on a joint and several senior unsecured basis by each of the Issuers and the subsidiary guarantors to the extent set forth in the 2027 Notes Indenture. Upon a continuing event of default, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the 2027 Notes may declare the 2027 Notes immediately due and payable, except that an event of default resulting from entry into a bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization with respect to the Issuers, any restricted subsidiary of ours that is a significant subsidiary or any group of our restricted subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a significant subsidiary of ours, will automatically cause the 2027 Notes to become due and payable.
Prior to August 1, 2022, the Issuers have the option to redeem up to 35% of the 2027 Notes in an amount not greater than the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price (expressed as a percentage of principal amount) of 107% plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any. The Issuers have the option to redeem the 2027 Notes, in whole or in part, at any time on or after August 1, 2022, at the redemption prices of 103.500% for the twelve-month period beginning on August 1, 2022, 102.333% for the twelve-month period beginning August 1, 2023, 101.167% for the twelve-month period beginning August 1, 2024, and 100% beginning on August 1, 2025 and at any time thereafter, together with any accrued and unpaid interest to the date of redemption. In addition, prior to August 1, 2022, the Issuers may redeem all or any part of the 2027 Notes at a redemption price equal to the sum of the principal amount thereof, plus a make whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. The holders of the 2027 Notes may require the Issuers to repurchase the 2027 Notes following certain asset sales or a Change of Control Triggering Event (as defined in the 2027 Notes Indenture) at the prices and on the terms specified in the 2027 Notes Indenture.
The 2027 Notes Indenture contains covenants that will limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred securities, make certain dividends and distributions, make certain investments and other restricted payments, restrict distributions by our subsidiaries, create liens, sell assets or merge with other entities. Events of default under the 2027 Notes Indenture include (i) a default in payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, the 2027 Notes, (ii) breach of our covenants under the 2027 Notes Indenture, (iii) certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, (iv) any payment default or acceleration of indebtedness of ours or certain subsidiaries if the total amount of such indebtedness unpaid or accelerated exceeds $50.0 million and (v) failure to pay within 60 days uninsured final judgments exceeding $50.0 million.
Financing Obligations
Capitol Acquisition
In connection with the June 2015 acquisition of retail gasoline stations and dealer supply contracts from Capitol, we assumed a financing obligation of $89.6 million associated with two sale-leaseback transactions for 53 leased sites. During the terms of these leases, which expire in May 2028 and September 2029, in lieu of recognizing lease expense for the lease rental payments, we incur interest expense associated with the financing obligation.
Interest expense of approximately $9.2 million and $9.3 million was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The financing obligation will amortize through expiration of the leases based upon the lease rental payments which were $10.4 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The financing obligation balance outstanding at December 31, 2021 was $84.9 million associated with the acquisition.
Sale-Leaseback Transaction
In connection with a sale in June 2016 of real property assets, including the buildings, improvements and appurtenances thereto, at 30 gasoline stations and convenience stores, we entered into a Master Unitary Lease Agreement to lease back certain of the real property assets sold. The initial term of the Master Unitary Lease Agreement expires in 2031. We have one successive option to renew the lease for a ten-year period followed by two successive options to renew the lease for five-year periods on the same terms, covenants, conditions and rental as the primary non-revocable lease term.
In connection with this transaction, we recognized a corresponding financing obligation of $62.5 million. During the term of the lease, which expires in June 2031, we incur interest expense associated with the financing obligation. Lease rental payments are recognized as both interest expense and a reduction of the principal balance associated with the financing obligation. Interest expense was $4.3 million and $4.3 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and lease rental payments were $4.7 million and $4.7 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The financing obligation balance outstanding at December 31, 2021 was $61.7 million associated with this transaction.
Environmental Matters
Our businesses of purchasing, storing, supplying and distributing refined petroleum products, gasoline blendstocks, renewable fuels, crude oil and propane and other business activities, involves a number of activities that are subject to extensive and stringent environmental laws. For a complete discussion of the environmental laws and regulations affecting our businesses, please read Items 1 and 2, “Business and Properties-Environmental.” For additional information regarding our environmental liabilities, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. A summary of our significant accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements is detailed in Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Certain of these accounting policies require the use of estimates. These estimates are based on our knowledge and understanding of current conditions and actions that we may take in the future. Changes in these estimates will occur as a result of the passage of time and the occurrence of future events. Subsequent changes in these estimates may have a significant impact on our financial condition and results of operations and are recorded in the period in which they become known; therefore, our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe our critical accounting estimates that are subjective in nature, require the exercise of judgment and involve
complex analysis include the valuation of physical forward derivative contracts, valuation of goodwill and environmental liabilities.
Valuation of Physical Forward Derivative Contracts
As described in Note 9 and Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we enter into different commodity contracts that qualify as derivative instruments. These include physical forward purchase and sale contracts and are accounted for at fair value. These contracts are considered Level 2 and Level 3 derivative instruments under the fair value hierarchy as inputs used to determine fair value are not quoted prices in active markets. As of December 31, 2021, derivative assets of $11.7 million and derivative liabilities of $31.7 million were recorded for physical forward derivative contracts based on Level 2 fair value measurements. There were no Level 3 physical forward derivative contracts as of December 31, 2021.
Accounting for the fair value measurement of physical forward derivative instruments is complex given the judgmental nature of the assumptions used as inputs into the valuation models. These include inputs used to value commodity products at locations whereby active market pricing may not be available. These assumptions are forward-looking and could be affected by future economic and market conditions.
We utilize published and quoted prices, broker quotes, and estimates of market prices to estimate the fair value of these contracts; however, actual amounts could vary materially from estimated fair values as a result of changes in market prices. In addition, changes in the methods used to determine the fair value of these contracts could have a material effect on our results of operations. We do not anticipate future changes in the methods used to determine the fair value of these derivative contracts.
Valuation of Goodwill
We allocate the fair value of the purchase price associated in a business combination to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of the purchase price over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill and allocated to our reporting units based on the future expected benefit arising from the business combination.
Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable at the time, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We have concluded that our operating segments are also our reporting units. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as of October 1 or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable.
All of our goodwill is allocated to the GDSO segment. During 2021 and 2020, we completed a quantitative assessment for the GDSO reporting unit. Factors included in the assessment included both macro-economic conditions and industry specific conditions, and the fair value of the GDSO reporting unit was estimated using a weighted average of a discounted cash flow approach and a market comparables approach. Based on our assessment, no impairment was identified.
Environmental and Other Liabilities
We record accrued liabilities for all direct costs associated with the estimated resolution of contingencies at the earliest date at which it is deemed probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of such liability can be
reasonably estimated. Costs accrued are estimated based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies and outcomes.
Estimated losses from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than completion of the remedial feasibility study. Loss accruals are adjusted as further information becomes available or circumstances change. Costs of future expenditures for environmental remediation obligations are not discounted to their present value. Recoveries of environmental remediation costs from other parties are recognized when related contingencies are resolved, generally upon cash receipt.
We are subject to other contingencies, including legal proceedings and claims arising out of our businesses that cover a wide range of matters, including, environmental matters and contract and employment claims. Environmental and other legal proceedings may also include matters with respect to businesses previously owned. Further, due to the lack of adequate information and the potential impact of present regulations and any future regulations, there are certain circumstances in which no range of potential exposure may be reasonably estimated.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description and related impact expected from the adoption of certain new accounting pronouncements is provided in Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report.