Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us,” “we,” or “Gelesis” refer to Gelesis Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (formerly known as Capstar Special Purpose Acquisition Corp.). The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
- 70 -
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and prior to the Merger, CPSR was a blank check company incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. For more information on the Merger, see “Basis of Presentation” elsewhere in this Report.
Following the Merger, we are a commercial stage biotherapeutics company built for consumer engagement. We are focused on advancing first-in-class superabsorbent hydrogel therapeutics for chronic gastrointestinal, or GI, diseases including excess weight, type 2 diabetes, NAFLD/NASH, functional constipation, and inflammatory bowel disease. Our biomimetic superabsorbent hydrogels are inspired by the composition and mechanical properties (e.g. firmness) of raw vegetables. They are conveniently administered in capsules taken with water to create a much larger volume of small, non-aggregating hydrogel pieces that become an integrated part of the meals, and act locally in the digestive system.
Our first commercial product, Plenity, received de novo clearance from the FDA on April 12, 2019 to aid in weight management in adults with excess weight or obesity, Body Mass Index (BMI) of 25 to 40 kg/m2, when used in conjunction with diet and exercise.
Plenity, which is available by prescription in the United States, became available for first commercial sale in May 2020 to a limited number of consumers. In October 2020 availability was increased to test commercial interest and consumer experience. Activities associated with a full commercial launch in the United States began in late 2021 and will continue to expand in 2022. While these are significant milestones, continued commercialization of Plenity will require significant external funding until we are able to generate positive cash flows from product sales.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations after the Merger
Gelesis Holdings, Inc. believes that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present not only significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors.”
New Consumer Acquisition
Our ability to attract new consumers is a key factor for our future growth. To date we have successfully acquired limited consumers through our on-going beta U.S. commercial launch in conjunction with the continued development of marketing and sales tactics. We intend to acquire new members in the United States by promoting Plenity to the consumer. The promotional activities will motivate the potential future member to ask a health care professional about acquiring Plenity through one of two channels:
● Telehealth: We are partnering with a leading telehealth platform in the United States, providing convenient and immediate access to physicians online at no cost. In August 2019, we entered into a two-year exclusive agreement with Ro giving Ro exclusive telehealth distributor rights to sell Plenity via telehealth in the United States. In January 2021, the agreement with Ro was amended and restated and in connection therewith, we received $10.0 million in cash as a pre-buy commitment for Plenity. In July 2021, the agreement with Ro was further amended and restated and we received $30.0 million in cash towards Ro’s future purchase of Plenity and also extended Ro’s exclusive telehealth rights through June 2023. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we have no obligations or commitments beyond the sale and supply of Plenity to Ro. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, Ro has no obligation or commitments specifically with respect to marketing and promotional spend in support of the sale of Plenity to consumers.
● Health Care Providers: We have engaged a limited contract sales force to promote Plenity to target physicians. To support prescription fulfillment for our non-telehealth tradition HCP promotional efforts, in February 2020, we executed a two-year exclusive distribution agreement with GoGoMeds, or GGM, giving GGM exclusive distributor rights to all non-telehealth mail order prescriptions generated in the United States by health care providers.
- 71 -
Retention of Consumers
Our ability to retain consumers is a key factor in our ability to generate revenue. Our home delivery, simple pricing, and consumer engagement enhance the experience of our consumer. Plenity is delivered straight to the consumer via pharmacy direct shipping. Plenity costs $98 for a 28-day supply or $1.75 per meal, without reimbursement. We currently do not have plans to pursue government or private insurance coverage by providing rebates. Consumers will purchase Plenity out of pocket in cash transactions, where we offer the consumer a convenient, simple and highly transparent process. We expect the simplified transaction process and high price transparency to synergize with the telemedicine platform and e-prescribing to produce a relatively frictionless consumer experience for consumers.
We have also partnered with leading lifestyle brands WW International, Inc. and Noom, providing members access to WW’s behavioral weight management program and supporting lifestyle content and offering discounts to Noom’s subscription programs. We continuously test and optimize the online member experiences and offerings to improve the overall experience, maximizing member weight journey success and ultimately brand sales.
Rest of World
We are evaluating global strategic partnerships to build our brand globally after full commercial launch in the U.S. market; however, we may also retain the rights.
● Europe: In June 2020, we received approval to market Plenity in Europe through a Conformité Européenne (CE) mark for Plenity as a class III medical device indicated for weight loss in overweight and obese adults with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 25-40 kg/m2, when used in conjunction with diet and exercise. We are evaluating strategic partnerships in Europe; however, we may also retain the rights.
● China Medical Systems Holdings Limited: In June 2020, we entered into a strategic partnership with China Medical System Holdings Limited (CMS) (HKG:0867) for the commercialization of Plenity in Greater China (including Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan), Singapore and United Arab Emirates. We granted CMS an exclusive and royalty-bearing license to commercialize Plenity in the aforementioned territory. Under the terms of the agreement, CMS provided $35.0 million upfront in a combination of licensing fees and equity investment with the potential for an additional $388.0 million in future regulatory and sales milestone payments. CMS is also obligated to pay a royalty of 11% on net product sales in the territory.
Investments in Growth
We expect to make significant investments in selling and marketing to acquire new consumers. Selling and marketing is an important driver of growth, and we intend to continue to make significant investments in consumer acquisition and our selling and commercial infrastructure. As such, we expect our selling and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars in the short term. However, we expect our selling and marketing expense to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term, although our selling and marketing expense may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and amount of these expenses. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest significantly in our manufacturing, fulfillment and operating capabilities. In the short term, we expect these investments to increase our operating expenses; however, in the long term we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations. If we are unable to generate sufficient demand in Plenity, we may not have sufficient funds to investment into these growth activities.
Product Candidate Expansion
In addition to Plenity, we have invested in a pipeline of product candidates for prevalent and important gastrointestinal, or GI, tract-related chronic diseases including, type 2 diabetes, NAFLD/NASH, chronic idiopathic constipation, and inflammatory bowel disease by targeting the natural processes of the GI pathway. We expect to continue investing in our pipeline over time to broaden our commercial opportunity. The continued preclinical and clinical development of the pipeline will require significant financial resources. If we are unable to generate sufficient demand in Plenity or raise additional capital at favorable terms, if at all, we may not have sufficient funds to invest in the research and development of additional product candidates.
- 72 -
Key Business Metrics after the Merger
Gelesis Holdings, Inc. monitors the following key metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Members
We define members as the number of consumers in the United States who have begun their weight loss journey with Plenity. This is the cumulative historical number of recurring and non-recurring consumers who have begun their weight loss journey as of the respective reporting date. We do not differentiate from recurring and non-recurring consumers as of the date of this prospectus as (i) we strongly believe every member’s weight-loss journey is chronic and long-term in nature, and (ii) owing to a limited available supply of Plenity to-date, we have not initiated our long-term strategy and mechanisms to retain and/or win-back members. We will continue to evaluate the utility of this business metric in future periods.
Units sold
Units sold is defined as the number of 28-day supply units of Plenity sold to consumers based on prescriptions, through our strategic partnerships with online pharmacies and telehealth providers as well as the units sold to our strategic partners outside the United States.
Product revenue, net
We recognize product revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Our product revenue is derived from product sales of Plenity, net of estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established for expected product returns, shipping charges to end-users, pharmacy dispensing and platform fees, merchant and processing fees, and promotional discounts offered to end-users.
Average selling price per unit, net
Average selling price per unit, net is the gross price per unit sold during the period net of estimates of per unit variable consideration for which reserves are established for expected product returns, shipping charges to end-users, pharmacy dispensing and platform fees, merchant and processing fees, and promotional discounts offered to end-users.
Gross profit and gross margin
Our gross profit represents product revenue, net, less our total cost of goods sold, and our gross margin is our gross profit expressed as a percentage of our product revenue, net. Our gross profit and gross margin have been and will continue to be affected by a number of factors, including the prices we charge for our product, the costs we incur from our vendors for certain components of our cost of goods sold, the mix of channel sales in a period, and our ability to sell our inventory. We expect our gross margin to increase over the long term, although gross margins may fluctuate from period to period depending on these and other factors.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures after the Merger
In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with GAAP, Gelesis Holdings, Inc., considers Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure in evaluating our operating performance and underlying trends in our business. We believe that this non-GAAP financial measure, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measure, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations, or outlook. We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to our investors as it is a metric used by management in assessing the health of our business and our operating performance. We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as net (loss) income before depreciation and amortization expenses, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, interest expense, net, stock-based compensation and (gains) and losses related to changes in fair value of our warrant liability, our convertible promissory note liability, our tranche rights liability and the One S.r.l. call option.
- 73 -
Results of Operations
Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after the Initial Public Offering, finding a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the acquisition of Gelesis Holdings, Inc. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $12,898,082, which consisted of operating costs of $20,674,209 and a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,602,367, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $167,045 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $6,715.
For the period from February 14, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $15,294,860, which consisted of transaction cost related to IPO of $671,901, operating costs of $2,426,204 and a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $12,406,208, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $201,441 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $8,012.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 7, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,600,000, generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,520,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $7,520,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters’ and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $276,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1,389,212 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $15,851,828 in transaction costs, including $5,520,000 of underwriting fees, $9,660,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $671,828 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $446,644, which consisted of our net loss of $12,898,082, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $167,045, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $6,715 and changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,602,367. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $20,227,565 of cash.
For the period from February 14, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $861,345. Net loss of $15,294,860 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $201,441, an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $8,012, transaction costs related to the Initial Public Offering of $671,901, changes in fair value or warrants of $12,406,208 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,564,859 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $276,207,207. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we have withdrawn $176,006 of interest earned on the Trust Account for the payment of franchise taxes.
Until the consummation of the Business Combination, we used the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
Upon the close of the Business Combination, we received approximately $105 million of gross proceeds to fund our operations. We believe that the cash available from the consummation of the Business Combination and related transactions will be sufficient to fund our short-term liquidity needs and the execution of our business plan through at least the twelve month-period from the date of the Business Combination.
- 74 -
Prior to the Closing of the Business Combination, holders of 26,844,777 shares of CPSR Class A Common Stock exercised their right to redeem such shares for cash at a price of approximately 10.00 per share for aggregate payments of $268,646,943. Due to the significant number of redemptions, we expect to implement an alternative business plan prioritizing short-term working capital needs such as investments in raw materials and finished goods as well as investments in sales and marketing. Further, we anticipate delaying certain long-term capital expenditures in commercial infrastructure and certain research and development expenses. We expect to reduce and optimize investments in sales and marketing, prioritizing investments in high return and high exposure mediums. We may seek out alternative commercial arrangements or geographic distribution partnerships to finance certain investments in sales and marketing associated with the full commercial launch of Plenity. We expect these actions will enable appropriate liquidity to manage risk and uncertainty over the next year and beyond and enable us to execute our business plan based on the level of our financial resources at Closing and available financing alternatives and further enable us to direct funding to the full commercial launch of Plenity. These changes to the execution of our business plan based on the significant number of redemptions made in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination may impact the growth of Plenity sales and the pace of acquisition and retention of consumers. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and our business plan. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining capital sufficient to meet our operating needs on terms or a timeframe acceptable to us or at all. Further, in the event that market conditions preclude our ability to consummate such a transaction, we may be required to evaluate additional alternatives in restructuring our business and our capital structure.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 1, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,660,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee was paid by the Company at the closing of the Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Private Placement Warrants and the Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
- 75 -
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating loss per common share. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from loss per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.