Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company developing a portfolio of novel small molecule precision medicines that employ the body’s natural mechanisms to selectively degrade therapeutically-relevant proteins. We have developed a proprietary protein degradation platform, called QuEEN, that enables us to rapidly identify protein targets and molecular glue degrader, or MGD, product candidates that are designed to eliminate therapeutically-relevant proteins in a highly selective manner. We believe our small molecule MGDs may give us significant advantages over existing therapeutic modalities, including other protein degradation approaches, by allowing us to target proteins that have been considered undruggable or inadequately drugged. We focus on therapeutic targets backed by strong biological and genetic rationale with the goal of discovering and developing novel precision medicines.
We were incorporated in Delaware in November 2019 and are headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts with research operations in both Boston and Basel, Switzerland.
Contribution and exchange
Monte Rosa Therapeutics AG, a Swiss operating company, was incorporated in April 2018. Monte Rosa Therapeutics, Inc. was incorporated in November 2019. In 2020, Monte Rosa Therapeutics, Inc. and Monte Rosa Therapeutics AG, entities under common control since the incorporation of Monte Rosa Therapeutics, Inc., consummated a contribution and exchange agreement, or the Contribution and Exchange, whereby Monte Rosa Therapeutics, Inc. (i) acquired the net assets and shareholdings of Monte Rosa Therapeutics AG via a one-for-one exchange of equity between Monte Rosa Therapeutics, Inc. and the shareholders of Monte Rosa Therapeutics AG in a common control reorganization. Accordingly, the historical financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to include the historical results and financial position of the Company combined with Monte Rosa Therapeutics AG’s historical results and financial position, after the elimination of all intercompany accounts and transactions. See the section entitled “Prospectus summary-Corporate information” for more information on the contribution and exchange transaction.
Initial public offering
In June 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 11,700,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $19.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds from the IPO of $203.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $15.6 million and offering costs of $3.1 million. In connection with the IPO, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase an additional 1,755,000 shares. In July 2021, the underwriters exercised the option in full and we issued 1,755,000 shares of common stock for aggregate net proceeds of $31.0 million after deducting underwriter discounts and commissions of $2.3 million.
Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of convertible promissory notes and our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in private equity financings, as well as our initial public offering. From our inception through the date hereof, we raised an aggregate of $479.1 million of gross proceeds from such transactions. Since inception, we have had significant operating losses. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures and, to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. Our net loss was $74.0 million and $35.9 million for the years
ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $122.0 million and $351.4 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Business effects of COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. To date, our financial conditions and operations have not been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak; however, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may develop concerning COVID-19, the emergence of new variants and the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
To date, our vendors have been able to continue to provide services and supply reagents, materials, and products and currently do not anticipate any disruption in services or interruptions in supply. However, we are continuing to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our expenses, and our ability to hire and retain employees.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to modify our business practices (including but not limited to curtailing or modifying employee travel, moving to partial remote work, and cancelling physical participation in meetings, events and conferences), and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, patients and business partners.
Our office-based employees have been working from home since March 2020, while ensuring essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our laboratories.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Components of operating results
Research and development expenses
Our research and development expenses include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, third-party service providers that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits, pension and stock-based compensation;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies;
•laboratory supplies and materials used for internal research and development activities; and
•facilities and equipment costs.
Most of our research and development expenses have been related to the development of our GSPT1-directed MGD candidate MRT-2359, our lead optimization efforts for our NEK7 and CDK2 programs, and continued development of our QuEEN platform. We have not reported program costs since our inception because we have not historically tracked or recorded our research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis. We use our personnel and infrastructure resources across the breadth of our research and development activities, which are directed toward identifying and developing product candidates.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain research and development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and third-party service providers.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our product candidates, including investments in manufacturing, as we advance our programs and conduct clinical trials. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects, the costs of related clinical development costs or
when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services, insurance costs and other operating costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over the next several years to support our continued research and development activities, manufacturing activities, and the potential commercialization of our product candidates and development of commercial infrastructure. We also anticipate our general and administrative costs will increase and with respect to the hiring of additional personnel, fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, and increased costs associated with being a public company such as expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC reporting requirements, insurance and investor relations costs.
Non-operating income and (expense)
Our non-operating income and (expense) includes (i) interest earned on our investments, including principally U.S. government-backed money-market funds; (ii) gains and losses on transactions of our Swiss subsidiary denominated in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar; and (iii) changes in the fair value of our preferred stock tranche obligations.
The changes in the fair value of our preferred stock tranche obligations is principally attributable to assumptions with respect to our overall enterprise value.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following sets forth our results of operations:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were comprised of:
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, we had 73 and 30 employees engaged in research and development activities in our facilities in the U.S. and Switzerland.
Our research and development activities consist primarily of costs associated with the development of our GSPT1-directed MGD candidate MRT-2359, our lead optimization efforts for our NEK7 and CDK2 programs, and continued development of our QuEEN platform. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to the expansion of research and development activities in the United States
and Switzerland including increased headcount and facilities as well as corresponding increases in laboratory related expenses. Research and development expenses included non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.6 million and $0.2 million for the years end December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses to support our business activities were comprised of:
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, we had 20 and 7 employees engaged in general and administrative activities principally in our US facility. Personnel and professional service costs increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 as a result of increased headcount and expenses in support of our growth and operations as a public company. General and administrative expenses included non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.6 million and $0.2 million for the years end December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other expenses, net
Other income (expense), net was comprised of:
The increase in interest income was due to increased cash and cash equivalents balance for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Foreign exchange losses on transactions of our Swiss subsidiary denominated in other than the U.S. dollar decreased in the year ended December 31, 2021 as to compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 principally due to decreased fluctuations of the U.S Dollar with respect to, principally, the Swiss Franc when compared to prior year.
The changes in the fair value of our preferred stock tranche obligations is principally attributable to assumptions with respect to our overall enterprise value.
Liquidity and capital resources
Overview
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated operating losses since our inception. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of convertible preferred stock and common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $351.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $122.0 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least one year past the issuance date of these financial statements.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $59.4 million was attributable to our net loss of $74.0 million off-set by a $6.3 million net change in our operating assets and liabilities and $8.3 million in non-cash charges. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued expenses of $6.6 million off-set by a decrease of accounts payable of $0.7 million and an increase in prepaid and other assets of $0.7 million. Non-cash charges include stock-based compensation expense of $5.2 million, depreciation expense of $2.1 million, and changes in the fair value of our preferred stock tranche obligation of $1.0 million.
Investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our investing activities consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $9.7 million and $3.4 million, respectively, as we expanded our operations.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $377.6 million comprised principally of aggregate net proceeds upon the issuance of our Series B and Series C convertible preferred stock in February and March 2021, respectively, and the issuance of common stock in our IPO in June 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $60.1 million comprised principally of aggregate net proceeds upon the issuance of our Series A-2 and Series B convertible preferred stock in April and September 2020, respectively.
Funding requirements
Any product candidates we may develop may never achieve commercialization and we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research, manufacturing and development services, costs relating to the build-out of our headquarters, laboratories and manufacturing facility, license payments or milestone obligations that may arise, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, manufacturing costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that the net proceeds from our IPO, together with our existing cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. We base this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
We will continue to require additional financing to advance our current product candidates through clinical development, to develop, acquire or in-license other potential product candidates and to fund operations for the foreseeable future. We will continue to seek funds through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at
all. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders, including investors in our IPO, will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through
debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise capital, we will need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching, developing and manufacturing our current product candidates or any future product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals or clearances for our lead product candidates or any future product candidates;
•the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
•the cost of manufacturing our lead product candidate or any future product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize, including costs associated with building-out our manufacturing capabilities;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements that we may enter into;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the costs associated with being a public company;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved or cleared products, if any; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the corresponding responses of businesses and governments.
Further, our operating plans may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials and other research and development activities. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated product development programs.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our combined and consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these combined and consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Research and development expense and accruals
We record research and development expenses to operations as incurred. Research and development expenses represent costs incurred by us for development of our technology platform and the discovery and development of our product candidates and include: employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and non- cash stock-based compensation expense; external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, including preclinical testing organizations, non-profit institutions and consultants; and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue expenses. We estimate costs of research and development activities conducted by service providers. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are deferred and recognized as expense in the period in which the related goods are received or services are rendered. If the costs have been prepaid, this expense reduces the prepaid expenses in the balance sheet, and if not yet invoiced, the costs are included in accrued expenses in the balance sheet. We classify such prepaid assets as current or non-current assets based on our estimates of the timing of when the goods or services will be realized or consumed. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses.
We estimate these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and budget provided and in accordance with agreements established third-party service providers. We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued expense balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed may vary from our estimates and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from external third-party service providers. Amounts ultimately incurred in relation to amounts accrued for these services at a reporting date may be substantially higher or lower than our estimates.
We have and may continue to enter into license agreements to access and utilize certain technology. We evaluate if the license agreement is an acquisition of an asset or a business. To date none of our license agreements have been considered to be an acquisition of a business. For asset acquisitions, the upfront payments to acquire such licenses, as well as any future milestone payments made before product approval, are immediately recognized as research and development expense when due, provided there is no alternative future use of the rights in other research and development projects.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by measuring and recognizing compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees and directors based on estimated grant-date fair values. We use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period, and estimate the fair value of share-based awards to employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including fair value of common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends, which are described in greater detail below.
Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to the IPO, as there was no public market for our common stock, the board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by taking into consideration, among other things, timely valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock prior to our IPO, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including our stage of development; progress of our research and development efforts; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies and the lack of marketability of our common stock. Since the completion of our IPO, the fair value of each share of common stock underlying stock option grants is based on the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market as reported on the date of grant.
Expected Term-The expected term of the options represents the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. As we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior, the expected term of options granted is derived from the average midpoint between the weighted average vesting and the contractual term, also known as the simplified method.
Expected Volatility- Since we have only recently become a public company and have only a limited trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. We selected companies with comparable characteristics, including enterprise value, risk profiles, position within the industry, and, where applicable, with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected
life of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until enough historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield of zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with maturities commensurate with the expected term of the awards.
Expected Dividends-The expected dividends assumption is based on our expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future; therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to our combined and consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Contractual obligations and commitments
License agreement
In April 2018, the Company entered into license, collaboration and investment agreements with CRT and the ICR for the purpose of development in the field of cereblon-mediated protein degradation or, the License and Collaboration. Pursuant to the License and Collaboration, CRT and the ICR granted the Company an exclusive and non-exclusive, worldwide, and sublicensable licenses under CRT’s and the ICR’s intellection property rights in the field of cereblon mediated protein degradation to discover, research, develop, have developed, use, keep, make, have made, market, import, offer for sale, and sell products in the field of cereblon-mediated protein degradation.
In consideration for the rights granted under the License Agreement, we issued an aggregate of 1,132,984 common shares to CRT, the ICR and affiliated founding scientists pursuant to the Formation and Investment Agreement at a price per share of CHF 0.04 for an aggregate purchase price of CHF 40,000 and paid CRT an immaterial technology access fee. The License Agreement will remain effective until terminated by written agreement between us, CRT and the ICR.
The Company is obligated to make milestone payments for achieving certain clinical progression events, aggregating up to $7 million for the first product candidate and $3.5 million for each subsequent product candidate. The aggregate amount of milestone payments and royalties to be paid will depend on whether or not the development candidates that the Company identifies are subject to the collaboration agreement with CRT and ICR. In addition, the Company is further required to pay low single-digit royalties on net sales for each product successfully developed and commercialized in the field of cereblon-mediated protein degradation under the terms of the License and Collaboration on a country by country basis until the later of (a) the date when the manufacture, use, offer for sale, sale or importation of a product is no longer covered by a valid claim in the country of sale, use or manufacture; (b) ten years from the first commercial sale of such product in the relevant country; and (c) the expiry of any extended exclusivity period granted with respect to an orphan drug designation, pediatric designation or other exclusivity in the relevant country. See the section entitled “Business-Our services, collaboration and licenses agreements” elsewhere in this Annual Report as well as Note 6 to our annual combined and consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report for a description of our collaboration and license agreements.