ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
For the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the discovery and development of novel glycomimetic drugs to address unmet medical needs resulting from diseases in which carbohydrate biology plays a key role. We are developing a pipeline of proprietary glycomimetics, which are small molecules that mimic the structure of carbohydrates involved in important biological processes, to inhibit disease-related functions of carbohydrates such as the roles they play in inflammation, cancer and infection. We believe this represents an innovative approach to drug discovery to treat a wide range of diseases. We are focusing our efforts on drug candidates for diseases that we believe will qualify for orphan drug designation.
Our proprietary glycomimetics platform is based on our expertise in carbohydrate chemistry and our understanding of the role carbohydrates play in key biological processes. Most human proteins are modified by the addition of complex carbohydrate structures to the surface of such proteins, which affects the functions of the proteins and their interactions with other molecules. Our initial research and development efforts have focused on drug candidates targeting selectins, which are proteins that serve as adhesion molecules and bind to carbohydrates that are involved in the inflammatory component and progression of a wide range of diseases, including hematologic disorders, cancer and cardiovascular disease. For example, we believe that members of the selectin family play a key role in tumor metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy. Inhibiting specific carbohydrates from binding to selectins has long been viewed as a potentially attractive approach for therapeutic intervention. The ability to successfully develop drug-like carbohydrate compounds that inhibit binding with selectins, known as selectin antagonists, has historically been limited by their potency and the complexities of carbohydrate chemistry. We believe our expertise in the rational design of potent glycomimetic antagonists with drug-like properties and in carbohydrate chemistry enables us to identify highly effective selectin antagonists and other glycomimetics that may inhibit the disease-related functions of certain carbohydrates in order to develop novel drug candidates to address orphan diseases with high unmet medical need.
Our lead glycomimetic drug candidate, uproleselan, is a specific E-selectin inhibitor that we are developing to be used in combination with chemotherapy to treat patients with acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, a life-threatening hematologic cancer, and potentially other hematologic cancers. In 2021, we completed enrollment of patients in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial to evaluate uproleselan in individuals with relapsed/refractory AML, the design of which was based on guidance received from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA. Based on discussions with our external statisticians for the trial, we expect to report preliminary data from the trial after year end 2022.
We have also entered into a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement, or CRADA, with the National Cancer Institute, or NCI, part of the National Institutes of Health, to conduct a Phase 2/3 randomized, controlled clinical trial testing the addition of uproleselan to a standard chemotherapy regimen. Enrollment of the Phase 2 portion was completed in December 2021. There will be a planned interim analysis that will evaluate event-free survival and whether the pre-specified threshold for continuing to Phase 3 has been met. The trial may also provide support for regulatory filings, if the results of the planned interim analysis are positive.
Uproleselan is also being studied in multiple investigator-sponsored trials, with data readouts from these trial expected in 2022.
We have rationally designed an innovative antagonist of E-selectin, GMI-1687, that could be a subcutaneously administered treatment. Initially developed as a potential life-cycle extension to uproleselan, we believe that GMI-1687 could be developed to broaden the clinical usefulness of an E-selectin antagonist to conditions where outpatient treatment is preferred or required. We are currently conducting preclinical activities and studies with GMI-1687 to support our planned submission of an investigational new drug application, or IND, to the FDA in the first half of 2022.
We are also developing a drug candidate, GMI-1359, that simultaneously targets both E-selectin and a chemokine receptor known as CXCR4. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we ended a Phase 1b trial of GMI-1359 in hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients whose tumors have spread to bone. We are also advancing other preclinical-stage programs, including small-molecule glycomimetic compounds that inhibit the protein galectin-3, that could be an orally administered treatment, which we believe may have potential to be used for the treatment of fibrosis, cancer and cardiovascular disease.
We have financed our operations primarily through private placements of our securities, up-front and milestone payments under our license and collaboration agreements and the net proceeds from public offerings of common stock, including sales of common stock under at-the-market sales facilities with Cowen and Company LLC, or Cowen. We have no approved drugs currently available for sale, and substantially all of our revenue to date has been revenue from up-front and milestone payments under license and collaboration agreements.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We had an accumulated deficit of $372.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and we expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● initiate and conduct our planned clinical trials of uproleselan and GMI-1687, including fulfilling our funding and supply commitments related to the ongoing clinical trials of uproleselan;
● conduct NDA-enabling activities related to manufacture, toxicology and clinical pharmacology for our product candidates;
● manufacture additional uproleselan drug supplies for validation and prepare for commercialization;
● seek to discover and develop additional drug candidates;
● seek regulatory approvals for any drug candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● ultimately establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure and scale up external manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any drug candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, quality control, regulatory and scientific personnel;
● maintain sufficient level of insurance including product liability and directors, officers and corporate liability insurance policies; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development and potential future commercialization efforts.
To fund further operations, we will need to raise capital. We may obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of our common stock, through other equity or debt financings, potentially including the use of our at-the-market sales facility with Cowen, or through collaborations or partnerships with other companies. We may not be able to raise additional capital on terms acceptable to us, or at all, and any failure to raise capital as and when needed could compromise our ability to execute on our business plan. For example, the current global COVID-19 pandemic presents material uncertainty and its disruption of the capital markets may have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise additional capital if we decide to do so. Although it is difficult to predict future liquidity requirements, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations into the second quarter of 2023 without
giving effect to potential business development opportunities, such as upfront or milestone payments under license and collaboration agreements, or additional financing activities including the potential sale of common stock. However, our ability to successfully transition to profitability will be dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The imposition of “lockdown,” “social distancing” and “shelter in place” directives by state and federal governments in the United States as well as governments in other regions of the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including in locations in which our Phase 3 clinical trial of uproleselan is being conducted, resulted in slowed clinical site initiation, patient recruitment and enrollment rates early in the pandemic. Enrollment rates returned to forecasted rates from the beginning of the lockdowns and we completed enrollment in November 2021. However, we cannot at this time fully assess the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our completion of the clinical trial. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 situation and any potential impact to our planned activities.
We have also implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. While to date we have experienced limited impacts beyond the earlier delays in recruitment in our ongoing uproleselan Phase 3 clinical trial, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 situation as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy. In March 2020, our workforce transitioned to working remotely in accordance with federal and state declarations. We have reopened our offices pursuant to a hybrid return to office policy with a focus on employee safety and optimal work environment.
Our Collaboration and License Agreements
Apollomics
In January 2020, we entered into an exclusive collaboration and license agreement with Apollomics (Hong Kong) Limited, or Apollomics, for the development and commercialization of uproleselan and GMI-1687 in Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, also known as Greater China. Under the terms of the agreement, Apollomics will be responsible for clinical development and commercialization in Greater China. We will also collaborate with Apollomics to advance the preclinical and clinical development of GMI-1687. We received an upfront cash payment of $9.0 million and in September 2020 received a $1.0 million development milestone payment. Subject to the terms of the agreement, we will be eligible to receive potential further milestone payments totaling approximately $179.0 million, as well as tiered royalties ranging from the high single digits to 15%, as a percentage of net sales. Apollomics will be responsible for all costs related to development, regulatory approvals, and commercialization activities for uproleselan and GMI-1687 in Greater China, and we and Apollomics expect to enter into clinical and commercial supply agreements with respect to our provision of uproleselan and GMI-1687 to Apollomics. We retain all rights for both compounds in the rest of the world.
In September 2020, the China National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) granted IND approval for uproleselan (also known as APL-106), enabling the initiation of a Phase 1 pharmacokinetics and tolerability study and a planned Phase 3 bridging study of APL-106 in combination with chemotherapy in relapsed/refractory AML. In January 2021, APL-106 was granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation from the China NMPA CDE for the treatment of relapsed/refractory AML. In March 2021, Apollomics enrolled the first patient in the Phase 1 study.
In June 2020, we entered into a clinical supply agreement with Apollomics under which we will manufacture and supply uproleselan product to Apollomics at agreed upon prices. Apollomics has the option to begin manufacture after appropriate material transfer requirements are met. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $1.1 million in revenue from the sale of clinical supplies to Apollomics under the clinical supply agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the balance sheets and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ materially from our estimates and judgments under different assumptions or conditions. We periodically review our estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in our financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the United States that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We apply Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration agreements and financial instruments. Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods and services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods and services. To determine revenue recognition for an arrangement that an entity determines is within the scope of Topic 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and identify, as a performance obligation, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We enter into licensing agreements which are within the scope of Topic 606, under which we license certain of our product candidates’ rights to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of the licensed product. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligation under our agreements, we perform the five steps described above. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement of personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Licensing of Intellectual Property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we will recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front-fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period, and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur,
the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license, collaboration and other revenues and earnings in their period of adjustment.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some of all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue from our license agreements.
Manufacturing and Supply: Our agreements may include providing clinical and commercial manufacturing products to the counterparties. The services are generally determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement. We recognize the transaction price allocated to these services as revenue at a point in time when transfer of control of the related products to the customer occurs.
Stock-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based compensation awards to our employees and non-employee directors, including stock options. We measure stock-based compensation expense related to these awards based on the fair value of the award, utilizing the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model, on the date of grant and recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which generally equals the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We grant stock options with exercise prices equal to the estimated fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model requires the input of various assumptions that require management to apply judgment and make assumptions and estimates, including:
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates for constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities consistent with the expected life of our employee stock options.
Expected Term-The expected life represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the simplified method. Under the simplified method, the expected life of an option is presumed to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. We used the simplified method due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected life of the stock options.
Expected Volatility- Volatility is a measure of the amount by which a financial variable such as share price has fluctuated (historical volatility) or is expected to fluctuate (expected volatility) during a period. We base the expected volatility on the historical volatility of our publicly traded common stock.
Expected Dividend Yield-We have assumed no dividend yield because we do not expect to pay dividends in the future, which is consistent with our history of not paying dividends.
Accruals for Clinical Trial Expenses
Clinical trial costs primarily consist of expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations (CROs), investigative sites, laboratory testing expenses, data management and consultants that conduct our clinical trials. Clinical trial expenses are a significant component of research and development expenses, and we outsource a significant portion of these clinical trial activities to third parties. The accrual for site and patient costs includes inputs such as estimates of patient enrollment, patient cycles incurred, clinical site activations, estimated project duration and other pass-through costs. These inputs are required to be estimated due to a lag in receiving the actual clinical information from third parties. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected on the balance sheets as prepaid assets or accrued expenses. These third-party agreements are generally cancellable, and related costs are recorded as research and development expenses as incurred. Except for payments made in advance of services, clinical trial costs are expensed as incurred. Non-refundable advance clinical payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development
activities are recorded as a prepaid asset and recognized as expense as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed. When evaluating the adequacy of the accrued expenses, management assessments include: (i) an evaluation by the project manager of the work that has been completed during the period; (ii) measurement of progress prepared internally and/or provided by the third-party service provider; (iii) analyses of data that justify the progress; and (iv) our judgment. Significant judgments and estimates may be made in determining the accrued balances at the end of any reporting period. Actual results could differ from the estimates made. Our historical clinical accrual estimates have not been materially different from the actual costs. Clinical trial accruals that are due longer than one year are classified as noncurrent accrued expenses.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of our drug candidates and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of drugs in the near future. Substantially all of our historical revenue consisted of upfront and milestone payments under license and collaboration agreements.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities, including compensation and benefits for full-time research and development employees, facilities expenses, overhead expenses, cost of laboratory supplies, clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing expenses, fees paid to CROs and other consultants and other outside expenses. Other preclinical research and platform programs include activities related to exploratory efforts, target validation, lead optimization for our earlier programs and our proprietary glycomimetics platform. Our research and development expenses relate primarily to the development of uproleselan and our other drug candidates.
We do not currently utilize a formal time allocation system to capture expenses on a project-by-project basis because we are organized and record expense by functional department and our employees may allocate time to more than one development project. Accordingly, we only allocate a portion of our research and development expenses by functional area and by drug candidate.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we seek to progress uproleselan, GMI-1687 and our other drug candidates into and through clinical development. However, it is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of our current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our drug candidates, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our drug candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our drug candidates.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our drug candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include:
● per patient trial costs;
● the number of patients that participate in the trials;
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the countries in which the trial is conducted;
● the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
● potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
● the duration of patient follow-up; and
● the safety and efficacy profile of the drug candidate.
In addition, the probability of success for each drug candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate, as well as an assessment of each drug candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we start to build upon our commercialization efforts for uproleselan and continue to support our research and development activities.
Interest Income
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations:
Revenue
During the year ended December 2021 and 2020, revenue was $1.2 million and $10.2 million, respectively, all of which was the result of payments received under our license and collaboration agreement with Apollomics for the development and commercialization of uproleselan and GMI-1687 in Greater China. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $1.1 million in revenue from the sale of clinical supplies to Apollomics under a clinical supply agreement. In January 2020, we recognized $9.0 million in revenue from an upfront milestone payment, and in September 2020, we recognized a $1.0 million clinical development milestone payment.
Research and Development Expense
The following table summarizes our research and development expense by functional area:
The following table summarizes our research and development expense by drug candidate:
Our research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to:
● increased clinical trial and development costs related to our ongoing global Phase 3 clinical trial of uproleselan in individuals with relapsed/refractory AML;
● increased manufacturing costs for the uproleselan validation batches; and
● increased costs for toxicity studies of GMI-1687 included in other research and development in the drug candidate summary table above.
These increases were partially offset by:
● decreased personnel-related and stock-based compensation due to a lower number of research and development employees.
General and Administrative Expense
The following table sets forth the components of our general and administrative expense:
General and administrative expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 by $372,000, or 2%, compared to 2020. Personnel-related expenses decreased due to a reversal of accruals for performance and retention bonuses that our prior Chief Executive Officer was eligible to receive but which were forfeited upon her cessation of
service in that role in 2021. These decreases were offset by higher recruiting, consulting and legal expenses incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
Interest Income
During the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income decreased by $462,000, compared to the same period in 2020, due to lower average cash balances and lower interest rates on those balances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have historically financed our operations primarily through public offerings and private placements of our capital stock, including sales agreements with Cowen, and upfront and milestone payments from our license and collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we had $90.3 million in cash and cash equivalents.
In October 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement to a shelf registration statement that we filed in May 2019 and entered into an at-the-market sales agreement, or the 2020 Sales Agreement, with Cowen. Under the 2020 Sales Agreement, we may sell up to $100.0 million of our common stock registered under the shelf registration statement that we filed in May 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 1,024,760 shares of common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement at a weighted average price of $3.74 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $3.7 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold an additional 3,092,603 shares of common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement at a weighted average price of $3.57 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $10.7 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $85.1 million remaining available to be sold under the terms of the 2020 Sales Agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, there have been no additional sales under the 2020 Sales Agreement.
We entered into a collaboration and license agreement with Apollomics in January 2020 and are potentially eligible to earn milestone payments and royalties under that agreement. In January 2020, Apollomics made an upfront payment to us of $9.0 million. We also received a non-refundable payment of $1.0 million in September 2020 as a clinical development milestone payment. Our ability to earn additional milestone payments and potential royalty payments and their timing will be dependent upon the outcome of Apollomics’ activities and is therefore uncertain at this time.
Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
As of December 31, 2021, our significant contractual obligations consisted solely of rent obligations under a non-cancelable lease, as amended, for our current office space in Rockville, Maryland, which has a term through October 2023. Total remaining obligations under this lease as of December 31, 2021 were $2.0 million. We have no other fixed long-term obligations and we do not have significant capital expenditure requirements.
We have also entered into various agreements for services with third-party vendors, including agreements to conduct clinical trials, to manufacture products, and for consulting and other contracted services. These agreements include cancellable terms and we accrue the costs of these agreements based on estimates of work completed to date.
The successful development of any of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of uproleselan or our other drug candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from uproleselan or our other drug candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
● successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for drug candidates;
● launching commercial sales of drugs, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● obtaining and maintaining healthcare coverage and adequate reimbursement.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our drug candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that drug candidate. Because our drug candidates are in various stages of clinical and preclinical development and the outcome of these efforts is uncertain, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our drug candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity or debt financings and collaboration arrangements, including our existing license agreement with Apollomics. Except for amounts that we may sell under our 2020 Sales Agreement with Cowen, and Apollomics’ conditional obligations to make milestone and royalty payments to us under our license agreement, we do not have any committed external source of liquidity.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities, these securities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations.
We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our drug candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements included in this Annual Report have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. During 2021, we incurred a net loss of $63.4 million and had net cash flows used in operating activities of $57.5 million. At December 31, 2021, we had $90.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and had no committed source of additional funding from either debt or equity financings. Management believes that given our current cash position and forecasted negative cash flows from operating activities over the next twelve months as we continue our product development activities, including the completion of our planned Phase 3 clinical trial of uproleselan, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern beyond the date that is one year from the date that these financial statements are issued, without obtaining additional financing or entering into another form of non-equity or debt arrangement.
Outlook
Based on our research and development plans and our timing expectations related to the progress of our programs, we expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing drug candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
In assessing cash used in operating activities, we consider several principal factors: (i) net loss for the period; (ii) adjustments for non-cash charges including stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization of property and equipment; and (iii) the extent to which receivables, accounts payable and other liabilities, or other working capital components increase or decrease.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $57.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $39.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we received $1.1 million and $10.2 million, respectively, in revenue under our agreements with Apollomics for the development and commercialization of uproleselan and GMI-1687 in Greater China. For the year ended December 31, 2021, there was increased spending in clinical development and manufacturing expenses as a result of ongoing costs associated with our uproleselan clinical development programs in our global Phase 3 clinical trial and the NCI-sponsored Phase 2/3 trial.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities, consisting of purchases of scientific equipment and computers, was $15,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $68,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $10.7 million and $18.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, consisted primarily of the net proceeds received from our at-the-market facility with Cowen. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also received $319,000 in proceeds from stock option exercises.