Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis here and throughout this Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under Item 1A (“Risk Factors”) and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company is a software company specializing in online gaming. It is headquartered in Las Vegas with offices in London and Mexico City.
The Company’s activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need for additional capital, as described below. The Company commenced revenue-generating operations in February 2021, does not have positive cash flows from operations, and is dependent on periodic infusions of equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
Background and Basis of Presentation
Gaming Technologies, Inc. was incorporated in the State of Delaware on July 23, 2019 under the name Dito, Inc. and on December 21, 2020 amended its name to Gaming Technologies, Inc. Effective as of March 18, 2020, Gaming Technologies, Inc. completed a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) to acquire all of the outstanding ordinary shares of Gaming Technologies UK that provided for each outstanding ordinary share of Gaming Technologies UK to be effectively converted into 25 shares of common stock of Gaming Technologies, Inc., As a result, Gaming Technologies UK became our wholly-owned subsidiary in a recapitalization transaction, as described below. Gaming Technologies UK was originally formed on November 3, 2017, in the United Kingdom as Dito UK Limited for the purpose of software development.
For financial reporting purposes, the Exchange Agreement was accounted for as a combination of entities under common control (the “Combination”), as Gaming Technologies, Inc. was formed by Gaming Technologies UK, with the objective of Gaming Technologies UK becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gaming Technologies, Inc., and the resultant parent company being domiciled in the United States. As a result of the Combination, the former stockholders of Gaming Technologies UK became the controlling shareholders of Dito, Inc., and the Gaming Technologies UK management and board members became the management and board members of Gaming Technologies, Inc.
As discussed above, our Board of Directors and our stockholders have approved a reverse split of our common stock in a range between 1-for-2 and 1-for-8. Such reverse split, if any, would be effected prior to the listing of our common stock on Nasdaq, if our listing application is approved. The share and per share information in this report has not been adjusted to reflect any reverse stock split.
Going Concern
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has had no significant operating revenues to date, and has experienced recurring net losses from operations and negative operating cash flows. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $12,896,105, utilized cash in operating activities of $8,036,300, and had an accumulated deficit of $20,862,298 as of December 31, 2021. The Company has financed its working capital requirements since inception through the sale of its equity securities and from borrowings.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $406,526. The Company estimates that a significant amount of capital will be necessary over a sustained period of time to advance the development of the Company's business to the point at which it can become commercially viable and self-sustaining. However, there can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in this regard.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern within one year of the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements are issued. In addition, the Company's independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, has also expressed substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company's ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
We failed to make interest payments on our 10% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Note in the principal amount of $1,666,666.67 (the “Convertible Note”) that were due in February and March 2022, in the amount of $13,889 each, and may not be able to make the interest payments due in April of $13,889 and subsequently. See “-Convertible Note Financing” below for additional information on the Convertible Note and related agreements.
The development and expansion of the Company’s business in 2022 and thereafter will be dependent on many factors, including the capital resources available to the Company. No assurances can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company or adequate to fund the development and expansion of the Company’s business to a level that is commercially viable and self-sustaining. There is also significant uncertainty as to the affect that the coronavirus pandemic may have on the availability, amount and type of financing in the future.
If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its operations, obtain funds, if available, although there can be no certainty, through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to its technology, or to discontinue its operations entirely.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 presented elsewhere in this report, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the US (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of the Company’s control. As a result, these issues are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on the Company’s historical operations, the future business plans and the projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, trends in the industry, and information available from other outside sources. For a more complete description of the Company’s significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, the Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected impact of differences between the financial statements and the tax basis of assets and liabilities.
The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In the event the Company was to determine that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of its recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be credited to operations in the period such determination was made. Alternatively, should the Company determine that it would not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to operations in the period such determination was made.
Gaming Technologies, Inc. is subject to US federal income taxes and income taxes of the State of New York. The Company’s operations in the US through December 31, 2021 resulted in losses for income tax purposes.
Gaming Technologies UK is subject to taxation in the UK. As a foreign corporation, Gaming Technologies UK is not consolidated with Gaming Technologies, Inc. in the Company’s US federal tax filings.
As the Company’s net operating losses in the respective jurisdictions in which it operates have yet to be utilized, all previous tax years remain open to examination by the taxing authorities in which the Company currently operates. The Company had no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021 and does not anticipate any material amount of unrecognized tax benefits within the next 12 months.
The Company accounts for uncertainties in income tax law under a comprehensive model for the financial statement recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns as prescribed by GAAP. The tax effects of a position are recognized only if it is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained by the taxing authority as of the reporting date. If the tax position is not considered “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained, then no benefits of the position are recognized. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not recorded any liability for uncertain tax positions. In subsequent periods, any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions will be recognized as a component of income tax expense.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Comprehensive income or loss is defined as the change in equity during a period from transactions and other events and circumstances from non- owner sources. Components of comprehensive income or loss, including net income or loss, unrealized gains or losses on available-for-sale securities, unrealized gains or losses on other financial investments, unrealized gains or losses on pension and retirement benefit plans, and foreign currency translation adjustments, are reported in the financial statements in the period in which they are recognized. Net income (loss) and other comprehensive income (loss) are reported net of any related tax effect to arrive at comprehensive income (loss). The Company’s comprehensive income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consists of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Software Development Costs
Due to the significant uncertainty with respect to the successful development of commercially viable products based on the Company’s development efforts, all software development costs incurred with respect to the Company’s mobile gaming platform are charged to operations as incurred.
Intellectual Property
Intellectual property, consisting of software, is recorded at cost. Amortization of intellectual property is provided using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of three years.
The Company recognizes amortization of intellectual property in software development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
Foreign Currency
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in US dollars (“USD”). The functional currency of Dito UK, the Company’s foreign subsidiary, is the British Pound (“GBP”), the local currency in the UK. Accordingly, assets and liabilities of the foreign subsidiary are translated at the current exchange rate at the end of the period, and revenues and expenses are translated at average exchange rates during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The resulting translation adjustments are recorded as a component of shareholders’ equity (deficiency). Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are included in net income (loss).
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers. ASC Topic 606 requires companies to recognize revenue in a manner that depicts the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In addition, the standard requires disclosures of the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. Revenue is recognized based on the following five step model:
· Identification of the contract with a customer
· Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
· Determination of the transaction price
· Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
· Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation
Performance Obligations
The Company operates an online betting platform allowing users to place wagers on casino and other games. Each wager placed by users create a single performance obligation for the Company to administer each event wagered. Net gaming revenue is the aggregate of gaming wins and losses based on results of each event that customers wager bets on. Gross gaming revenue is split with our partners, whose share of gross gaming revenue is recorded as a reduction to net gaming revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company issues common stock and intends to issue stock options to officers, directors and consultants for services rendered. Options will vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date of each grant. Stock grants, which are generally time vested, will be measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations ratably over the vesting period.
The fair value of stock options granted as stock-based compensation will be determined utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and can be affected by several variables, the most significant of which are the life of the equity award, the exercise price of the stock option as compared to the fair market value of the common stock on the grant date, and the estimated volatility of the common stock. Estimated volatility will be based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock over an appropriate calculation period, or, if not available, by reference to the volatility of a representative sample of comparable public companies. The risk-free interest rate will be based on the US Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. The fair market value of the common stock will be determined by reference to the quoted market price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date, or, if not available, by reference to an appropriate alternative valuation methodology.
The Company will recognize the fair value of stock-based compensation awards in general and administrative costs or in software development costs, as appropriate, in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The Company will issue new shares of common stock to satisfy stock option exercises.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any outstanding stock options.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets, including accounts and notes receivables. ASU 2016-13 will replace the current “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model, under which companies will recognize allowances based on expected rather than incurred losses. Entities will apply the provisions of ASU 2016-13 as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which ASU 2016-13 is effective. As small business filer, ASU 2016-13 will be effective for the Company for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Management is currently in the process of assessing the impact of adopting ASU-2016-13 on the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures subsequent to its adoption.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, including its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission, did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Plan of Operation
We are a software company specializing in online gaming. Our cloud-based Player Account Management (PAM) platform enables us to rapidly deploy branded online gambling presences for land-based casinos, consumer brands and media companies. Depending on each geographical region and the restrictions/requirements of its gambling-related legislation, we form "access deals" that offer a faster and easier route to market by enabling us to operate under a gambling license already held by a local partner.
We integrate best-in-class third-party games to provide the ultimate gaming platform, and we help our international partners in regulated markets leverage online gambling presences while putting players first. We also form business partnerships with established brands such as Playboy to launch new game content.
On November 13, 2020, we entered into an “access deal” Agreement for the Provision of Online Gaming Management and Consulting Services (as subsequently amended) with Comercial de Juegos de la Frontera, S.A. de C.V., a Mexican company doing business as Big Bola, pursuant to which we provide to Big Bola consulting and management services related to their interactive online betting and gaming business in Mexico via the web site www.vale.mx, a regulated online casino and sports betting site. vale.mx operates under Big Bola’s existing license issued by the General Directorate of Games and Raffles of the Ministry of Interior (SEGOB). Big Bola is one of only 14 operators legally authorized to offer legal betting and online casino services in Mexico. vale.mx has more than 500 online premium casino games available, which can be enjoyed both on mobile or via desktop. Players can receive promotions and play live roulette and blackjack, or high-definition slots from leading software providers such as NetEnt, Microgaming, Pragmatic Play, Evolution and Matrix Studios. We are responsible for player acquisition, promotion and retention for vale.mx. We manage players’ accounts and are required to ensure that the balance in players’ accounts at all times satisfies the requirements under applicable law, and we pay out winnings to players from Big Bola’s account. While Big Bola bears liability to the players as provided by the permit, as between us and Big Bola we bear the costs of this obligation. Each party indemnifies the other against certain liabilities and claims. Under the terms of the agreement, as amended, we share 75% of gross gaming revenue generated from the platform, subject to certain minimum guaranteed monthly amounts of Big Bola’s participation in the remaining gross gaming revenues. In February 2021, vale.mx began operations. During the year ending December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $167,875 of net revenue. See “Our Business-Development of Our Business-Big Bola/vale.mx” above for more information.
On April 14, 2021, we entered into a Sponsorship Agreement (the “Canelo Agreement”) with SA Holiday, Inc. (“Holiday”), owner of the personality rights of champion professional boxer Saul Alvarez Barragan, or “Canelo,” in connection with a promotional campaign for the Corporation to sponsor a prize fight and certain other activities of Canelo, and for Canelo to promote the Corporation’s “VALE” brand and create certain promotional materials in connection therewith for the Corporation’s use in the United States, Latin America and certain countries in the Caribbean. See “Our Business-Development of Our Business-Playboy License Agreement” above for more information.
On May 19, 2021, we entered into a non-exclusive license agreement with Playboy Enterprises International, Inc. (“Playboy”) to use certain trademarks (including the rabbit head logo) and other intellectual property of Playboy on and in connection with the design, creation, promotion, marketing, advertisement, sales, operation, maintenance and distribution in India of real-money game mobile apps, such as rummy, poker, fantasy sports and other games of skill approved by Playboy. We will pay Playboy as a royalty a percentage of net gaming revenue. The term of the agreement is through the end of 2025, subject to early termination upon certain events of default, which include our failure to launch a Playboy-branded game in India by November 1, 2021, or to meet certain annual minimum net gaming revenue targets. The Playboy-branded game, https://www.playboyrummy.com/, was launched on November 1, 2021. See “Our Business-Development of Our Business-Playboy License Agreement” above for more information.
On August 18, 2021, we entered into a software partnership with Ortiz Gaming to supply us with online Bingo gaming content. The deal initially covers Mexico, and we plan to expand to other parts of Latin and South America.
Convertible Note Financing
On November 18, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with an accredited investor for the sale of a secured convertible note and warrants. We received aggregate gross proceeds of $1,500,000 and issued (i) the Convertible Note in the principal amount of $1,666,666.67 (the “Convertible Note”) and (ii) warrants (the “Convertible Note Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 727,273 shares of our common stock.
The Convertible Note. The Convertible Note bears interest at a rate of 10% per year, payable monthly commencing after the third month following the issuance date, and matures 12 months from issuance. The principal and interest are convertible at any time, at the option of the holder, into shares of common stock at a conversion price equal to the lower of (i) $2.75 per share and (ii) the price of the common stock of the Company in a Qualified Offering (subject to adjustment as provided in the Convertible Note). A “Qualified Offering” is an equity or equity-linked financing for the account of the Company or any of its subsidiaries or debt financing that results in cumulative aggregate proceeds to the Company of at least $8,000,000. The principal and interest on the Convertible Note will be amortized on a straight-line basis commencing sixth months after the closing.
The conversion price of the Convertible Note is subject to adjustment in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock and also upon any distributions of assets, including cash, stock or other property to the Company’s stockholders. With certain customary exceptions, if, at any time while the Convertible Note is outstanding, the Company sells or grants any option to purchase or sells or grants any right to reprice, or otherwise disposes of or issues (or announces any sale, grant or any option to purchase or other disposition), any common stock or common stock equivalents entitling any person to acquire shares of common stock at an effective price per share that is lower than the then conversion price of the Convertible Note (such lower price, the “Base Conversion Price,” then the conversion price of the Convertible Note will be reduced to equal the Base Conversion Price.
We have the right at any time to prepay in cash all or a portion of the Convertible Note at 115% (or 120% on or after the first three months from the closing) of the principal amount thereof plus any unpaid accrued interest to the date of repayment. In such event, the holder will have the right to convert the Convertible Note prior to the date of any such prepayment.
We will be required to offer to prepay in cash the aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Note at 115% (or 120% on or after the first three months from the closing) of the principal amount thereof plus any unpaid accrued interest to the date of repayment, on the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries, upon a Change of Control (as defined in the Convertible Note), or on a Qualified Offering. In such event, the holder shall have the right to convert the Convertible Note prior to the date of any such prepayment.
Upon an Event of Default (as defined in the Convertible Note), interest will accrue at 1 1/2% per month and 125% of principal and interest through maturity shall be due and payable. At the holder’s option, the holder will be entitled to be paid in cash or common stock with the conversion price of the common stock equal to a 30% discount to the average of the three lowest closing prices of the common stock for the 10 prior trading days.
We failed to make interest payments on the Convertible Note that were due in February and March 2022, in the amount of $13,889 each, and may not be able to make the interest payments due in April of $13,889 and subsequently. The holder has agreed to extend the due dates of the payments that were due in February and March 2022 to April 18, 2022, and to waive any resulting default until such date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional capital to enable us to make such payments by such date, or future payments that come due.
The Convertible Note Warrants. The Convertible Note Warrants are exercisable at an exercise price equal to the lower of (x) $2.75 per share and (y) the price of the common stock of the Company in a Qualified Offering (as defined in the Purchase Agreement), subject to adjustment as described below, and the Convertible Note Warrants are exercisable for five years after the issuance date. The Convertible Note Warrants are exercisable for cash at any time and are exercisable on a cashless basis at any time there is no effective registration statement registering the shares of common stock underlying the Convertible Note Warrants. The exercise price of the Convertible Note Warrants is subject to adjustment in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock and also upon any distributions of assets, including cash, stock or other property to the Company’s stockholders. The exercise price of the Convertible Note Warrants is also subject to “full ratchet” price adjustment if the Company issues common stock or equivalents at a price per share lower than the then-current exercise price of the Convertible Note Warrant, as described above for the conversion price of the Convertible Note.
Ancillary Agreements. In connection with the Company’s obligations under the Convertible Notes, the Company and its subsidiary Gaming Technology Limited (the “Subsidiary”) each entered into a security agreement with the holder, pursuant to which the Company and the Subsidiary granted a security interest on all assets of the Company and the Subsidiary, including the stock of the Subsidiary, for the benefit of the holders, to secure, and the Subsidiary guaranteed, the Company’s obligations under the Convertible Note, the Convertible Note Warrant and the other transaction documents. In addition, the holder was granted customary piggyback registration rights for the shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Note and exercise of the Convertible Note Warrant and rights of participation.
Right of Participation. At any time within the 18 month period following closing, upon any issuance by the Company or any of its subsidiaries of debt or common stock or common stock equivalents for cash consideration, indebtedness or a combination of units thereof, other than in an underwritten public offering (a “Subsequent Financing”), the investor will have the right to participate up to its investment amount in the Convertible Note, but not more than 25% of the Subsequent Financing, on the same terms, conditions and price provided for in the Subsequent Financing.
“Most Favored Nation.” Until such time as the Company has consummated a Qualified Offering, which results in an up-listing of the Common Stock onto a national securities exchange, if the Company engages in any future financing transactions with a third-party investor (not including such a Qualified Financing, except to the extent it relates to conversion, exercise and anti-dilution provisions of the Convertible Note and Convertible Note Warrants), if the holder determines that the terms of the subsequent investment are preferable in any respect to the terms of the securities of the Company issued to the Holder pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company shall be required to amend and restate such securities to include the preferable term or terms.
Warrants for Waivers. In November 2021, we also issued warrants to purchase an aggregate of 179,566 shares of common stock to investors in our August 2021 private placement in exchange for their granting a waiver of their anti-dilution and most favored nation rights in respect of the Convertible Note transaction describe above. These warrants have substantially the same terms as the Convertible Note Warrants described above.
Key Performance Indicators
Registered Players
A registered player is a customer who has registered on our app or website and met the Know Your Customer customer identification requirements, which include identity and address verification (“KYC requirements”). During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we registered 108,206 and 0 players, respectively. On October 4, 2021, we announced we had reached 100,000 registrations.
Monthly Unique Payers
Monthly Unique Payers (“MUPs”). MUPs is the average number of unique paid users (“unique payers”) that use our online games on a monthly basis.
MUPs is a key indicator of the scale of our user base and awareness of our brand, and/or the third-party brands we partner with. We believe that year-over-year MUPs will also generally be indicative of the long-term revenue growth potential of the online gaming brands we hold directly and/or those we establish around our B2B brand partners, although MUPs in individual periods may be less indicative of our longer-term expectations. We expect the number of MUPs to grow as we attract, retain and re-engage users in new and existing jurisdictions and expand the online gambling brands we operate to appeal to a wider audience.
We define MUPs as the average number of unique payers per month who had a paid engagement (e.g., participated in a casino game) across one or more of our product offerings via our platform technology. For reported periods longer than one month, we average the MUPs for the months in the reported period.
A “unique paid user” or “unique payer” is any person who had one or more paid engagements via our B2C technology during the period (i.e., a user that participates in a paid engagement with one of our B2C product offerings counts as a single unique paid user or unique payer for the period). We exclude users who have made a deposit but have not yet had a paid engagement. Unique payers or unique paid users include users who have participated in a paid engagement with promotional incentives, which are fungible with other funds deposited in their wallets on our technology. The number of these users included in MUPs has not been material to date and a substantial majority of such users are repeat users who have had paid engagements both prior to and after receiving incentives.
During the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, our MUPs were 3,251 and 0, respectively. The increase was due to the initiation of revenue generating activities in February 2021.
Average Revenue per MUP (“ARPMUP”). ARPMUP is the average online casino revenue per MUP, and this key metric represents our ability to drive usage and monetization of our online casino offering.
During the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, our ARPMUP was $51.64 and $0, respectively.
We define and calculate ARPMUP as the average monthly online casino revenue for a reporting period, divided by MUPs (i.e., the average number of unique payers) for the same period.
Handle
Handle is a casino or sports betting term referring to the total amount of money bet. We will report the handle or cash wagering which is the total amount of money bet excluding all bonuses.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our handle was $6,313,132 and $0, respectively.
Hold
Hold is essentially the amount of cash that our platform instances keep after paying out winning bets. The industry also refers to hold as win or revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our hold was $288,848 and $0, respectively.
Online games are characterized by an element of chance. Our revenue is impacted by variations in the hold percentage (the ratio of net win to total amount wagered) on bets placed on, or the actual outcome of, games or events on which users bet. Although our product offerings generally perform within a defined statistical range of outcomes, actual outcomes may vary for any given period, and a single large bet can have a sizeable impact on our short-term financial performance. Our hold is also affected by factors that are beyond our control, such as a user’s skill, experience and behavior, the mix of games played, the financial resources of users and the volume of bets placed. As a result of variability in these factors, actual hold rates on our products may differ from the theoretical win rates we have estimated and could result in the winnings of our gaming users exceeding those anticipated. We seek to mitigate these risks through data science and analytics and rules built into our technology, as well as active management of our amounts at risk at a point in time, but may not always be able to do so successfully, particularly over short periods, which can result in financial losses as well as revenue volatility.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, our hold percentage was 4.58% and 0%, respectively.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
In February 2021, our online casino, vale.mx, began operations. However, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any positive cash flows from operations and was dependent on its ability to raise equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
Revenues
The Company began generating revenue in February 2021. Revenues consist of the net gaming revenues from the Company’s vale.mx online casino based in Mexico. Total revenues were $167,875 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $167,875 for the year ended December 31, 2021 is due to the initiation of revenue producing activities in February 2021.
Cost of Revenues
The Company began generating costs of revenues in February 2021. Cost of revenues consist of the direct costs of operating vale.mx, our online casino based in Mexico. Total costs of revenues were $857,709 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increases of $857,709 was due to the initiation of revenue producing activities in February 2021.
Operating Expenses
The Company generally recognizes operating costs and expenses as they are incurred in two general categories, software development costs and expenses, and general and administrative costs and expenses. The Company’s operating costs and expenses also include non-cash components related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, and intellectual property, which are allocated, as appropriate, to software development costs and expenses and general and administrative costs and expenses.
Software development costs and expenses consist primarily of fees paid to consultants and amortization of intellectual property. Management expects software costs and expenses to increase in the future as the Company increases its efforts to develop technology for potential future products based on its technology and research.
General and administrative costs and expenses consist of fees for directors and officers, and their affiliates, as well as legal and other professional fees, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, lease and rent expense, and other general corporate expenses. Management expects general and administrative costs and expenses to increase in future periods as the Company adds personnel and incurs additional costs related to its operation as a public company, including higher legal, accounting, insurance, compliance, compensation and other costs.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as discussed herein, are presented below.
Revenues. In February 2021, our online casino, vale.mx, began operations. The Company recognized $167,875 in revenue during the year ending December 31, 2021. The Company did not have any revenues for the year ending December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenues: The Company began generating costs of revenues in February 2021. Cost of revenues consist of the direct costs of operating and marketing vale.mx, our online casino based in Mexico. Total costs of revenues were $857,709 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The increase of $857,709 was due to the initiation of revenue producing activities in February 2021.
Software Development Costs and Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, software development costs and expenses were $185,789, which consisted of development costs paid to contractors of $147,587 and amortization of intellectual property of $38,202.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, software development costs and expenses were $128,563, which consisted of development costs paid to contractors of $67,505 and amortization of intellectual property of $61,058.
Software development costs and expenses increased by $57,226 or 45% in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of increased software development costs as the Company developed more online games for its gaming platform.
General and Administrative Costs and Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative costs and expenses were $11,736,650, which consisted of director, consulting, and professional fees to officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties of $728,757, marketing and advertising expense of $5,693,017, stock compensation expense of $3,409,214, consulting fees of $1,050,020, legal and accounting fees to non-related parties of $510,548, and other operating costs of $345,094.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative costs and expenses were $7,064,240, which consisted of director, consulting, and professional fees to officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties of $417,094, stock compensation expense of $5,875,000, legal and accounting fees to non-related parties of $599,957, and other operating costs of $172,189.
General and administrative costs increased by $4,672,410 or 66% in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of increases in marketing and advertising expense of $5,693,017 and consulting fees of $977,317, and a decrease in stock compensation expense of $2,465,786.
Interest Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had interest expense of $283,754, as compared to interest expense of $3,046 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of interest on notes payable.
Foreign Currency Gain (Loss). For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a foreign currency loss of $78, as compared to a foreign currency loss of $15,968 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of an increase in the value of the GB Pound compared to the US Dollar.
Net Loss. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $12,896,105, as compared to a net loss of $$7,211,817 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources - December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in Item 6 (“Selected Financial Data”), the Company has had no operating revenues to date, and has experienced recurring net losses from operations and negative operating cash flows. The Company has financed its working capital requirements since inception through the sale of its equity securities and from borrowings.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year of the date that the consolidated financial statements are being issued. In addition, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, has also expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern (see “-Going Concern”).
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital deficit of $2,113,765, as compared to working capital of $1,586,238 as of December 31, 2020, reflecting a decrease in working capital of $3,700,003 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of increased marketing and advertising costs incurred to launch the vale.mx brand.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $406,526, reflecting the remaining balance of cash from the placement of $1,666,667 in convertible notes payable in November 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $1,946,232, reflecting cash of $2,628,000 from the sale of Common Stock in 2020.
Management believes that the cash on hand will be sufficient to fund the Company’s operations only until April 2022, after which we will need to raise additional funding. The Company has deferred payments and reduced costs in order to conserve cash until it is able to raise additional capital. No assurance can be given that we will be successful in raising the required capital at reasonable cost and at the required times, or at all. Our ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other sources may depend on the commercial success of our software and financial, economic and market conditions and other factors, some of which are beyond our control.
In February 2021, the Company began earning revenues, however they are not a level sufficient to support the Company’s operations. The Company estimates that its working capital requirements for the next twelve months to be approximately $4,800,000, or $400,000 per month.
The working capital budget will enable the Company to support the existing monthly operating costs of the Company of approximately $400,000 per month, consisting of monthly (and quarterly) accounting and US securities filing costs estimated at $20,000 per month and a sales and marketing budget of $250,000 per month to engage in a sales and marketing campaign to sell licenses of the Company’s software platform to third parties and attach customers to its online casino based in Mexico.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company completed a series of private placements of its common stock, with proceeds totaling $5,300,648. In November 2021, the Company issued a convertible note payable in the amount of $1,666,667. In addition, the Company is planning additional capital raises over the remainder of the calendar year to fund operations as it ramps up revenues, however, there can be no assurances such raises will be successful The Company believes that its existing working capital will be sufficient to fund the Company’s operations for the next three months.
Since acquiring the software platform, the Company has successfully carried out development to port the software platform from its former physical server dependencies and reliance on third parties for hardware management and deployment to a cloud-based platform where deployment is automated through the use of infrastructure as code. To make the Company’s software platform work for business-to-business (B2B) licensees, the Company has modified the software to enable remote management by system administrators of prospective licensees. Previously, the platform was business to consumer (B2C) focused, with outsourced management and deployment. As a result of this software development, the Company expects to be able to monetize its software platform by selling licenses to third parties.
The Company’s ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other sources may depend on the stage of development of the software platform, the commercial success of the software, and financial, economic and market conditions and other factors, some of which are beyond the Company’s control. No assurance can be given that the Company will be successful in raising the required capital at reasonable cost and at the required times, or at all. Further equity financings may have a dilutive effect on shareholders and any debt financing, if available, may require restrictions to be placed on the Company’s future financing and operating activities. If the Company requires additional capital and is unsuccessful in raising that capital, the Company may not be able to continue the development of its software platform and continue to advance its growth initiatives, or ultimately to be able to continue its business operations, which could adversely impact the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities utilized cash of $8,036,300, as compared to utilized cash of $924,917for the year ended December 31, 2020, to fund the Company’s ongoing operating expenses.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s investing activities consisted of the acquisition of intellectual property for $169,564 and property and equipment of $9,194.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s investing activities consisted of the acquisition of intellectual property for $18,620.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s financing activities consisted of gross proceeds from the private placement of 2,155,294 shares of Common Stock of $5,221,325, net proceeds from a convertible note payable to bank of $1,500,000, offset by the repayment of $5,445 of a note payable with a bank.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s financing activities consisted of gross proceeds from the private placement of 1,153,200 shares of Common Stock of $2,628,000, proceeds from a note payable to bank of $60,623, offset by the repayment of a note payable to related party of $35,508, and the repayment of $60,000 in connection with the cancellation of an investment in the private placement.
Principal Commitments
Contractual Commitments
The Company has retained Julian Parge as a consultant to Gaming Technologies UK, at the request and under the sole discretion of Gaming Technologies UK, at the rate of $1,549 (equivalent to 1,250£) per week up to a maximum of $77,456 (equivalent to 62,500£) per annum.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Development of new software is, by its nature, unpredictable. Although the Company will undertake development efforts with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that the Company’s efforts to raise funds in the future will be sufficient to enable the Company to develop its technology to the extent needed to create future revenues to sustain operations as contemplated herein.
There can be no assurances that the Company’s technology will be adopted or that the Company will ever achieve sustainable revenues sufficient to support its operations. Even if the Company is able to generate revenues, there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to achieve profitability or positive operating cash flows. There can be no assurances that the Company will be able to secure additional financing on acceptable terms or at all. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its software development programs, or obtain funds, if available (although there can be no certainty), through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to certain of its potential products, or to curtail or discontinue its operations entirely.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company is not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition.
Impact of COVID-19 on the Company
The global outbreak of COVID-19 has led to severe disruptions in general economic activities, as businesses and governments have taken broad actions to mitigate this public health crisis. Although the Company has not experienced any significant disruption to its business to date, these conditions could significantly negatively impact the Company’s business in the future.
The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak ultimately impacts the Company’s business, future revenues, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, its severity and longevity, the actions to curtail the virus and treat its impact (including an effective vaccine), and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Even after the COVID-19 outbreak has subsided, the Company may be at risk of experiencing a significant impact to its business as a result of the global economic impact, including any economic downturn or recession that has occurred or may occur in the future.
Currently, capital markets have been disrupted by the crisis, as a result of which the availability, amount and type of financing available to the Company in the near future is uncertain and cannot be assured and is largely dependent upon evolving market conditions and other factors.
The Company intends to continue to monitor the situation and may adjust its current business plans as more information and guidance become available.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company is not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition.