ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources.
You should read the following description of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and accompanying notes included in this annual report beginning on page.
This section includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “project” and similar expressions, or words which, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from our predictions.
Business Overview
GiveMePower Corporation operates and manages a portfolio of real estate and financial services assets and operations to empower black persons in the United States through financial tools and resources. Givemepower is primarily focused on: (1) creating and empowering local black businesses in urban America; and (2) creating real estate properties and businesses in opportunity zones and other distressed neighborhood across America. This Offering represents the commencement of the Banking and financial services division of our business. This Offering will enable GMPW to become a financial technology company (FINTEC) business that (1) one-to-four branch federally licensed bank in each jurisdiction, (2) a machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) enabled loan and insurance underwriting platform, (3) blockchain-powered transaction processing and payment systems, (4) cryptocurrency transaction processing platform, and (5) emerging cryptocurrency opportunities portfolio; giving access to the unbanked, underserved residents of majorly black communities across the United State. This is the fulfillment of mission of operating and managing a portfolio of real estate and financial services assets and operations to empower black persons in the United States through financial tools and resources, with a primary focused on: (1) creating and empowering local black businesses in urban America; and (2) creating real estate properties and businesses in opportunity zones and other distressed neighborhood across America. Our FINTEC operations would cover the basic areas of traditional banking-digitally enhance, ML and Ai enabled lending and insurance underwriting, areas of private equity, business lending and venture capital that invest in young black entrepreneurs, and seeding their viable business plans/ideas on block-chain-powered financial services delivery platform that connects, black entrepreneurs, black borrowers, consumers, banks, and institutional investors. Our real estate division invests in Opportunity Zones, Affordable Housing, and specialized real estate properties.
Corporate History
GiveMePower Corporation (the “PubCo” or “Company”), a Nevada corporation, was incorporated on June 7, 2001 to sell software geared to end users and developers involved in the design, manufacture, and construction of engineered products located in Canada and the United States. GiveMePower was originally incorporated in Alberta, Canada as GiveMePower.com Inc. on April 18, 2000, to sell software and web-based services geared to businesses involved in the design, manufacture, and construction of engineered products throughout North America. Effective September 15, 2000, the Company amended its Articles of Incorporation to change its corporate name to GiveMePower Inc. The founder of the Company began the implementation of this business plan under his 100%-owned private company, Sundance Marketing International Inc. (Sundance). Sundance has been in existence since 1991 and at one time was a market leader in the distribution of survey, mapping and infrastructure design software in the Canadian marketplace. On April 15, 1999, Mr. Walton entered into a license agreement with Felix Computer Aided Technologies GmbH (Felix) for the exclusive rights to distribute FCAD software in North America.
On December 20, 2000, the Company entered into a Plan and Agreement of Reorganization to undertake a reverse merger with a National Quotation Bureau public company called TelNet World Communications, Inc. (TelNet). TelNet was originally incorporated in the State of Utah on March 10, 1972 as Tropic Industries, Inc. (Tropic). Tropic became United Datacopy, Incorporated on February 24, 1987 which became Pen International, Inc. on March 21, 1994 and then TelNet World Communications, Inc. on March 4, 1998. TelNet had no operations nor any working capital when the Company entered into the reverse merger with it. GMP acquired the rights, title and interest to the domain name, givemepower.com from Sundance on February 16, 2001. In addition, Sundance agreed to assign its existing customer base to GMP and further agreed that it would terminate its license agreement with Felix immediately upon GMP securing its own agreement with Felix. GMP renegotiated the exclusive rights to co-develop, re-brand and distribute FCAD software in North America effective February 16, 2001. Effective July 5, 2001 the Company changed the name of TelNet to GiveMePower Corporation and changed the domicile from Utah to Nevada.
The PubCo has been dormant and non-operating since year 2009. PubCo is a public reporting company registered with the Securities Exchange Commissioner (“SEC”). In November 2009, the Company filed Form 15D, Suspension of Duty to Report, and as a result, the Company was not required to file any SEC forms since November 2009.
On December 31, 2019, PubCo sold one Special 2019 series A preferred share (“Series A Share”) for $38,000 to Goldstein Franklin, Inc. (“Goldstein”), a California corporation. One Series A Share is convertible to 100,000,000 shares of common stocks at any time. The Series A Share also provided with 60% voting rights of the PubCo. On the same day, Goldstein sold one-member unit of Alpharidge Capital, LLC (“Alpharidge”), a California limited liability corporation, representing 100% member owner of Alpharidge. As a result, Alpharidge become a wholly owned subsidiary of PubCo as of December 31, 2019.
The Company’s operating structure did not change as a result of the change of control, however, following the transaction on December 31, 2019, in which Goldstein Franklin, Inc. acquired control of the Company, Goldstein transferred one of its operating subsidiaries, Alpharidge Capital LLC into GMPW to become one of the Company’s operating subsidiaries. As the result of above transaction, Alpharidge Capital LLC became the Company’s wholly owned operating subsidiary of the Company.
On September 16, 2020, as part of its sales of unregistered securities to Kid Castle Educational Corporation, company related to, and controlled by GMPW President and CEO, the Company, for $3 in cash and 1,000,000 shares of its preferred stock, acquired 100% interest in, and control of Community Economic Development Capital, LLC (“CED Capital”), a California Limited Liability Company, and 97% of the issued and outstanding shares of Cannabinoid Biosciences, Inc. (“CBDX”), a California corporation. This transaction was accounted for under the Consolidation Method using the variable interest entity (VIE) model wherein the Company consolidates all investees operating results if the Company expects to assume more than 50% of another entity’s expected losses or gains. The 1,000,000 shares of our preferred stock sold to Kid Castle Educational Corporation gave to Kid Castle, approximately 87% voting control of Givemepower Corporation.
On April 21, 2021, the Company sold Cannabinoid Biosciences, Inc. (“CBDX”), a California corporation, to Premier Information Management, Inc. for $1 in cash. As further consideration pursuant to the stated sales, CBDX returned Kid Castle Educational Inc., the parent Company of GMPW, the 100,000 shares of KDCE preferred stock and 900,000,000 shares of KDCE common stock that CBDX bought in October of 2019. Pursuant to the April 21, 2021 transaction, CBDX ceased from being a subsidiary of GMPW, effective April 1, 2021.
On December 30, 2021, in exchange for the 87% control block held by Kid Castle Educational Corporation, a subsidiary of Video River Networks, Inc. both of which are publicly traded companies with ticker symbols KDCE and NIHK respectively, the Company sold Alpharidge Capital LLC to KDCE.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company therefore include the 12 months operating results of the all wholly owned subsidiaries of Alpharidge Capital LLC. (“Alpharidge”), Community Economic Development Capital, LLC. (“CED Capital”), and the balance sheet represent the financial position as at 12/31/2021 of the Company and subsidiaries including CED Capital, but excluding Alpharidge Capital. Others include subsidiaries in which GiveMePower has a controlling voting interest and entities consolidated under the variable interest entities (“VIE”) provisions of ASC 810, “Consolidation” (“ASC 810”), after elimination of intercompany transactions and accounts.
Current Business and Organization - Subsidiaries
The Company, through its three wholly owned subsidiaries, Malcom Wingate Cush Franklin LLC (“MWCF”), and Opportunity Zone Capital LLC (“OZC”), seeks to empower black persons in the United States through financial tools and resources as follows:
● Opportunity Zone Capital, LLC (“OZC”) Capital Markets and Real Estate operations - Capital Markets and Real Estate operations consist primarily of principal transactions in public and private securities of opportunity-zone domiciled/linked businesses and rental real estate, affordable housing projects, opportunity zones, other property development and associated HOA activities. OZC development operations would be primarily through principal transactions and real estate investment, management and development of subsidiary that focuses primarily on opportunity-zone business opportunities, construction and sale of single-family and multi-family homes, lots in subdivisions and planned communities, and raw land for residential development
● MWCF financial empowerment - MWCF would utilize operate the tools of financial education/training, mergers and acquisitions, private equity and business lending to invest and empower young black entrepreneurs, seeding their viable business plans and ideas and creating jobs in their communities. MWCF is primarily focused on: (1) creating and empowering local black businesses in urban America; and (2) creating real estate in opportunity zones and other distressed neighborhood across America.
● Cash Management, Opportunistic and Event-Driven Investments: The Company keeps no more than 10% of its total assets in liquid cash or investments portfolio, which is actively managed by its directors and officers and invest primarily in equity investments on a long and short basis. The Company’s cash management policy which requires that the Company actively invests its excess cash into stocks, bonds and other securities is intended to provide the company greater levels of liquidity and current income. The Company uses proprietary trading models to capitalize on real-time market anomalies and generate ongoing income in the forms similar to hedge funds. Where necessary, the Company uses seeded entities to pursue real-time market transactions in publicly traded securities including but not limited to stocks, bonds, options, futures, forex, warrants, and other instruments.
Current Business and Organization - CED Capital
Community Economic Development Capital, LLC. (“CED Capital”), a California limited liability company, is a specialty real estate holding company for specialized assets including, affordable housing, opportunity zones properties, hemp and cannabis farms, dispensaries facilities, CBD related commercial facilities, industrial and commercial real estate, and other real estate related services. CED Capital principal business objective is to maximize returns through a combination of (1) generating good profit while making substantial social impact, (2) sustainable long-term growth in cash flows from increased rents, and (3) potential long-term appreciation in the value of its properties from capital gains upon future sale. The Company is engaged primarily in the ownership, operation, management, acquisition, development and redevelopment of predominantly multifamily housing and specialized industrial properties in the United States. This strategy includes the following components:
● Owning Specialized Real Estate Properties and Assets for Income. The Company intends to acquire multifamily housings, economic development real estate properties. The Company expects to hold acquired properties for investment and to generate stable and increasing rental income from leasing these properties to licensed growers.
● Owning Specialized Real Estate Properties and Assets for Appreciation. The Company intends to lease its acquired properties under long-term, triple-net leases. However, from time to time, the Company may elect to sell one or more properties if the Company believes it to be in the best interests of its stockholders. Accordingly, the Company will seek to acquire properties that it believes also have potential for long-term appreciation in value.
● Affordable Housing. Its motto is: “acquiring distressed/troubled properties, securing generous government subsidies, empowering low-income families, and generating above-market returns to investors.”
● Preserving Financial Flexibility on the Company’s Balance Sheet. The Company intends to focus on maintaining a conservative capital structure, in order to provide us flexibility in financing its growth initiatives.
BlackBank, Blockchain-Powered Fintech, Ai and ML Enabled Lending, and CryptoCurrency Deals
The Company intends to actualize its banking and financial services operations goals through acquisition and management of (1) a one-to-four branch bank that is federally licensed in each jurisdiction; (2) a machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (Ai) enabled loan and insurance underwriting platform; (3) blockchain-powered transaction processing and payment systems; (4) cryptocurrency transaction processing platform; and (5) emerging cryptocurrency opportunities portfolio; a combination of three of which would connects consumers, banks, institutional investors, and ensure access to the unbanked and underserved residents of majorly black communities across the United State of America.
(1) BlackBank - Proposed Federally licensed one-four branch bank
Jurisdictionally, GMPW intend to acquire and manage one-four branch bank in each of its relevant jurisdictional domain. Owning/controlling a bank or banks with branches across every urban/black neighborhood in the United States is not our goal. Rather we would be content to own a one-four branch bank in every relevant jurisdiction to allow us to initiate/conduct MAIL enabled and blockchain-powered digitized banking that is accessible to all black person and businesses across the United States. We intend to start our banking acquisition by finding targets that operates one-four branches. We intend to start with the acquisition of one-four branch bank, whose operation and back-office would be migrated unto a Blockchain-powered platform to digitize its entire banking operation to cover and serve all black persons in the United States. We believe that block chain technology is one of the most suited platform to implement, run and manage a U.S. wide digitized banking services whose reach encompasses most black persons living in the United States.
(2) Machine-Learning and Ai (AI) Enabled Lending and Insurance Underwriting Platform
Once it has raised sufficient capital (proposed $10 million offering), the Company intends to launch the Company’s cloud-based machine learning and artificial intelligence lending platform. It is our believe that Machine-Learning (ML) and Artificial intelligence (AI), lending and insurance underwriting platform would enable a superior loan product with improved economics that can be shared between consumers and lenders. The proposed platform would aggregate consumer demand for high-quality loans and connects it to our soon-to-be-build network of ML-AI-enabled investors, lenders and bank partners. Consumers on the MAIL platform would benefit from a highly automated, efficient, all-digital experience. Our prospective bank partners would benefit from access to new customers, lower fraud and loss rates, and increased automation throughout the lending process.
Credit is a cornerstone of the U.S. economy, and access to affordable credit is central to unlocking upward mobility and opportunity. The FICO score was invented in 1989 and remains the standard for determining who is approved for credit and at what interest rate. (Rob Kaufman, myFico Blog: The History of the FICO Score, August 2018). While FICO is rarely the only input in a lending decision, most banks use simple, rules-based systems that consider only a limited number of variables. Unfortunately, because legacy credit systems fail to properly identify and quantify risk, millions of creditworthy individuals are left out of the system, and millions more pay too much to borrow money. (Patrice Ficklin and Paul Watkins, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Blog: An Update on Credit Access and the Bureau’s First No-Action Letter, August 2019).
The first generation of online lenders focused on bringing credit online. Analogous to earlier internet pioneers, these companies made shopping for and accessing credit simpler and easier for consumers and businesses. It was no longer necessary to stand in line at a bank branch, to sit across the desk from a loan officer and to wait weeks or months for a decision. These lenders enabled the emergence of personal loan products that were previously unprofitable for banks to offer. While they brought the credit process online, they inherited the decision frameworks that banks had used for decades and did not address the more rewarding and challenging opportunity of reinventing the credit decision.
GMPW intend to leverage the power of AI to more accurately quantify the true risk of a loan. The ML- AI models would be built to continuously self-upgrade, train and refine many critical components of lending risk analytics and decision-making on a real-time basis. We intend to build discrete ML- AI models that target fee optimization, income fraud, acquisition targeting, loan stacking, prepayment prediction, identity fraud and time-delimited default prediction. These models would be designed to incorporate multiple lending underwriting variables and utilize training dataset that accounts for varieties of repayment events. It is also anticipated that the network effects generated by constantly improving ML- AI models would provide a significant competitive advantage-and more training data would lead to higher approval rates and lower interest rates at the same loss rate
(3) Blockchain-Powered Digital Currency Payment and Financial Transactions Processing platform (“Blackchain”)
The Company intends to acquire an existing, or build-from-the-scratch, a Blockchain-Powered Digital Currency Payment and Financial Transactions Processing platform (“Blackchain”), with home in the BlackBank alongside the MAIL lending platform. Blockchain-powered Payment and Financial Transactions Processing platform would also provide efficient and inexpensive payment platform and merchant services to black businesses across the United States.
The company would establish an exchange network called Blackchain Exchange Network (“BEN”), a Payment and Financial Transactions Processing platform, would be a wholly-owned subsidiary, the BlackBank. We believe Blackchain would be a leading provider of innovative financial infrastructure solutions and services to participants in the nascent and expanding digital currency industry. Blackchain business strategy is floating a Blackchain Exchange Network, or BEN, a virtually instantaneous payment network for participants in the digital currency industry which would serve as a platform for the development of additional products and services. The BEN would have a network effect that would make it valuable as participants and utilization increase, leading to good growth in BEN transaction volumes. The BEN would enable the BlackBank to prioritize, build and significantly grow non-interest bearing deposit product for digital currency industry participants, which is expected to provide the majority of our bank funding in the next two years from finalizing acquisition. This unique source of funding would be a distinctive advantage over most traditional financial institutions and allows BlackBank to generate revenue from a conservative portfolio of investments in cash, short term securities and MAIL enabled loans that we believe generate attractive risk-adjusted returns. In addition, use of the BEN would result in an increase in non-interest income that we believe will become a valuable source of additional future revenue as we develop and deploy blockchain-powered, fee-based solutions in connection with our digital currency initiative. We would also evaluate additional products or product enhancements specifically targeted at providing further financial infrastructure solutions to our customers and strengthening BEN network effects.
Blackchain Business Overview
Once acquired, the Federally licensed one-four branch bank would be such that is already providing banking and financial services including commercial banking, business lending, commercial and residential real estate lending and mortgage warehouse lending, all funded primarily by interest bearing deposits and borrowings. To that up and running banking and financial services operation, we intend to insert a Blockchain-powered payment and transaction processing system and digital currency platform. We intend to pursue digital currency customers and bring them into the BlackBank to bank with us using digital currency. We believe we could effectively leverage the traditional commercial bank platform, the MAIL enabled lending platform and the attributes of the BEN to gain traction in the digital currency banking industry.
We intend to focus on the digital currency initiative as the core of our future strategy and direction. We intend to build a leadership position in the digital currency industry as a result of the BEN to enable us to establish a significant balance of non-interest bearing deposits from digital currency customer base. Over several post-acquisition years, BlackBank would have transitioned from a traditional asset based bank model focused on loan generation to a deposit and solutions based model focused on increasing non-interest bearing deposits and non-interest income. This emphasis on non-interest bearing deposits and non-interest income, is primarily associated with digital currency, will likely result in a significant shift in BlackBank’s asset composition with a greater percentage consisting of liquid assets such as interest earning deposits in other banks and investment securities, and a corresponding decrease in the percentage of loans. Most of our actions would be focused on developing and delivering highly scalable and operationally efficient solutions for BlackBank’s digital currency customers.
(4) Emerging Cryptocurrency Opportunities Portfolio
The emerging cryptocurrency opportunities portfolio is the wildcard of our FINTEC business model. While the goals are clear, because it is a wildcard, there is no outline on what to expect or how it should be run. GMPW needs these flexibilities because many established companies are jumping into the crypocurrency opportunities on a minutes notice. For example, in 2020, Microstrategy decided to move their treasury into bitcoin as part of their cash management strategy. Marathon Patent Group moved into cryptocurrency mining as a business model. Overstock has been in cryptocurrency for a while. Square and Paypal just joined the bandwagon of American companies that try to find and exploit opportunities in the crypto currency industry without abandoning their actual businesses. GMPW’s emerging cryptocurrency opportunities portfolio would not be different. The company would on an ongoing basis evaluate and consider investments into potentially viable cryptocurrency opportunities anywhere.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
We are generating substantially all our revenue from sales of real estate investment property, entrepreneurship development initiative, and principal transactions in proprietary trading operation. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue from real estate sales was $700,385. Compared to combined real estate sales revenue of $1,253,445 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenue is totally related to the cost of acquiring the real estate investment property and the trading securities sold. Cost related to our real estate investment property revenue for the year December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $722,341, compared to $1,179,827 for December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Operating expense was $54,820 for the years ended December 31, 2021, compared to $159,463 for December 31, 2020. Operating expense consists of costs related to office administration and the establishment of corporate governances; and costs associated with our plans and preparations for a future potential capital raise. These expenses also include the costs of conducting market research, attending and/or participating in industry conferences and seminars, business development activities, and professional fees, other general business outside consulting activities. Operating expense also includes travel costs, for third-party consultants, legal and accounting fees and other professional and administrative costs.
We expect that our operating expenses will increase in the future as we add to our personnel and expand our infrastructure to support the requirements of being a public company.
Net Income (Loss)
Net Loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $76,777 compared to Net Loss of $82,980 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Related Party Transactions
The following individuals and entities have been identified as related parties based on their affiliation with our CEO and director, Frank I Igwealor:
Frank I Igwealor
Goldstein Franklin, Inc.
The following amounts were owed to related parties, affiliated with the CEO and Chairman of the Board, at the dates indicated:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $130,685 cash on hand. We anticipate that our cash position is sufficient to fund current operations. We believe that our capital resources, including cash on hand, cash generated from operations, and available capacity on our credit facility, will provide us with sufficient liquidity to meet our strategic objectives, maintain current operations and execute the capital program for the next 12 months and beyond, given current oil price trends and production levels. In accordance with our investment policy, available cash balances are held in our primary cash management banks or tradable securities for short-term liquidity. We believe that our current financial position provides us the flexibility to respond to both internal growth opportunities and those available through acquisitions.
We have limited operating expenses because we live within our means. We have limited lending relationships with commercial banks; however, we are not dependent upon the completion of one or more financings or equity raises to fund our continuing operations. We did not conduct any financings or equity raises to fund our continuing operations during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. While we are systematically pursuing financing to make acquisitions, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in our capital raising efforts. If financial condition will force us to equity raises, any equity financing may result in substantial dilution to our stockholders.
Since 2019, all of our operations have been financed through advances from a company controlled by our president and CEO. As of December 31, 2021, the company controlled by our president and CEO has loaned $315,389 to us, with no formal commitments or arrangements to advance or loan any additional funds to us in the future. We have not yet achieved significant profitability. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need to generate significant revenues to achieve significant profitability. We may never achieve significant profitability.
We will now be obligated to file annual, quarterly and current reports with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the rules subsequently implemented by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board have imposed various requirements on public companies, including requiring changes in corporate governance practices. We expect these rules and regulations to increase our legal and financial compliance costs and to make some activities of ours more time- consuming and costly. In order to meet the needs to comply with the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act, we will need investment of capital.
Management has determined that additional capital will be required in the form of equity or debt securities. There is no assurance that management will be able to raise capital on terms acceptable to the Company. If we are unable to obtain sufficient amounts of additional capital, we may have to cease filing the required reports and cease operations completely. If we obtain additional funds by selling any of our equity securities or by issuing common stock to pay current or future obligations, the percentage ownership of our shareholders will be reduced, shareholders may experience additional dilution, or the equity securities may have rights preferences or privileges senior to the common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time-to-time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board or other standard setting bodies, relating to the treatment and recording of certain accounting transactions. Unless otherwise discussed herein, management of the Company has determined that these recent accounting pronouncements will not have a material impact on the financial position or results of operations of the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements which we have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. In preparing our financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
Critical accounting estimates are estimates for which (a) the nature of the estimate is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and (b) the impact of the estimate on financial condition or operating performance is material.
These significant accounting estimates or assumptions bear the risk of change due to the fact that there are uncertainties attached to these estimates or assumptions, and certain estimates or assumptions are difficult to measure or value.
Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in relation to the financial statements taken as a whole under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Management regularly evaluates the key factors and assumptions used to develop the estimates utilizing currently available information, changes in facts and circumstances, historical experience and reasonable assumptions. After such evaluations, if deemed appropriate, those estimates are adjusted accordingly.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 of our annual financial statements included in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company utilizes ASC 820-10, Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure, for valuing financial assets and liabilities measured on a recurring basis. Fair value is defined as the exit price, or the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants as of the measurement date. The guidance also establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in measuring fair value that maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that the most observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of the Company. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions about the factors market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. The guidance establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1. Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2. Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3. Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. If the inputs used to measure the financial assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
Transactions involving related parties cannot be presumed to be carried out on an arm’s-length basis, as the requisite conditions of competitive, free-market dealings may not exist. Representations about transactions with related parties, if made, shall not imply that the related party transactions were consummated on terms equivalent to those that prevail in arm’s-length transactions unless such representations can be substantiated.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. For employees and directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and for non-employees, the fair value of the award is generally re-measured on vesting dates and interim financial reporting dates until the service period is complete. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. Stock-based compensation expense is recorded by us in the same expense classifications in the consolidated statements of operations, as if such amounts were paid in cash.
Deferred Tax Assets and Income Taxes Provision
The Company adopted the provisions of paragraph 740-10-25-13 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. Paragraph 740-10-25-13 which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under paragraph 740-10-25-13, the Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent (50%) likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Paragraph 740-10-25-13 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. The Company had no material adjustments to its liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits according to the provisions of paragraph 740-10-25-13.
The estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities are reported in the accompanying balance sheets, as well as tax credit carry-backs and carry-forwards. The Company periodically reviews the recoverability of deferred tax assets recorded on its balance sheets and provides valuation allowances as management deems necessary.
Management makes judgments as to the interpretation of the tax laws that might be challenged upon an audit and cause changes to previous estimates of tax liability. In addition, the Company operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions and is subject to audit in these jurisdictions. In management’s opinion, adequate provisions for income taxes have been made for all years. If actual taxable income by tax jurisdiction varies from estimates, additional allowances or reversals of reserves may be necessary.
Management assumes that the realization of the Company’s net deferred tax assets resulting from its net operating loss (“NOL”) carry-forwards for Federal income tax purposes that may be offset against future taxable income was not considered more likely than not and accordingly, the potential tax benefits of the net loss carry-forwards are offset by a full valuation allowance. Management made this assumption based on (a) the Company has incurred recurring losses and presently has no revenue-producing business; (b) general economic conditions; and, (c) its ability to raise additional funds to support its daily operations by way of a public or private offering, among other factors.
Seasonality
Although our operating history is limited, we do not consider our business to be seasonal.
Commercial Real Property
As at December 31, 2021, the Company has no commercial real estate.
Line of Credit
As at December 31, 2021, we have on our book $729,389 classified as long-term debt. This debt is from an interest-free line of credit from a related party.