Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
GMS Inc. (together with its consolidated subsidiaries, “we,” “our,” “us,” “GMS” or the “Company”), through its wholly owned operating subsidiaries, operates a network of nearly 300 distribution centers with extensive product offerings of wallboard, ceilings, steel framing and complementary construction products. We also operate nearly 100 tool sales, rental and service centers. Through these operations, we provide a comprehensive selection of building products and solutions for our residential and commercial contractor customer base across the United States and Canada. Our unique operating model combines the benefits of a national platform and strategy with a local go-to-market focus, enabling us to generate significant economies of scale while maintaining high levels of customer service.
Fiscal 2022 Highlights
Key highlights in our business during fiscal 2022 are described below:
•Generated net sales of $4,634.9 million in fiscal 2022, a 40.5% increase from the prior year primarily due to inflationary pricing, healthy residential end markets, acquisitions over the past year and the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic (“COVID-19”) in the prior year.
•Generated net income of $273.4 million in fiscal 2022, a 159.0% increase from the prior year, primarily due to the increase in net sales noted above, partially offset by increases in related operating costs, the provision for income taxes and depreciation and amortization. Supply chain dynamics have led to high levels of product inflation, which have been the principal driver of both sales growth and incremental profitability, as inflation on sales outpaced operating cost inflation.
•Generated Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP measure, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” in this Item 7) of $566.9 million in fiscal 2022, a 77.5% increase from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to the increase in net sales noted above. Adjusted EBITDA, as a percentage of net sales, increased to 12.2% in fiscal 2022 compared to 9.7% for the prior year primarily due to better operating leverage, as product price inflation on sales outpaced operating cost inflation.
•Completed five acquisitions and opened 13 new branches (“greenfields”), increasing the Company’s geographic footprint and product offerings.
Recent Developments
Acquisitions
Westside. On July 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all the assets of Westside Building Material (“Westside”), one of the largest independent distributors of interior building products in the U.S., for preliminary consideration of $140.1 million. Westside is a leading supplier of steel framing, wallboard, ceilings, insulation and complementary building products serving commercial and residential markets. Westside’s distribution network comprises ten locations, including nine across California (Anaheim, Hesperia, Oakland, Chatsworth, Fresno, Lancaster, Santa Maria, San Diego and National City) and one in Las Vegas, Nevada. The acquisition of Westside was funded with cash on hand and borrowings under our asset based lending facility ("ABL Facility"). For more information regarding our acquisition of Westside, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Ames. On December 1, 2021, we acquired Ames Taping Tools Holding LLC (“Ames”) for preliminary consideration of $226.7 million. Ames is the leading provider of automatic taping and finishing (“ATF”) tools and related products to the professional drywall finishing industry. Ames operates nearly 100 retail locations servicing professionals in the interior finishing market. The acquisition of Ames was primarily funded with borrowings under our ABL Facility. For more information regarding our acquisition of Ames, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other. On June 3, 2021, we acquired the assets of Architectural Coatings Distributors, Inc. (“Architectural Coating”). Architectural Coating is an interior building products distributor in Cleveland, Ohio. On August 2, 2021, we acquired certain assets of DK&B Construction Specialties, Inc. (“DK&B”). DK&B is a distributor of External Insulation and Finishing Systems (“EIFS”) and stucco products through one location in Omaha, Nebraska. On December 1, 2021, we acquired the assets of Kimco Supply Company (“Kimco”). Kimco is an interior building products distributor through two locations in the Tampa, Florida area. Subsequent to the fiscal year end on June 1, 2022, we acquired certain assets of Construction Supply of Southwest Florida, Inc. (“CSSWF”). CSSWF is a distributor of various stucco, building and waterproofing supplies serving markets in the southwest Florida area.
Greenfields
During fiscal 2022, we opened 13 greenfield locations. This included locations in Hickory, North Carolina; Scarborough, Ontario; Denver, Colorado; Jackson, Mississippi; Wilmington, Delaware; Johnson City, Tennessee; Ft. Myers, Florida; Woodlawn, Maryland; Abilene, Texas; Milford, Connecticut; Statesboro, Georgia; Ocean Springs, Mississippi; and Woburn, Massachusetts.
Market Conditions and Outlook
Residential
There has been strong underlying demand for residential products since mid-calendar year 2020. We believe this strength in residential demand has been driven by a combination of factors including favorable demographics, historically low interest rates, low levels of supply of new and existing homes for sale, strong wages amid a solid job market, as well as by changes in workplace habits and preferences resulting from COVID-19. It is expected that the current favorable demand environment for our products will continue throughout calendar year 2022 given the underlying requirements for housing and the gap that has existed between residential starts and completions. The recent uptick in affordability concerns, including higher mortgage interest rates and product and labor inflation as well as geopolitical concerns, creates an unknown that may eventually result in some cyclical suppression of demand over the longer term.
Driven in part by the solid level of residential demand, homebuilders and contractors are facing significant inflationary pressures for products and labor plus supply chain constraints, primarily related to products needed during construction phases outside of those serviced by us, resulting in significantly increased cycle times and a decreased ability to predict project timing, as compared to historical periods. As a result, and as our sales teams work hard to ensure product availability for our customers, and given product inflation, we have experienced an increase in our inventory balances. We expect our inventory levels on a unit basis to return to more normal levels as the supply chain constraints further subside in future quarters.
Commercial
Demand for commercial projects was severely impacted by COVID-19 and has been slow to recover in certain sectors. While construction to support medical, educational and governmental projects has generally rebounded, hospitality and larger office projects, both new and for repair and remodeling (“R&R”), remain tempered, particularly in certain geographic markets. Leading indicators of commercial activity, such as the Architectural Billings Index, as well as our own quoting activity and discussions with customers make us optimistic that we will begin to see a possible recovery in new and R&R commercial projects beginning sometime this calendar year.
As with residential contractors, both we and commercial contractors face significant inflationary and in certain cases availability pressures for fuel, labor, building products and other miscellaneous expenses.
Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results
General Economic Conditions
Our business is sensitive to changes in general economic conditions, including, in particular, conditions in the U.S. and Canadian commercial construction and housing markets. The markets we serve are broadly categorized as commercial new construction, commercial R&R, residential new construction and residential R&R. Prior to the pandemic, we believed all four end markets were in an extended period of expansion following a deep and prolonged downturn. The impacts of COVID-19 caused significant disruption and uncertainty. While the economy showed significant signs of recovery from COVID-19 in fiscal 2022, the economy remains impacted by COVID-19 and its contributory effects. Furthermore, any resurgence or future pandemics may have a negative impact on our customers and the construction industry in general, as it may impact, among others, economic activity, employment levels, consumer spending and consumer confidence, which would decrease demand for new construction and R&R activity, adversely affecting our business.
Commercial New Construction
Our addressable commercial construction market is composed of a variety of commercial and institutional sub-segments with varying demand drivers. Our commercial markets include offices, hotels, retail stores and other commercial buildings, while our institutional markets include educational facilities, healthcare facilities, government buildings and other institutional facilities. The principal demand drivers across these markets include the overall economic outlook, the general business cycle, government spending, vacancy rates, employment trends, interest rates, availability of credit and demographic trends. Given the depth of the last recession and the negative impacts of COVID-19, activity in the commercial construction market remains below average historical levels.
Commercial R&R
We believe commercial R&R spending is typically more stable than new commercial construction activity. Commercial R&R spending is driven by several factors, including commercial real estate prices and rental rates, office vacancy rates, government spending and interest rates. Commercial R&R spending is also driven by commercial lease expirations and renewals, as well as tenant turnover. Such events often result in repair, reconfiguration and/or upgrading of existing commercial space. As such, the commercial R&R market has historically been less volatile than commercial new construction. While there is very limited third-party data for commercial R&R spending, commercial R&R spending has been negatively impacted by COVID-19. However, we believe there are early indications of some recovery in the market.
Residential New Construction
Residential construction activity is driven by several factors, including the overall economic outlook, employment, income growth, home prices, availability of mortgage financing and related government regulations, interest rates and consumer confidence, among others. While housing starts have generally recovered in recent years, activity in the market remains below historical peaks. However, the U.S. residential market experienced an increase in demand and activity during fiscal 2022, as did the Canadian housing market.
Residential R&R
Residential R&R activity is typically more stable than new construction activity. Following a prolonged period of under-investment during the downturn from 2007 to 2011, residential R&R activity experienced above-average growth, which we expect to continue for the next several years. The primary drivers of residential R&R spending include changes in existing home prices, existing home sales, the average age of the housing stock, consumer confidence and interest rates.
Price and Mix Changes
Prices for certain of our products are subject to fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations, tariffs and trade restrictions, and periodic delays in delivery. Certain products we distribute have recently seen extreme price volatility, caused in large part by the contributory effects of COVID-19 and the international conflicts. Price inflation may impact demand for these products while price deflation may reduce our net sales and compress our margins. There is no assurance that we can successfully pass on price increases from our vendors to our customers. In addition, we may experience changes in our customer mix or in our product mix. Our operating results may be negatively impacted if customers require more lower-margin products from us and few higher-margin products.
Acquisitions
Our results of operations are impacted by acquisitions, as we complement our organic growth strategy with acquisitions. During fiscal 2022, we completed five acquisitions. During fiscal 2021, we completed one acquisition. During fiscal 2020, we completed three acquisitions. We believe that significant opportunities exist to expand our geographic footprint by executing additional strategic acquisitions and we consistently strive to maintain an extensive and active acquisition pipeline. We are often evaluating several acquisition opportunities at any given time. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our business acquisitions.
COVID-19 Update
We continue to actively monitor the ongoing impacts of COVID-19 on our business. We will continue to implement, as deemed necessary or advisable, procedures and processes to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers.
To date, our business experienced the largest adverse impact from COVID-19 during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and the first three quarters of fiscal year 2021, primarily the result of the suspension of construction activity related to mandated shutdowns and cancelled, delayed or temporarily paused building projects as customers focused on responding to COVID-19. We also temporarily closed many of our showrooms. The resulting decrease in net sales was more pronounced in our ceilings and steel framing products, as these product categories are tied primarily to commercial construction, which was more impacted by COVID-19 than the residential market. However, the residential market experienced an increase in demand and activity during the latter half of fiscal 2021 that continued in fiscal 2022. Our results of operations and financial condition were not materially adversely impacted by COVID-19 during fiscal 2022.
We may take actions that alter our business operations if required by federal, state, provincial or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and stockholders. Furthermore, while COVID-19 had a limited impact on our financial results and operations during the year ended April 30, 2022, there is no guarantee that COVID-19 will not have a material impact on our future financial results or operations. See Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of risks which could have a material adverse effect on our operations and financial results.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the year ended April 30, 2021 is presented below. A discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the year ended April 30, 2020 can be found under Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 24, 2021.
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations:
___________________________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are non-GAAP measures. See “Non-GAAP Measures” in this Item 7 for how we define and calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, reconciliations thereof to net income and a discussion of why we believe these measures are useful.
(2)Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales.
Net Sales
The increase in net sales during our fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to inflationary pricing, healthy residential end markets and the negative impacts of COVID-19 in the prior year. Also contributing to the increase were acquisitions over the past year. Partially offsetting these increases was one less selling day during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year. The increase in net sales consisted of the following:
•an increase in wallboard sales, which are impacted by both commercial and residential construction activity, primarily due to an increase in price/product mix and slightly higher volume;
•an increase in ceilings sales, which is principally impacted by commercial construction activity, primarily due to an increase in price/product mix and slightly higher volume driven by acquisitions;
•an increase in steel framing sales, which is principally impacted by commercial construction activity, primarily due to an increase in price/product mix and higher volume; and
•an increase in complementary products sales, which include insulation, joint treatment, tools, lumber and various other specialty building products, primarily due to an increase in pricing in certain product categories, positive contributions from acquisitions and the execution of growth initiatives to increase other products sales.
The following table breaks out our net sales into organic, or base business, net sales and recently acquired net sales for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021. When calculating organic sales growth, we exclude the net sales of acquired businesses until the first anniversary of the acquisition date. In addition, we exclude the impact of foreign currency translation in our calculation of organic net sales growth.
___________________________________
(1)Represents net sales of branches acquired by us until the first anniversary of the acquisition date. For the year ended April 30, 2022, this includes net sales from the following acquisitions: D.L. Building Materials acquired on February 1, 2021, Westside acquired on July 1, 2021, Ames acquired on December 1, 2021 and Kimco acquired on December 1, 2021. Our acquisitions of Architectural Coatings and DK&B have been treated as greenfields and are included in base business net sales.
(2)Represents the impact of foreign currency translation on net sales.
(3)Represents net sales of existing branches and branches that were opened by us during the period presented.
The increase in organic net sales was primarily driven by inflationary pricing, healthy residential end markets, growth in complementary products sales and the negative impacts of COVID-19 in the prior year.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in gross profit during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the successful pass through of product inflation, strength in residential market demand, incremental gross profit from acquisitions and the negative impacts of COVID-19 in the prior year. Gross margin on net sales during the year ended April 30, 2022 decreased slightly from the prior year primarily due to challenging price-cost dynamics for certain product categories, partially offset by the impact of inflationary market pricing on sales. Wallboard and steel gross margins were unfavorably impacted by these dynamics while complementary products and ceilings were favorably impacted. Included in cost of sales for the year ended April 30, 2022 was $3.8 million in non-cash charges to increase acquired inventory to its estimated fair value. These adjustments had a negative effect on both gross profit and gross margin as the related inventory was sold.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of warehouse, delivery and general and administrative expenses. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to increases in payroll and payroll related costs, fuel costs, travel costs and facilities costs, which were driven by increased sales volume, inflationary pressures and incremental selling, general and administrative expenses from acquisitions. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of our net sales decreased during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year primarily due to the impact of inflationary market pricing on sales.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of definite-lived intangible assets. The increase in depreciation expense during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to incremental expense resulting from property and equipment obtained in the acquisitions of Westside, Ames and D.L. Building Materials, partially offset by assets becoming fully depreciated during the period. The increase in amortization expense during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to incremental expense resulting from definite-lived intangible assets obtained in the acquisition of Westside, Ames and D.L. Building Materials, partially offset by time-based progression of our use of the accelerated method of amortization for acquired customer relationships.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred on our debt and finance leases and amortization of deferred financing fees and debt discounts. The increase in interest expense during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase in average debt outstanding and an increase in interest rates.
Gain on Legal Settlement
During the year ended April 30, 2021, we received proceeds as part of a class action settlement against certain drywall manufacturers related to purchases made during calendar years 2012 and 2013. The Company recorded a gain on legal settlement of $1.4 million during the year ended April 30, 2021.
Write-Off of Debt Discount and Deferred Financing Fees
During the year ended April 30, 2021, we recorded a write-off of debt discount and deferred financing fees of $4.6 million related to the refinancing of our senior secured first lien term loan facility in April 2021. For more information regarding our debt transactions, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022.
Income Tax Expense
The change in the effective income tax rate during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the impact of state taxes, foreign taxes and stock-based compensation. For information regarding the significant differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and our effective tax rate, see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Summary
We depend on cash flow from operations, cash on hand and funds available under our ABL Facility to finance working capital needs, capital expenditures and acquisitions. We believe that these sources of funds will be adequate to fund debt service requirements and provide cash, as required, to support our growth strategies, ongoing operations, capital expenditures, lease obligations and working capital for at least the next twelve months and in the long term. We also believe we would be able to take measures to preserve liquidity should there be an economic downturn, recession or other disruption to our business in the future.
On November 30, 2021, we amended our ABL Facility to, among other things, increase the commitments thereunder by $100.0 million from $445.0 million to $545.0 million and change the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) interest rate provisions to Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") interest rate provisions. As of April 30, 2022, we had available borrowing capacity of approximately $307.4 million under our $545.0 million ABL Facility. The ABL Facility is scheduled to mature on September 30, 2024.
As of April 30, 2022, we had available borrowing capacity of approximately $23.3 million under our Canadian revolving credit facility (the “Canadian Facility”) that provides for aggregate revolving commitments of $23.3 million ($30.0 million Canadian dollars). The Canadian Facility matures on January 12, 2026.
For more information regarding our ABL Facility and other indebtedness, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022.
We regularly evaluate opportunities to optimize our capital structure, including through consideration of the issuance or incurrence of additional debt, to refinance existing debt and to fund ongoing cash needs such as general corporate purposes, growth initiatives, acquisitions and our stock repurchase program.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth summarized cash flow data:
Operating Activities
The increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the increase in operating results previously discussed, partially offset by an increase in inventory related to ensuring product availability and managing price inflation amid an environment of tight and less reliable supply, as well as an increase in accounts receivable. In addition, in the prior year period we were still conserving cash in response to COVID-19.
Investing Activities
The increase in cash used in investing activities during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a $312.1 million increase in cash used for acquisitions and an $11.2 million increase in capital expenditures.
Capital expenditures during the years ended April 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020 primarily consisted of real estate purchases, building and leasehold improvements, vehicles and IT-related spending. Capital expenditures vary depending on prevailing business factors, including current and anticipated market conditions. Historically, capital expenditures have remained at relatively low levels in comparison to the operating cash flows generated during the corresponding periods.
Financing Activities
The change in cash flows from financing activities during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior year was primarily due to net borrowings of $211.3 million under our revolving credit facilities during the year ended April 30, 2022, compared to net repayments of $87.4 million during the prior year. During the year ended April 30, 2022, we used our revolving credit facilities to help fund the Westside and Ames acquisitions and for general working capital needs. During the prior year, we repaid the proceeds we proactively borrowed in March 2020 due to COVID-19. Also contributing to the change was a $31.3 million increase in repurchases of common stock during the year ended April 30, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and commitments as of April 30, 2022:
___________________________________
(1)Long-term debt includes principal payments on outstanding debt obligations. Long-term debt excludes unamortized discounts and deferred financing fees. As of April 30, 2022, we had $1,072.8 million aggregate amount of debt outstanding, consisting of $504.6 million of our Term Loan Facility due 2025, $350.0 million under our Senior Notes due 2029, $211.1 million under our ABL Facility and $7.1 million of installment notes due in monthly and annual installments through 2025.
(2)Interest payments on long-term debt includes interest due on outstanding debt obligations and commitment and borrowing costs under our ABL Facility.
(3)Represents remaining payments under finance leases, including interest on finance lease obligations.
(4)Represents base rent payments under non-cancellable operating leases.
We may, from time to time, repurchase or otherwise retire or extend our debt and/or take other steps to reduce our debt or otherwise improve our financial position. These actions may include open market debt repurchases, negotiated repurchases, other retirements of outstanding debt and/or opportunistic refinancing of debt. The amount of debt that may be repurchased or otherwise retired or refinanced, if any, will depend on market conditions, trading levels of our debt, our cash position, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations.
We lease certain office and warehouse facilities and equipment, some of which provide renewal options. Rent expense for operating leases, which may have escalating rents over the terms of the leases, is recorded on a straight-line basis over the minimum lease terms. Rent expense under operating leases approximated $65.6 million, $55.3 million, and $55.4 million for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As existing leases expire, we anticipate such leases will be renewed or replaced with other leases that are substantially similar in terms, which are consistent with market rates at the time of renewal.
During fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, we recorded $41.7 million, $27.4 million and $50.5 million for finance lease obligations for equipment and vehicles. We expect to continue to enter in to finance lease obligations for equipment and vehicles in fiscal 2023.
Share Repurchase Program
On November 30, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a common stock repurchase program to repurchase up to $75.0 million of our outstanding common stock. We repurchased 715 thousand shares of our common stock during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 for $35.5 million. As of April 30, 2022, we had $18.8 million of remaining purchase authorization under this share repurchase program.
On June 23, 2022, our Board of Directors approved an expanded share repurchase program under which we are authorized to repurchase up to $200.0 million of our outstanding common stock. This expanded program replaces our previous share repurchase authorization of $75.0 million. We may conduct repurchases under the share repurchase program through open market transactions, under trading plans in accordance with SEC Rule 10b5-1 and/or in privately negotiated transactions, in each case in compliance with Rule 10b-18 under the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The timing and amount of any purchases of our common stock are subject to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, our liquidity, credit availability, general business and market conditions, our debt covenants and the availability of alternative investment opportunities. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and it may be suspended or terminated at any time at our discretion.
Interest Rate Swap
We have interest rate swap agreements with a notional amount of $500.0 million to convert the variable interest rate on a portion of our Term Loan Facility to a fixed 1-month LIBOR interest rate of 2.46%. These contracts were effective on February 28, 2019 and terminate on February 28, 2023.
Debt Covenants
The ABL Facility contains certain affirmative covenants, including financial and other reporting requirements. We were in compliance with all such covenants as of April 30, 2022.
The Term Loan Facility and the indenture governing the Senior Notes contain a number of covenants that limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries, as described in the respective credit agreement and the indenture, to: incur more indebtedness; pay dividends, redeem or repurchase stock or make other distributions; make investments; create restrictions on the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends to us or make other intercompany transfers; create liens securing indebtedness; transfer or sell assets; merge or consolidate; enter into certain transactions with our affiliates; and prepay or amend the terms of certain indebtedness. Such covenants are subject to several important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the Term Loan Facility and the indenture governing the Senior Notes. We were in compliance with all restrictive covenants as of April 30, 2022.
Interest Rates
Our Term Loan Facility includes available interest rate options based on LIBOR. LIBOR publications will end after June 30, 2023, and the United States and other countries are currently working to replace LIBOR with alternative reference rates. The consequences of these developments with respect to LIBOR cannot be entirely predicted; however, we do not believe that the discontinuation of LIBOR as a reference rate in our loan agreements will have a material adverse effect on our financial position or materially affect our interest expense.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of April 30, 2022, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of operating results and financial condition are based upon our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of our financial statements, in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Although these estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact us in the future, actual results may be materially different from the estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and that the judgments and estimates are reasonable.
Business Combinations
Description. We account for business combinations by recognizing the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair value. In valuing acquired assets and liabilities, fair value estimates use Level 3 inputs, including future expected cash flows and discount rates. Goodwill is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions as a part of the acquisition accounting process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the Company’s estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company records adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments arising from new facts and circumstances are recorded to the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Judgments and Uncertainties. Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions about intangible assets, obligations assumed and pre-acquisition contingencies, including uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances and reserves. Critical inputs and assumptions in valuing certain of the intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from customer relationships and developed technologies; the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio; and discount rates.
Effect if Actual Results Differ. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are inherently uncertain. As a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Description. We perform an impairment test of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets annually during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year (February 1) or when events and circumstances indicate goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets might be impaired. Impairment testing of goodwill is required at the reporting unit level. We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of our reporting units with the reporting unit's carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is measured as the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. We evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis or when events or circumstances indicate our reporting units might change.
Judgments and Uncertainties. Application of the impairment tests requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assigning assets and liabilities to reporting units and determining the fair values of reporting units. We estimated the fair values of our reporting units based on weighting of the income and market approaches. These models use significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 inputs, as defined by the fair value hierarchy. Significant estimates and assumptions inherent in the valuations include the amount and timing of future cash flows (including expected growth rates and profitability), the discount rate applied to the cash flows and the selection of guideline companies. The assumptions with the most significant impact on the fair value of our reporting units are those related to the discount rate, the terminal value, future operating cash flows and the growth rate.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions. As of April 30, 2022, we had $695.9 million of goodwill and $84.4 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets. During the year ended April 30, 2020, we recognized a $63.1 million non-cash
impairment charge to write off goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit in conjunction with our annual goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. The primary factors contributing to the impairment was an increase in the discount rate and a decrease in market multiples, combined with a decrease in the reporting unit’s forecasted near-term cash flows, primarily resulting from COVID-19 driven economic uncertainty. The impairment charge was equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value. As of April 30, 2022, we had $138.3 million of remaining goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit. Our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 indicated the estimated fair values of our other reporting units exceeded their carrying values. Our fiscal 2022 and 2021 annual impairment tests indicated that none of our reporting units were at risk of failing the goodwill impairment test. Our impairment tests for indefinite-lived intangible assets for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020 also indicated no impairment. Changes to our business strategy, changes in industry or market conditions, changes in operating performance, a prolonged weakness in general economic conditions, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other similar circumstances could affect the assumptions used in the impairment tests. Although management currently believes that the estimates used in the evaluation of goodwill are reasonable, if the assumptions used in the impairment analysis are not met or materially change, it could cause goodwill to be impaired.
Long-Lived Assets
Description. We depreciate property and equipment and amortize intangible assets over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Estimates of useful lives are based on the nature of the underlying assets as well as our experience with similar assets and intended use. We periodically review estimated useful lives for reasonableness. We evaluate recoverability of long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets, when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to be generated by the assets. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset.
Judgments and Uncertainties. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset requires judgment. Estimates of useful lives can differ from actual useful lives due to the inherent uncertainty in making these estimates. Our impairment tests contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and apply judgment regarding the amount and timing of future cash flows (including expected growth rates and profitability) and the discount rate applied to the cash flows.
Effect if Actual Results Differ. As of April 30, 2022, we had $350.7 million of property and equipment, $370.4 million of definite-lived intangible assets and $153.3 million of operating lease right-of-use assets. During the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, we recorded impairments of $1.0 million and $1.9 million, respectively, of operating lease right-of-use assets due to restructuring plans to close certain facilities. We did not recognize any other material impairment charges for our long-lived assets during the past three years. We did not have any material changes in useful lives for our long-lived assets during the past three years. However, changes in management intentions, market events or conditions, projected future net sales, operating results and other similar circumstances could affect the assumptions used in the impairment tests. Although management currently believes that the estimates used in the evaluation of long-lived assets are reasonable, differences between actual and expected net sales, operating results and cash flow could cause these assets to be impaired.
Income Taxes
Description. Income taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Inherent in the measurement of deferred balances are certain judgments and interpretations of existing tax law and published guidance as applicable to our operations.
We evaluate our deferred tax assets to determine if valuation allowances are required. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider both positive and negative evidence in determining whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The primary negative evidence considered includes the cumulative operating losses generated in prior periods. The primary positive evidence considered includes the reversal of deferred tax liabilities related to depreciation and amortization that would occur within the same jurisdiction and during the carry-forward period necessary to absorb the federal and state net operating losses and other deferred tax assets. The reversal of such liabilities would utilize the federal and state net operating losses and other deferred tax assets.
We record amounts for uncertain tax positions that management believes are supportable, but are potentially subject to successful challenge by the applicable taxing authority. Consequently, changes in our assumptions and judgments could materially affect amounts recognized related to income tax uncertainties and may affect our results of operations or financial position. We believe our assumptions for estimates continue to be reasonable, although actual results may have a positive or
negative material impact on the balances of such tax positions. Historically, the variation of estimates to actual results is immaterial and material variation is not expected in the future.
Judgments and Uncertainties. We consider the probability of future taxable income and our historical profitability, among other factors, in assessing the amount of the valuation allowance. Significant judgment is involved in this determination, including projections of future taxable income. Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various filing positions. Our effective income tax rate is also affected by changes in tax law, our level of earnings and the results of tax audits.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions. Although we believe that the judgments and estimates used are reasonable, changes in estimates and assumptions could materially affect the amount or timing of valuation allowances.
Newly Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are non-GAAP measures. We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. However, we present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, which are not recognized financial measures under GAAP, because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure and allocation, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments and acquisitions.
In addition, we utilize Adjusted EBITDA in certain calculations under our debt agreements. Our debt agreements permit us to make certain additional adjustments in calculating Consolidated EBITDA, such as projected net cost savings, which are not reflected in the Adjusted EBITDA data presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We may in the future reflect such permitted adjustments in our calculations of Adjusted EBITDA.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties in their evaluation of companies, many of which present an Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA margin measure when reporting their results. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in our industry or across different industries.
We also include information concerning Adjusted EBITDA margin, which is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales. We present Adjusted EBITDA margin because it is used by management as a performance measure to judge the level of Adjusted EBITDA that is generated from net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have their limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation of our net income to Adjusted EBITDA:
___________________________________
(a)Represents changes in the fair value of stock appreciation rights.
(b)Represents changes in the fair values of noncontrolling interests.
(c)Represents non-cash equity-based compensation expense related to the issuance of share-based awards.
(d)Represents severance expenses and other costs permitted in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA under the ABL Facility and the Term Loan Facility, including certain unusual, nonrecurring costs and credits due to COVID-19.
(e)Represents costs related to acquisitions paid to third parties.
(f)Includes gains from the sale of assets and impairment of assets resulting from restructuring plans to close certain facilities.
(g)Represents the non-cash cost of sales impact of acquisition accounting adjustments to increase inventory to its estimated fair value.
(h)Represents costs paid to third-party advisors related to secondary offerings of our common stock.
(i)Represents costs paid to third-party advisors related to debt refinancing activities.