Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 9, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
On November 9, 2020, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 7,187,500 Founder Shares of our Class B common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000 or approximately $0.003 per share. On November 19, 2020, we effectuated a 0.8-for-1 reverse split of the Founder Shares, resulting in an aggregate outstanding amount of 5,750,000 Founder Shares. Our Sponsor transferred an aggregate of 125,000 of its Founder Shares to the Initial Stockholders and a Consultant.
On January 20, 2021, we consummated our Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units of the Company, including 3,000,000 Units issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-third of one public Warrant, each whole Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share of Class A common stock. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per share, generating gross proceeds to us of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the IPO Closing Date, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 2,840,000 warrants to our Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, generating gross proceeds to us of $4,260,000. The Private Placement Warrants have terms and provisions that are identical to those of the public Warrants sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering, except that the Private Placement Warrants may be physical (cash) or net share (cashless) settled and are not redeemable so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees. The sale of the Private Placement Warrants was made pursuant to the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
On the IPO Closing Date, $230,000,000 of the gross proceeds from the Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were deposited in the Trust Account with the Trustee. Of the $4,260,000 held outside of the Trust Account, $2,760,000 was used to pay underwriting discounts and commissions, $458,681 was used to repay notes payable to our Sponsor and advances from our Sponsor and the balance was available to pay accrued offering and formation costs, business, legal and accounting due diligence on prospective acquisitions and continuing general and administrative expenses. Funds held in the Trust Account have been invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of one hundred and eighty-five (185) days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. Funds will remain in the Trust Account until the earliest of (i) the completion of the Business Combination; (ii) the redemption of any shares of Class A common stock properly tendered in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of such shares of Class A common stock if we do not complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the IPO Closing Date and (iii) the redemption of 100% of the shares of Class A common stock if we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the IPO Closing Date (subject to applicable law).
On March 8, 2021, we announced that the holders of our Units may elect to separately trade the Class A common stock and Warrants included in the Units on the NASDAQ under the symbols “GNAC” and “GNACW,” respectively. Those Units not separated will continue to trade on the NASDAQ under the symbol “GNACU.”
We may pursue a target business in any stage of its corporate evolution or in any industry, sector or geographic region.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our Public Offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,619,992, which consists of $9,015,866 million derived from changes in fair value of warrant liabilities, $270,990 derived from the change in fair value of the convertible promissory note and interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $21,427, offset by transaction costs related to warrant liabilities of $609,099 operating costs of $2,688,291.
For the period from November 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,282, which consisted of formation expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 20, 2021, the Company consummated the Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 2,840,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $4,260,000.
Following the Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $13,156,274 in transaction costs, including $2,760,000 of underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $9,890,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $506,274 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $2,787,283. Net income of $6,619,992 was affected by items such as, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,015,866, change in fair value of convertible promissory note of $270,990, interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $21,427, and transaction costs associated with the Public Offering of $609,099. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $708,091 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $230,021,427. We are using substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $69,053 held outside of the Trust Account. We are using the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account
released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity, at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than described below.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,890,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. Additionally, the deferred fee includes an additional $0.08 per unit, or $1,840,000 in the aggregate that was due in December 2021. In December 2021, the Company paid $1,825,600 to the underwriters. The fees were paid by the Sponsor and are included as a liability, due to the Sponsor on the balance sheet.
Pursuant to an agreement between the Company and its attorneys, certain fees have been deferred and will become payable only if the Company consummates a Business Combination. If a Business Combination does not occur, the Company will not be required to pay these contingent fees. As of the closing of the Public Offering, the amount of these contingent fees was approximately $342,690. There can be no assurances that the Company will complete a Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption, if any, are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not
solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheets.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Private Placement Warrants and the public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public Warrants from the Units, the public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock (the “Common Stock”). Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Private and public warrants to purchase 10,506,667 shares of Common Stock at $11.50 per share were issued on January 20, 2021. No warrants were exercised during the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from November 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The 10,506,667 potential common shares for outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s stock were excluded from diluted earnings per share in 2021 as the exercise price of the warrants was less than the average market price for the period. The deemed dividend associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is included in income (loss) per common share in the IPO quarter and year to date calculation in which the IPO occurred. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the period.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.