Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that contain the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar words and phrases. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results projected in any forward-looking statement. In addition to the factors specifically noted in the forward-looking statements, other important factors, risks and uncertainties that could result in those differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed under Item 1A to Part I “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. The forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this Annual Report, and we assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Investors should consult all of the information set forth in this report and the other information set forth from time to time in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including our reports on Forms 10-Q and 8-K.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are comprised of Genie Retail Energy ("GRE"), Genie Retail Energy International ("GRE International") and Genie Renewables. In March 2021, the Company modified its management reporting to rename the Genie Energy Services ("GES") segment as "Genie Renewables."
GRE owns and operates retail energy providers ("REPs"), including IDT Energy, Residents Energy, Town Square Energy ("TSE"), Southern Federal and Mirabito Natural Gas. GRE's REPs' businesses resell electricity and natural gas primarily to residential and small business customers, with the majority of the customers in the Midwestern and Eastern United States and Texas.
GRE International holds the Company's interest in REPs that serve retail customers in Scandinavia. It holds 90.8% controlling interest in Lumo Energia Ojy ("Lumo Finland"), a REP serving residential customers in Finland and 97.7% of Lumo Energi AB ("Lumo Sweden"), which serves retail customers in Sweden. GREI previously held 98.8% in Genie Japan that was sold in May 2021. GRE International also holds a 100% ownership of Orbit Energy, a REP operating in the U.K., which was discontinued in November 2021 as discussed below.
Genie Renewables holds Genie Solar Energy, a rooftop solar system sales and general contracting company, a 93.5% interest in CityCom Solar, a marketer of community solar energy solutions, Diversegy LLC ("Diversegy"), an energy broker for commercial, and a 60.0% controlling interest in Prism Solar, a solar solutions company that is engaged in U.S. manufacturing of solar panels, solar installation design and solar energy project management.
Discontinued Operations
In September 2021, we initiated the process of spinning off the operations of GRE International into a separate publicly-traded company. After the initiation of the spin-off process, the natural gas and energy market in the United Kingdom deteriorated which prompted us to suspend the spin-off and start the process of orderly withdrawal from the United Kingdom market. In October 2021, as part of the orderly exit process from the United Kingdom market, Orbit and Shell U.K. Limited ("Shell") agreed to terminate the exclusive supply contract between them. As part of the termination agreement, Orbit was required to unwind all physical forward hedges with Shell which resulted in net cash proceeds after settlement of all related liabilities with Shell. A portion of the net cash proceeds was transferred to us (see Notes 16, Legal and Regulatory Proceedings, to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Following the termination of the contract with Shell, we filed a petition with the High Court of Justice Business and Property of England and Wales (the “Court”) to declare Orbit insolvent based on the Insolvency Act of 1986. On November 29, 2021, the Court declared Orbit insolvent based on the Insolvency Act of 1986, revoked Orbit's license to supply electricity and natural gas in the United Kingdom, ordered that Orbit's current customers be transferred to a “supplier of last resort” and transferred the administration of Orbit to Administrators effective December 1, 2021. All of the customers of Orbit were transferred to a third-party supplier effective December 1, 2021 as ordered by the Court. All assets and liabilities of Orbit, including cash and receivables remain with Orbit, the management and control of which was transferred to Administrators.
We determined that exiting the United Kingdom represented a strategic shift that would have a major effect on our operations and accordingly, presented the results of operations and related cash flows as discontinued operations for all periods presented. The assets and liabilities of the discontinued operations have been presented separately, and are reflected within assets and liabilities from discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID 19)
Starting in the first quarter 2020, the world and the United States experienced the unprecedented impacts of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the impacts of COVID-19 are evident in several key aspects of our business operations and the corresponding financial impact has been mixed. Our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $6.8 million or 1.9% compared to 2020.
Our customer base is predominantly residential, so we benefited from the increased demand for electricity when customers are working from their homes. On the other hand, like other retail energy providers, we suspended our face-to-face customer acquisition programs in March 2020 as public health measures were implemented to combat COVID-19, resulting in a decrease in gross meter acquisitions and a decrease in U.S. domestic meters served. The reduction in gross meter acquisitions decreased our customer acquisition expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 compared to the period before the pandemic. Churn the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, in part, due to our competitors suspending face to face marketing programs.
We did not experience any significant changes in our workforce composition and were able to implement our business continuity plans with no significant impact to our ability to maintain our operations. We continue to maintain strong physical and cybersecurity measures in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and to ensure that we continue to provide services to our customers. We face challenges due to the need to operate with a remote workforce and are continuing to address those challenges so as to minimize the impact on our ability to operate.
Beginning in 2021, public health restrictions have begun to ease in some of our markets which allow us to resume face-to-face sales and marketing. Looking ahead, we expect to see a modest rebound in meter acquisition, however, any reversal of the easing of restrictions would impact that expected rebound.
There are many uncertainties regarding the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring those impacts of on all aspects of its business, including how it will impact our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners. We are currently unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results due to the complexities of the impacts and numerous uncertainties that are beyond the Company's control. We expect to continue to assess the evolving impact of COVID-19 on our business and assets and intend to make adjustments accordingly.
Genie Retail Energy
GRE operates REPs that resell electricity and/or natural gas to residential and small business customers in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Rhode Island, and Washington, D.C. GRE’s revenues represented approximately 85.7% and 85.3% of our consolidated revenues in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively
GRE’s cost of revenues consists primarily of natural gas and electricity purchased for resale. Certain of GRE’s REPs are party to an Amended and Restated Preferred Supplier Agreement with BP Energy Company, or BP, which is in effect through November 30, 2023. Those REPs ability to purchase electricity and natural gas under this agreement is subject to satisfaction of certain conditions including the maintenance of certain covenants.
As an operator of REPs, GRE does not own electrical power generation, transmission, or distribution facilities, or natural gas production, pipeline or distribution facilities. Instead, GRE’s REPs contract with various pipeline and distribution companies for natural gas pipeline, storage and transportation services, and utilizes NYISO, PJM, ISO New England and MISO for electric transmission and distribution. GRE’s cost of revenues includes scheduling costs, ISO fees, pipeline costs and utility service charges for the purchase of these services.
For risk management purposes, GRE’s REPs utilize put and call options and swaps as hedges against unfavorable fluctuations in market prices of electricity and natural gas and to reduce exposure from price fluctuations. The put and call options and swaps are recorded at fair value as a current asset or liability and any changes in fair value are recorded in cost of revenues. The impact of these options and swaps on cost of revenues is relatively small in comparison to the purchases of gas and electricity for resale.
The electricity transmission and distribution operators perform real-time load balancing for each of the electrical power grids in which GRE’s REPs operate. Similarly, the utility or the local distribution company, or LDC, performs load balancing for each of the natural gas markets in which GRE’s REPs operate. Load balancing ensures that the amount of electricity and natural gas that GRE’s REPs purchase is equal to the amount necessary to service their customers’ demands at any specific point in time. GRE’s REPs manage the differences between the actual electricity and natural gas demands of its customers and its bulk or block purchases by buying and selling in the spot market, and through monthly cash settlements and/or adjustments to futures deliveries in accordance with the load balancing performed by utilities, LDCs, and electricity transmission and distribution operators. Suppliers and the LDC’s charge or credit GRE for balancing the electricity and natural gas purchased and sold for its account.
Local utilities generally meter and deliver electricity and natural gas to GRE’s REPs' customers. The local utilities also provide billing and collection services on GRE’s REPs behalf for most of customers and certain local utilities offer purchase of receivables, or POR, programs. GRE’s REPs receive the proceeds less the utility’s fees for purchase of receivables billing and other ancillary services, where applicable.
Volatility in the electricity and natural gas markets affects the wholesale cost of the electricity and natural gas that GRE’s REPs sell to customers. GRE’s REPs may not always choose to pass along increases in costs to their customers for various reasons including competitive pressures and for overall customer satisfaction. In addition, GRE’s REPs offer fixed rate products or guaranteed pricing and may be unable to change their sell rates offered to fixed rate and guaranteed pricing customers in response to volatility in the prices of the underlying commodities. This can adversely affect GRE’s gross margins and results of operations. Alternatively, increases in GRE’s REPs rates charged to customers may lead to increased customer churn.
GRE’s REPs’ selling expense consists primarily of sales commissions paid to independent agents and marketing costs, which are the primary costs associated with the acquisition of customers. Selling, general and administrative expense includes compensation, benefits, utility fees for billing and collection, professional fees, rent and other administrative costs.
Seasonality and Weather; Climate Change
The weather and the seasons, among other things, affect GRE’s REPs’ revenues. Weather conditions have a significant impact on the demand for natural gas used for heating and electricity used for heating and cooling. Typically, colder winters increase demand for natural gas and electricity, and hotter summers increase demand for electricity. Milder winters and/or summers have the opposite effect. Unseasonable temperatures in other periods may also impact demand levels. Potential changes in global climate may produce, among other possible conditions, unusual variations in temperature and weather patterns, resulting in unusual weather conditions, more intense, frequent and extreme weather events and other natural disasters. Some climatologists believe that these extreme weather events will become more common and more extreme which will have a greater impact on our operations. Natural gas revenues typically increase in the first quarter due to increased heating demands and electricity revenues typically increase in the third quarter due to increased air conditioning use. Approximately 44.5% and 47.9% of GRE’s natural gas revenues for the relevant years were generated in the first quarter of 2021 and 2020, respectively, when demand for heating was highest. Although the demand for electricity is not as seasonal as natural gas (due, in part, to usage of electricity for both heating and cooling), approximately 30.3% and 31.8% of GRE’s electricity revenues for 2021 and 2020, respectively, were generated in the third quarters of those years. GRE’s REPs’ revenues and operating income are subject to material seasonal variations, and the interim financial results are not necessarily indicative of the estimated financial results for the full year.
In addition to the direct physical impact that climate change may have on our business, financial condition and results of operations because of the effect on pricing, demand for our offerings and/or the energy supple markets, we may also be adversely impacted by other environmental factors, including: (i) technological advances designed to promote energy efficiency and limit environmental impact; (ii) increased competition from alternative energy sources; (iii) regulatory responses aimed at decreasing greenhouse gas emissions; and (iv) litigation or regulatory actions that address the environmental impact of our energy products and services.
Concentration of Customers and Associated Credit Risk
GRE’s REPs reduce their customer credit risk by participating in purchase of receivable programs for a majority of their receivables. In addition to providing billing and collection services, some utility companies purchase those REPs’ receivables and assume all credit risk without recourse to those REPs for those purchased receivables. GRE’s REPs primary credit risk with respect to those purchased receivables is therefore nonpayment by the utility companies. Certain of the utility companies represent significant portions of our consolidated revenues and consolidated gross trade accounts receivable balance during certain periods, and such concentrations increase our risk associated with nonpayment by those utility companies.
The following table summarizes the percentage of consolidated revenues from customers that equal or exceed 10.0% or greater of the Company’s consolidated revenues in the period (no other single customer accounted for more than 10.0% of consolidated revenues in these periods):
There was no single utility company or customer that accounted for 10% or greater of our consolidated trade accounts receivable at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Purchase of Receivable
Utility companies offer purchase of receivable, or POR, programs in most of the service territories in which we operate. GRE’s REPs reduce their customer credit risk by participating in POR programs for a majority of their receivables. In addition to providing billing and collection services, utility companies purchase those REPs’ receivables and assume all credit risk without recourse to those REPs. GRE’s REPs’ primary credit risk is therefore nonpayment by the utility companies. In the year ended December 31, 2021, the associated cost was approximately 1.0% of GRE's revenue. At December 31, 2021, 80.8% of GRE’s net accounts receivables were under a POR program.
Class Action Lawsuits
Although GRE endeavors to maintain best sales and marketing practices, such practices have been the subject of certain class action lawsuits.
On February 18, 2020, named Plaintiff Danelle Davis filed a putative class action complaint against Residents Energy and GRE in United States District of New Jersey alleging violations of the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 47 U.S.C § 227 et seq. Although Residents Energy and GRE denies any wrongdoing in connection with the complains, the parties settled the matter for a minimal amount which was included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the first quarter of 2021.
See Notes 15, Legal and Regulatory Proceedings, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference.
Agency and Regulatory Proceedings
From time to time, the Company responds to inquiries or requests for information or materials from public utility commissions or other governmental regulatory or law enforcement agencies related to investigations under statutory or regulatory schemes. The Company cannot predict whether any of those matters will lead to claims or enforcement actions or whether the Company and the regulatory parties will enter into settlements before a formal claim is made. See Notes 15, Legal and Regulatory Proceedings, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference, for further detail on agency and regulatory proceedings.
State of Connecticut Public Utilities Regulatory Authority
Town Square Energy
On September 19, 2018, the State of Connecticut Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (“PURA”) commenced an investigation into Town Square following customer complaints of allegedly misleading and deceptive sales practices on the part of Town Square. The Connecticut Office of Consumer Counsel subsequently joined in the investigation. Although Town Square denies any basis for those complaints and any wrongdoing on its part, it cooperated with the investigation and responded to subpoenas for discovery. On June 17, 2020, the PURA notified Town Square that it was advancing it’s investigation by assigning Prosecutorial staff for the purpose of investigating Town Square’s compliance with licensed electric supplier billing, marketing, and licensing requirements, and, if appropriate, facilitating settlement discussions among the parties that contains, but is not limited to, an appropriate civil penalty, extensive retraining of the supplier’s third-party agents, and retention of all sales calls with continued auditing. In the first quarter of 2021, Town Square accrued $0.4 million.
In July 2021, the parties settled the dispute. Pursuant to the terms of the settlement agreement, Town Square paid $0.4 million. Town Square has also, and has agreed to voluntarily refrain, from in-person marketing activities in Connecticut for the period of 15 months. As of December 31, 2021, Town Square’s Connecticut customer base represented 4.8% of GRE’s total meters served and 5.6% of the total RCEs of GRE’s customer base. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Town Square’s gross revenues from sales in Connecticut were $29.0 million.
An RCE represents a natural gas customer with annual consumption of 100 mmbtu or an electricity customer with annual consumption of 10 MWh. Because different customers have different rates of energy consumption, RCEs are an industry standard metric for evaluating the consumption profile of a given retail customer base.
Residents Energy
In August 2020, Residents Energy began marketing retail energy services in Connecticut. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Residents Energy's gross revenues from sales in Connecticut was $0.2 million. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the enforcement division of PURA contacted Residents Energy concerning customer complaints received in connection with alleged door-to-door marketing activities in violation of various rules and regulations. On March 12, 2021, the enforcement division filed a motion against Resident Energy with the adjudicating body of PURA, seeking the assessment of $1.5 million in penalties, along with a suspension of license, auditing of marketing practices upon reinstatement and an invitation for settlement discussions. In the first quarter of 2021, Residents Energy accrued $0.3 million.
In September 2021, the parties settled the dispute. Pursuant to the terms of the settlement agreement, Residents Energy paid $0.3 million and volunteered to withdraw from the market in Connecticut for a period of 36 months.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Critical accounting policies are those that require application of management’s most subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our critical accounting policies include those related to the allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill and income taxes. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from the Sale of Electricity and Natural Gas
Revenue from the single performance obligation to deliver a unit of electricity and/or natural gas is recognized as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit. Variable quantities in requirements contracts are considered to be options for additional goods and services because the customer has a current contractual right to choose the amount of additional distinct goods to purchase. GRE and Genie Japan (during the period prior to its sale in May 2021) record unbilled revenues for the estimated amount customers will be billed for services rendered from the time meters were last read to the end of the respective accounting period. The unbilled revenue is estimated each month based on available per day usage data, the number of unbilled days in the period and historical trends.
Many utility companies in the U.S. offer purchase of receivable, or POR, programs in most of the service territories in which we operate, and GRE’s REPs participate in POR programs for a majority of their receivables. We estimate variable consideration related to our rebate programs using the expected value method and a portfolio approach. Our estimates related to rebate programs are based on the terms of the rebate program, the customer’s historical electricity and natural gas consumption, the customer’s rate plan, and a churn factor. Taxes that are imposed on our sales and collected from customers are excluded from the transaction price.
We recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer as an asset if it expects the benefit of those costs to be longer than one year. We determined that certain sales commissions to acquire customers meet the requirements to be capitalized. For GRE, we apply a practical expedient to expense costs as incurred for sales commissions to acquire customers as the period would have been one year or less. Incremental customer acquisition cost GRE International entities are capitalized and amortized over a range of eighteen and twenty-four months. These costs and the related amortization are recorded within sales and marketing expenses. Total capitalized customer acquisition costs to obtain a contract were $1.0 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021 customer acquisition costs of $0.5 million and $0.2 million were included in other current assets and other assets, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2020 customer acquisition costs of $0.6 million and $0.2 million were included in other current assets and other assets, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheet. We recognized $0.8 million of amortization of capitalized customer acquisition cost for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We continuously monitor our customer relationship periods to ensure compliance with the application of the standard.
Revenues from Solar Panels
Our revenues from sales of solar panels are recognized at a point in time following the transfer of control of the solar panels to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. For sales contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, such as the shipment or delivery of solar modules, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on relative standalone selling prices, or estimates of such prices, and recognize the related revenue as control of each individual product is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses that result from the inability or unwillingness of our customers to make required payments. The allowance for doubtful accounts was $6.4 million at December 31, 2021 and $4.8 million at December 31, 2020. Our allowance is determined based on known troubled accounts, historical experience and other currently available evidence. Our estimates of recoverability of customer accounts may change due to new developments, changes in assumptions or changes in our strategy, which may impact our allowance for doubtful accounts balance. We continually assess the likelihood of potential amounts or ranges of recoverability and adjust our allowance accordingly, however, actual collections and write-offs of trade accounts receivable may materially differ from our estimates.
Goodwill
Our goodwill balances were $11.8 million and $11.9 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Goodwill is not amortized since it is deemed to have an indefinite life. It is reviewed annually (or more frequently under various conditions) for impairment using a fair value approach.
Goodwill is the excess of the acquisition cost of businesses over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets are not amortized. These assets are reviewed annually (or more frequently under various conditions) for impairment using a fair value approach.
The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using discounted cash flow methodologies, as well as considering third party market value indicators. Calculating the fair value of the reporting units requires significant estimates and assumptions by management. Should the estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of the reporting units prove to be incorrect, the Company may be required to record impairments to its goodwill in future periods and such impairments could be material.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1. In reviewing goodwill for impairment, we have the option, for any or all of our reporting units that carry goodwill - to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (i.e. greater than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determines that an impairment is more likely than not, we then required to perform the quantitative impairment test, otherwise no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to quantitative impairment test. The ultimate outcome of the goodwill impairment review for a reporting unit should be the same whether we choose to perform the qualitative assessment or proceeds directly to the quantitative impairment test. In 2021 and 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative analysis for our GRE and GRE International reporting units as of October 1. The Company determined, after performing a qualitative analysis, that there was no evidence that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any identified reporting unit was less that the carrying amounts, therefore, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. We determined, after performing qualitative analysis, that there was no evidence that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any identified reporting unit was less that the carrying amounts, therefore, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. In 2020, we performed quantitative impairment analysis for Prism reporting unit. As a result of this test, we concluded that the carrying value Prism reporting unit exceeded its fair value of reporting unit including the allocated goodwill. Therefore, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $0.4 million.
The determination of the fair value of our reporting units is based on an income approach that utilizes discounted cash flows for each reporting unit and other Level 3 inputs as specified in the fair value hierarchy in ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosure. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on the present value of the most recent cash flow projections for the reporting unit as of the date of the analysis and calculate a terminal value utilizing a terminal growth rate. The significant assumptions under this approach include, among others: income projections, which are dependent on future sales, new customers, customer behavior, competitor pricing, operating expenses, the discount rate, and the terminal growth rate. The cash flows used to determine fair value are dependent on a number of significant management assumptions such as the expectations of future performance and the expected future economic environment, which are partly based upon our historical experience. The estimates are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future results. Additionally, the discount rate and the terminal growth rate are based on judgment of the rates that would be utilized by a hypothetical market participant.
Income Taxes
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowance are impacted by events and transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with special and non-routine items. Assessment of the appropriate amount and classification of income taxes is dependent on several factors, including estimates of the timing and realization of deferred income tax assets, the results of Internal Revenue Service audits of our federal income tax returns, and changes in tax laws or regulations.
The valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets was $10.8 million and $15.7 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We employ a tax strategy that enables us to currently deduct losses from our foreign subsidiaries against our profitable U.S. operations and we assess the realizability of deferred taxes quarterly. Because of our current projections, we concluded that we meet the criteria of more likely than not in order to utilize our deferred federal income tax assets in the foreseeable future and have released the valuation on the assets that we will utilize.
We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that, a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information will examine the position. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured to determine the amount of tax benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the financial statements will generally result in one or more of the following: an increase in a liability for income taxes payable, a reduction of an income tax refund receivable, a reduction in a deferred tax asset, or an increase in a deferred tax liability. We review and adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits based on our best estimate and judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at each reporting date. To the extent that the outcome of these tax positions is different from the amounts recorded, such differences may affect income tax expense and actual tax payments.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements are included in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We evaluate the performance of our operating business segments based primarily on income (loss) from operations. Accordingly, the income and expense line items below income (loss) from operations are only included in our discussion of the consolidated results of operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Genie Retail Energy Segment
Revenues. GRE’s electricity revenues increased modestly in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in electricity revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 was the result of an increase in the average price charged to customers partially offset by a decrease in electricity consumption. The average rate per kilowatt hour sold increased by 4.7% in 2021 compared to 2020. Electricity consumption by GRE's REPs' customers decreased 3.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in electricity consumption reflected a decrease in the average number of meters served, which decreased by 7.7% in 2021 compared to 2020 partially offset by a 4.3% increase in average electricity consumption per meter. The increase in per meter consumption reflects a sustained focus on the acquisition of higher consumption meters, warmer weather during the summer of 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 and increased residential electricity consumption resulting from COVID-19 "stay-at-home" orders in the first half of 2021.
GRE’s natural gas revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in natural gas revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 was a result of increases in natural gas consumption, average meters served, average rate per therm sold and average consumption per meter. Natural gas consumption by GRE's REPs' customers increased by 4.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. Average meters served increased by 3.4% in 2021 compared to 2020 and average consumption per meter increased by 1.3%. The average rate per therm sold increased 10.3% in 2021 compared to 2020.
Other revenue in 2020 included commission from selling third-party products to customers.
The customer base for GRE's REPs as measured by meters serviced consistent of the following:
Gross meter acquisitions in 2021 were 177,000 compared to 212,000 in 2020. The number of meters served on December 31, 2021 decreased by 76,000 meters or 20.5% from December 31, 2020. In 2021, the average monthly churn increased to 5.7% compared to 4.4% in 2020. The decreases in the gross meter acquisitions and a number of meters served and increase in average monthly churn at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was due to termination of a significant aggregation deal in 2021 as well as a “strategic pause” on customer acquisition to protect margins due to unfavorable market conditions in the fourth quarter 2021. GRE REPs also returned some customers to their underlying utility in certain markets to minimize the impact of expected higher prices on our margins.
The average rates of annualized energy consumption, as measured by residential customer equivalents, or RCEs, are presented in the chart below. An RCE represents a natural gas customer with annual consumption of 100 mmbtu or an electricity customer with annual consumption of 10 MWh. Because different customers have different rates of energy consumption, RCEs are an industry standard metric for evaluating the consumption profile of a given retail customer base.
RCEs decreased 22.8% at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 primarily due to the "strategic pause" on customer acquisition and transfer of some customers to their underlying customers as discussed above.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin Percentage. GRE’s cost of revenues and gross margin percentage were as follows:
Cost of revenues for electricity increased modestly in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily because of increases in electricity consumption partially offset by a decrease in the average unit cost of electricity. The average unit cost of electricity increased by 4.7% in 2021 compared to 2020. Electricity consumption by GRE's REPs' customers decreased by 3.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. Gross margin on electricity was flat in 2021 compared to 2020.
Cost of revenues for natural gas increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily because of increases in total natural gas consumption and average unit cost of natural gas. Natural gas consumption by GRE’s REPs’ customers increased by 4.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. The average unit cost of natural gas increased 12.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. Gross margin on natural gas sales decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 because the increase in the average rate charged to customers increased less than the average unit cost of natural gas.
Selling, General and Administrative. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases in marketing and customer acquisition costs and employee-related costs partially offset by a decrease in the provision for doubtful accounts and costs related to POR programs. Marketing and customer acquisition expenses increased by $4.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the expansion of marketing activities to offset the effect of COVID-19 related public health restrictions to traditional customer acquisition methods. Employee-related expenses slightly increased by $0.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in the number of employees. Provision for doubtful accounts and costs related to POR programs decreased by $1.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of an increase in receivables in markets that offers POR programs. As a percentage of GRE’s total revenues, selling, general and administrative expenses increased to 18.0% in 2021 from 17.0% in 2020.
GRE International
GRE International holds our stakes in REPs outside of North America. These businesses currently include our controlling stakes in Lumo Finland and Lumo Sweden and Genie Japan (prior to its sale in May 2021). Lumo Sweden began operations in the second quarter of 2020. GRE International also holds our stake in Orbit, which discontinued operations at the end of November 2021.
In January 2021, weather volatility and the lack of adequate gas reserves drove the prices on the Japan Electric Power Exchange to $2,390 per megawatt hour for an extended period of time. Although our supply commitment for our customers in Japan was hedged reasonably for expected winter weather conditions, the extreme price spike exposed us to further unexpected cost increases. The impact on our 2021 consolidated result of operations was approximately $2.5 million.
On April 26, 2021, we entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement ("Purchase Agreement") with Hanhwa Q Cells Japan Co., Ltd. ("Hanhwa"), pursuant to which, we agreed to sell our interest in Genie Japan for ¥570.0 million (equivalent to approximately $5.3 million at April 26, 2021) subject to certain terms and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement. On May 11, 2021, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of Purchase Agreement, we completed the divestiture of Genie Japan for an aggregate cash consideration of ¥570.0 million (equivalent to approximately $5.2 million at May 11, 2021). Hanhwa also assumed the outstanding loans payable of Genie Japan. We paid $0.6 million of commission to certain former employees of Genie Japan and recognized a pre-tax gain of $4.2 million from the divestiture. For the period from January 1, 2021 to May 11, 2021, Genie Japan had revenues and cost of revenues of $3.9 million and $5.9 million, respectively.
Meters served by GRE International's REPs decreased to 67,000 at December 31, 2021 from 88,000 at December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of the sale of Genie Japan. The Company also started the commercial operations of Lumo Sweden and Genie Japan in the second quarter of 2020 and the second quarter of 2019, respectively.
RCEs of GRE International's REPs at December 31, 2021 decreased to 40,000 from 57,000 at December 31, 2020 primarily from the sale of Genie Japan.
Revenue. GRE International's revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in the electricity consumption and the average price charged to customers partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Genie Japan. Revenues from Lumo Sweden increased by $3.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to a full year of operations in 2021. The electricity consumption of Lumo Finland's customers increased by 30.9% in 2021 compared to 2020 and the average price charged to customers increased by 57.8% in 2021 compared to 2020.
Cost of Revenues. GRE International's cost of revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in the electricity consumption and the average cost of electricity partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Genie Japan. The increase in the cost of revenues is less than the increase in revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in gain recognized from energy derivative contracts in both Lumo Finland and Lumo Sweden.
Selling, General and Administrative. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the sale of Genie Japan in May 2021 partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of Lumo Sweden primarily due to the full year of operations in 2021.
Genie Renewables
The Genie Renewables (formerly GES) segment is composed of Genie Solar, CityCom Solar, Diversegy and Prism, in which we hold a 60.0% controlling interest.
Revenue. Genie Renewables' revenues decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of the discontinuance of a relationship with a customer of Prism in the second quarter of 2020. Revenues from Diversegy include commissions, entry fees and other fees from our energy brokerage and marketing services businesses. Revenues from CityCom Solar include commissions from selling third-party products to customers.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenues decreased in 2021compared to 2020 consistent with the decreases in revenues for the periods. Cost of revenues includes commissions incurred by our energy brokerage and marketing services businesses. Cost of revenue related to Diversegy included commissions incurred by our energy brokerage and marketing services businesses. Gross margin increased significantly due to our focus on higher-margin products and services within Genie Renewables.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily because of the streamlining of operations of Prism and the sale of the Prism facility in October 2020.
Impairment of Assets. Impairment of assets in 2020 pertains to the impairments of property, plant and equipment and customer relationship of Prism as a result of the disposal of Prism's property in New York and renegotiation of the contract with a key customer.
Corporate
Corporate does not generate any revenues, nor does it incur any cost of revenues. Corporate costs include unallocated compensation, consulting fees, legal fees, business development expense and other corporate-related general and administrative expense.
The decrease in Corporate general and administrative expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to expenses incurred related to the final testing of exploratory well in Golan Heights in 2020 and subsequent suspension of operations in Israel. As a percentage of our consolidated revenues, corporate general and administrative expense decreased from 2.0% in 2020 to 1.8% in 2021.
Consolidated
Selling, General and Administrative. Stock-based compensation expense included in consolidated selling, general and administrative expense was $2.9 million and $1.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, aggregate unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested stock-based compensation was $5.9 million. The unrecognized compensation cost expected to be recognized over the average service period of 2.2 years.
As a percentage of our consolidated revenues, selling, general and administrative expense decreased from 20.1% in 2020 to 19.7% in 2021.
The following is a discussion of our consolidated income and expense line items below loss from operations.
nm - not meaningful
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities and investments. The unrealized loss on marketable equity securities and investments in 2021 pertains primarily to the fluctuation of the market price of the Company's investments in common stock and warrants to purchase common stock of Rafael Holdings, Inc. ("Rafael") which the Company acquired in December 2020.
Gain on sale of subsidiary. The gain on sale of subsidiary in 2021 pertains to the gain recognized related to the sale of Genie Japan in May 2021.
Other Income, net. Other expense, net in 2021 and 2020 consisted primarily foreign currency transaction gains and losses and equity in net income of equity method investee.
Provision for Income Taxes. The increase in provision for income tax in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to increases in the amount of taxable income in the various taxing jurisdictions.
Net Loss (Income) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. Loss attributable to noncontrolling interest in 2021 was mainly due to share of noncontrolling interest loss of Citizens Choice ("CCE"), partially offset by share of noncontrolling interest in the income of Lumo Finland and Sweden. Income attributable to noncontrolling interest in 2020 mainly consisted of noncontrolling interest share in income resulting from write-off of intercompany payable of entities within the Company. The income was offset by the share of noncontrolling interest in the losses mainly from Prism, Lumo Finland and Citizens Choice Energy.
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax. As discussed above, Orbit Energy and Shell agreed to terminate the exclusive supply contract in October 2021 which required us to unwind all physical forward hedges with Shell and resulted in a recognition of significant gain due to high prices of the commodity at the date of termination. The gain from the termination of the contract was partially offset by the losses incurred in 2021 and the estimated cost of administration of Orbit Energy following the insolvency.
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax in 2020 is mainly due to gain on consolidation of Orbit Energy in October 2020 which pertains to the estimated fair value of the noncontrolling interest in Orbit Energy immediately prior to acquisition. The gain was partially offset by losses incurred from operations of Orbit Energy.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
We currently expect that our cash flows from operations in the next twelve months and the $95.5 million balance of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents that we held at December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our currently anticipated cash requirements for at least the period from January 1, 2022 to March 16, 2023.
At December 31, 2021, we had working capital (current assets less current liabilities) of $84.1 million.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by continuing operating activities was $21.3 million and $25.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net income from continuing operations after non-cash adjustments increased cash flows by $31.0 million for 2021 compared to $30.0 million in 2020. The increase is primarily the result of favorable results of continuing operations in 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
Our cash flow from operations varies significantly from quarter to quarter and from year to year, depending on our operating results and the timing of operating cash receipts and payments, specifically trade accounts receivable and trade accounts payable. Changes in working capital decreased cash flows by $5.5 million for 2021, compared to 2020. Changes in other assets increased cash flows by $0.8 million for 2021, compared to 2020.
Certain of GRE's REPs are party to an Amended and Restated Preferred Supplier Agreement with BP Energy Company, or BP, which is to be in effect through November 30, 2023. Under the agreement, the REPs purchase electricity and natural gas at market rate plus a fee. The obligations to BP are secured by a first security interest in deposits or receivables from utilities in connection with their purchase of the REP’s customer’s receivables, and in any cash deposits or letters of credit posted in connection with any collateral accounts with BP. The ability to purchase electricity and natural gas under this agreement is subject to satisfaction of certain conditions including the maintenance of certain covenants. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with such covenants. At December 31, 2021, restricted cash-short-term of $0.5 million and trade accounts receivable of $47.0 million were pledged to BP as collateral for the payment of trade accounts payable to BP of $16.7 million at December 31, 2021.
We had purchase commitments of $131.3 million at December 31, 2021, of which $85.3 million was for purchases of electricity.
From time to time, we receive inquiries or requests for information or materials from public utility commissions or other governmental regulatory or law enforcement agencies related to investigations under statutory or regulatory schemes, and we respond to those inquiries or requests. We cannot predict whether any of those matters will lead to claims or enforcement actions.
Investing Activities
In December 2020, we invested $5.0 million in Class B common stock of Rafael Holdings, Inc. ("Rafael"), a publicly-traded company, that is a related party. In connection with the purchase, Rafael issued to us warrants to purchase an additional 43,649 of Rafael's Class B common stock with an exercise price of $22.91 per share. The warrants had a term expiring on June 6, 2022. We exercised the warrants in full on March 31, 2021 for a total exercise price of $1.0 million. We do not exercise significant influence over the operating or financial policies of Rafael.
On May 11, 2021, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Purchase Agreement, we completed the divestiture of Genie Japan for an aggregate consideration of ¥570.0 million (equivalent to approximately $5.2 million at May 11, 2021). We paid $0.6 million of commission to certain former employees of Genie Japan and included $0.1 million of cash in the assets transferred to the buyer for a net proceed of $4.5 million.
In March 2020, the Company initiated a plan to sell the property, plant and equipment of Prism. Prism's 4.75% notes payable to Catskill Hudson Bank were collateralized by Prism's land, building and improvements. In the first quarter of 2020, Prism's property, plant and equipment and notes payable were reclassified as assets and liabilities held for sale and reported at lower of fair value less cost to sell. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a $0.2 million write-down to the fair value of certain property and equipment.
In October 2020, Prism completed the sale of all assets held for sale with an aggregate proceed $2.7 million of and recorded a net loss from disposal of $0.3 million included in the selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. In October 2020, Prism settled the 4.75% notes payable to Catskill Bank previously classified as liabilities held for sale with full payment of the principal amount of $0.9 million.
Our capital expenditures were $0.1 million and $0.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We currently anticipate that our total capital expenditures in the year ending December 31, 2022 will be between $0.5 million and $1.0 million.
In connection with the acquisition of Lumo Finland in January 2019, the Company has a conditional continuing call option to purchase a portion or the entire noncontrolling interest from the sellers during the period beginning at the third anniversary of the Lumo Finland Closing Date and ending three years later.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, Orbit transferred to GEIC a net amount of $49.7 million from the proceeds of the settlement of the contract with Shell which is included in cash and cash equivalents in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. In January 2022, we transferred $21.5 million to the Administrators of Orbit Energy to fund the settlement of the expected remaining liabilities of Orbit of $30.8 million which were included in the current liabilities of discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. In February 2022, we deposited $28.3 million into an attorney trust account which will hold, preserve, and dispense funds to the extent needed in connection with the administration process.
On February 24, 2022, the Administrators filed a petition under Chapter 15 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code with the Bankruptcy Court of the Southern District of New York seeking (i) recognition of the U.K. Administration proceeding as a foreign main proceeding and the U.K. Administrators as its foreign representatives, and (ii) entrusting distribution of the funds the Company deposited into its attorney’s trust fund to the U.K. Administrators. The Company believes that the funds held in its attorney’s trust are secure and more than sufficient to pay any remaining creditors of Orbit (with a significant surplus remaining), and that the petition filed by the U.K. Administrators is wasteful and inefficient. The Company is currently evaluating its response to the petition. The Company does not expect any significant loss from this petition, however, the $28.3 million that was placed in the trust may be restricted until the matter is resolved.
Financing Activities
In each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we paid aggregate cash Base Dividends of $0.6376 per share on our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock. The aggregate preferred stock Base Dividends paid in each of 2021 and 2020 were $1.5 million. On December 31, 2021, the Company accrued Additional Dividends of $0.0848 per share on its Preferred Stock, equal to an aggregate of $0.2 million, in respect of the GRE results of operations through December 31, 2021. See the description of our Series 2021-A Preferred Stock below.
On February 18, 2022, we paid a quarterly Base Dividend of $0.1594 per share on our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock for the fourth quarter of 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 6, 2022.
In March 2021, in light of the losses incurred from the effects of events in Texas and Japan discussed above, the Company suspended the payment of quarterly dividends on its common stock.
On February 9, 2022, the Board of Directors reversed its earlier suspension of quarterly dividends and declared a quarterly dividend of $0.075 per share on our Class a common stock and Class B Common Stock. The dividend will be paid on or about March 1, 2022 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 22, 2022.
In 2020, we paid aggregate dividends per share of $0.33 to stockholders of our Class A common stock and Class B common stock. The aggregate dividends paid in 2020 was $8.7 million.
In 2020, we received minimal proceeds from the exercise of stock options for which we issued 4,133 shares of our Class B common stock. There were no stock options exercised in 2021.
On March 11, 2013, our Board of Directors approved a program for the repurchase of up to an aggregate of 7.0 million shares of our Class B common stock. In 2021, we acquired 230,000 Class B common stock under the stock repurchase program for an aggregate amount of 1.4 million. In 2020, we acquired 233,602 Class B common stock under the repurchase program for an aggregate amount of $1.7 million. At December 31, 2021, 5.9 million shares remained available for repurchase under the stock repurchase program.
On March 21, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company approved a program to redeem up to $4.0 million worth of the Company's Preferred Stock in accordance with the Certificate of Designations for the preferred stock. There were no redemptions under this program in 2021 or 2020.
On February 9, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a program to repurchase up to $1.0 million per quarter of the Company's Preferred Stock at the liquidation preference of $8.50 per share beginning in the second quarter of 2022.
On November 28, 2019, Genie Japan entered into a Loan Agreement with Tokyo Star Bank for a ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) short-term credit facility. Genie Japan provided a letter of credit issued by JPMorgan Chase amounting to ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) as collateral. The outstanding principal amount incurred interest at Tokyo Star Bank's short-term prime rate plus 0.25% per annum. Interest was payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on May 13, 2020. Genie Japan settled the Loan agreement and paid the outstanding balance of ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) on May 13, 2020.
On May 13, 2020, Genie Japan entered into a new Loan Agreement with Tokyo Star Bank for a ¥150.0 million (equivalent to $1.4 million) short-term credit facility ("May 2020 Loan"). Genie Japan provided a letter of credit issued by JPMorgan Chase in the amount of ¥150.0 million (equivalent to $1.4 million) as collateral. The outstanding principal amount incurs interest at 3.0% per annum. Interest is payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on November 13, 2020. On November 13, 2020, Genie Japan and Tokyo Star Bank amended the May 2020 Loan to extend the maturity date to March 13, 2021. At September 30, 2020, $1.4 million was outstanding under the May 2020 Loan. At December 31, 2020, the effective interest rate was 3.0%.
On December 13, 2018, we entered into a Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank (“Credit Agreement”). On December 23, 2021, the Company entered into the third amendment of its existing Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date of December 31, 2022. The Company continues to have an aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million credit line facility (“Credit Line”). The Company pays a commitment fee of 0.1% per annum on unused portion of the Credit Line as specified in the Credit Agreement. The borrowed amounts will be in the form of letters of credit which will bear interest of 1.0% per annum. The Company will also pay a fee for each letter of credit that is issued equal to the greater of $500 or 1.0% of the original maximum available amount of the letter of credit. We agreed to deposit cash in a money market account at JPMorgan Chase Bank as collateral for the line of credit equal to $5.1 million. As of December 31, 2021, there is no issued letter of credit from the Credit Line. At December 31, 2021, the cash collateral of $5.6 million was included in restricted cash-short-term in the consolidated balance sheet.
On April 4, 2017, GRE, IDT Energy, and other GRE subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement with Vantage Commodities Financial Services II, LLC ("Vantage"), for a $20.0 million revolving loan facility. The borrowers consist of our subsidiaries that operate REP businesses, and those subsidiaries’ obligations are guaranteed by GRE. The borrowers have provided as collateral a security interest in their receivables, bank accounts, customer agreements, certain other material agreements and related commercial and intangible rights. The outstanding principal amount incurs interest at LIBOR plus 4.5% per annum. Interest was payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on April 3, 2020. In April 2020, the revolving line of credit expired and we paid outstanding balance of $3.5 million.
On December 11, 2019, Prism refinance the 5.95% notes payable to Catskill Hudson Bank that were due in November 2019. The outstanding balance of notes payable of $0.9 million December 11, 2019 was payable in monthly equal installments for period of ten years. The outstanding principal amount incurred fixed interest at 4.75% per annum. The notes payable were secured by Prism's commercial property in Highland, New York. In March 2020, the outstanding balance of the notes payable was transferred to liabilities held for sale. On October 16, 2020, Prism settled the notes payable to Catskill Bank previously classified as liabilities held for sale with full payment of the principal amount of $0.8 million
In 2021, we paid $1.4 million to repurchase 230,000 shares of our Class B common stock, and, in 2020, we paid $1.7 million to repurchase 266,602 shares of our Class B common stock tendered by our employees to satisfy tax withholding obligations in connection with the lapsing of restrictions on awards of restricted stock. Such shares were repurchased by us based on their fair market value on the trading day immediately prior to the vesting date.
Series 2012-A Preferred Stock
At December 31, 2021, there were 2.3 million shares of our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock issued and outstanding with an aggregate liquidation preference of $19.7 million. Each share of our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock has a liquidation preference of $8.50 (the “Liquidation Preference”), and is entitled to receive an annual dividend per share equal to the sum of (i) $0.6375 (the “Base Dividend”) plus (ii) seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the quotient obtained by dividing (A) the amount by which the EBITDA for a fiscal year of our retail energy provider business exceeds $32 million by (B) 8,750,000 (the “Additional Dividend”), payable in cash. EBITDA consists of income (loss) from operations exclusive of depreciation and amortization and other operating gains (losses).
The Series 2012-A Preferred Stock is redeemable, in whole or in part, at our option following October 11, 2017 at 101% of the Liquidation Preference plus accrued and unpaid dividends, and 100% of the Liquidation Preference plus accrued and unpaid dividends following October 11, 2018.
During any period when we have failed to pay a dividend on the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock and until all unpaid dividends have been paid in full, we are prohibited from paying dividends or distributions on our Class B or Class A common stock.
The Base Dividend is payable (if declared by our Board of Directors, and accrued, if not declared) quarterly on each February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15, and to the extent that there is any Additional Dividend payable with respect to a fiscal year, it will be paid to holders of Series 2012-A Preferred Stock with the May dividend. With respect to the payment of dividends and amounts upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up, the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock is equal in rank to all other equity securities we issue, the terms of which specifically provide that such equity securities rank on a parity with the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock with respect to dividend rights or rights upon our liquidation, dissolution or winding up; senior to our common stock; and junior to all of our existing and future indebtedness.
Each share of Series 2012-A Preferred Stock has the same voting rights as a share of Class B common stock, except on certain matters that only impact our common stock, as well as additional voting rights on specific matters or upon the occurrence of certain events.
Cash flows from discontinued operations
Cash provided by discontinued operations was $45.7 million in 2021 compared to net cash used in discontinued operations of $2.5 million in 2020. Net income from discontinued operations after non-cash adjustments increased cash flows by $40.5 million for 2021 compared to a decrease of $1.5 million in 2020. The increase is primarily from gain from the unwinding of the contract of Orbit Energy with Shell as discussed above. Changes in assets and liabilities of discontinued operations increased cash flows by $5.2 million in 2021, compared to a decrease of $0.4 million in 2020.
Cash flows used in investing activities of discontinued operations were $0.5 million in 2020. There was no cash used in investing activities in discontinued operations in 2021.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following table quantifies our future contractual obligations and other commercial commitments at December 31, 2021:
Payments Due by Period
(1) The above table does not include amounts related to call option and a put option related to the noncontrolling interest in connection with the acquisition of Lumo Finland due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any such payments.
(2)
The above table does not include the financing made available to New Atid of up to $0.4 million due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any financing to be provided.
(3)
The above table does not include an aggregate of $13.5 million in performance bonds at December 31, 2021 due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any payments.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined in relevant SEC regulations that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, other than the following. GRE has performance bonds issued through a third party for the benefit of certain utility companies and for various states in order to comply with the states’ financial requirements for retail energy providers. At December 31, 2021, the Company had outstanding aggregate performance bonds of $13.7 million and $2.3 million of unused letters of credit.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
For information concerning climate change, see "Climate change" in Item I.