ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The MD&A generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
We are a Marshall Islands company that transports iron ore, coal, grain, steel products and other drybulk cargoes along worldwide shipping routes through the ownership and operation of drybulk carrier vessels. Our fleet currently consists of 44 drybulk carriers, including 17 Capesize drybulk carriers, 15 Ultramax drybulk carriers, and twelve Supramax drybulk carriers with an aggregate carrying capacity of approximately 4,636,000 deadweight tons (“dwt”). The average age of our current fleet is approximately 10.0 years. We seek to deploy our vessels on time charters, spot market voyage charters, spot market-related time charters or in vessel pools trading in the spot market, to reputable charterers. The majority of the vessels in our current fleet are presently engaged under time charter and spot market voyage charters that expire (assuming the option periods in the time charters are not exercised) between February 2022 and September 2023.
See pages 5 - 7 for a table of our current fleet.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus strain, or COVID-19, to be a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Over the course of the pandemic, governments have implemented measures in an effort to contain the virus, including social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, limitations on public gatherings, working from home, supply chain logistical changes, and closure of non-essential businesses. This led to a significant slowdown in overall economic activity levels globally and a decline in demand for certain of the raw materials that our vessels transport.
Drybulk shipping rates, and therefore our voyage revenues, depend to a significant degree on global economic activity levels and specifically, economic activity in China. As the world’s second largest economy, China is the largest importer of drybulk commodities globally, which drives demand for iron ore, coal and other cargoes we carry. In particular, starting in the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in reduced industrial activity in China on which our business is substantially dependent, with temporary closures of factories and other facilities. The pandemic resulted in a 6.8% contraction in China’s GDP during the first quarter of 2020, with the most significant impact occurring in January and February. Since March 2020, China’s economy has substantially improved, as various economic indicators such as fixed asset investment and industrial production rose as compared to the previous months of the year, which led to a return to GDP growth for the balance of 2020 and into 2021. Demand for the commodities that we carry continued to increase through 2021, which positively impacted the rate our vessels earned. Economic activity levels in regions outside of China declined significantly beginning in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into the second quarter of the year due to various forms of nationwide shutdowns being imposed to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Over time, several economies around the world gradually eased measures taken earlier in 2020 resulting in
improved activity levels from earlier year lows and leading to a demand rebound for 2021. Although rebounding economies around the world have had a positive impact on our revenues in 2021, our vessel operating expenses continued to be affected by higher than anticipated costs related to COVID-19 disruptions. The impact of COVID-19 on both our revenues and operating expenses remains highly dependent on the trajectory of COVID-19, potential variants, as well as vaccine distribution and efficacy, which remains uncertain.
While China-led global economic activity levels have improved, the outlook for China and the rest of the world remains uncertain and is highly dependent on the path of COVID-19 and measures taken by governments around the world in response to it. Drybulk commodities that are closely tied to global GDP growth and energy demand, experienced reduced trade flows in 2020 due to lower end user demand resulting from a decline in global economic activity. As countries worldwide gradually reopened their respective economies in mid-2020, trade flows and demand for raw materials increased. Drybulk spot freight rates rebounded from the 2020 lows towards the end of the second quarter and remained firm in the second half of 2020. In 2021, spot rates for Capesize and Supramax vessels reached levels not seen since 2010. While vaccinations are rising in developed countries, developing countries vaccination rates have lagged. Global vaccination rates, vaccine effectiveness together with the onset of variants, could impact the sustainability of this recovery in addition to drybulk specific seasonality described in further detail below.
As our vessels trade commodities globally, we have taken measures to safeguard our crew and work toward preventing the spread of COVID-19. Crew members have received gloves, face masks, hand sanitizer, goggles and handheld thermometers. Genco requires its vessel crews to wear masks when in contact with other individuals who board the vessel. We continue to monitor the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) and the WHO guidelines and are also limiting access of shore personnel boarding our vessels. Specifically, no shore personnel with fever or respiratory symptoms are allowed on board, and those that are allowed on board are restricted to designated areas that are thoroughly cleaned after their use. Face masks are also provided to shore personnel prior to boarding a vessel. Precautionary materials are posted in common areas to supplement safety training while personal hygiene best practices are strongly encouraged on board.
We have implemented protocols with regard to crew rotations to keep our crew members safe and healthy which includes polymerase chain reaction (PCR) antibody testing as well as a 10-day quarantine period prior to boarding a vessel. Genco is enacting crew changes where permitted by regulations of the ports and of the country of origin of the mariners, in addition to strict protocols that safeguard our crews against COVID-19 exposure. Crew rotations have been challenging due to port and travel restrictions globally, as well as promoting the health and safety of both on and off signing crew members.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures to contain its spread thus have negatively impacted and could continue to impact regional and global economies and trade patterns in markets in which we operate, the way we operate our business, and the businesses of our charterers and suppliers. These impacts may continue or become more severe. Although we have successfully completed many crew changes over the course of the pandemic to date, additional crew changes could remain challenging due to COVID-19 related factors. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors we cannot reliably predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business, and individuals’ actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity, including the possibility of recession or financial market instability.
IMO 2020 Compliance
On October 27, 2016, the Marine Environment Protection Committee (“MEPC”) of the International Maritime Organization (“IMO”) announced the ratification of regulations mandating reduction in sulfur emissions from 3.5% currently to 0.5% as of the beginning of 2020 rather than pushing the deadline back to 2025. Accordingly, ships now have to reduce sulfur emissions, for which the principal solutions are the use of exhaust gas cleaning systems (“scrubbers”) or buying fuel with low sulfur content. If a vessel is not retrofitted with a scrubber, it will need to use low sulfur fuel, which is currently more expensive than standard marine fuel containing 3.5% sulfur content. This increased demand for low sulfur fuel resulted in an increase in prices for such fuel during the beginning of 2020. Following a
decrease during the second quarter of 2020, fuel prices began to increase again during the third quarter of 2020 and continue to increase due to such demand.
In order to comply with regulations mandating a reduction in sulfur emissions from 3.5% to 0.5% as of the beginning of 2020, we have installed exhaust gas cleaning systems (“scrubbers”) on our 17 Capesize vessels, 16 of which were completed during 2019 and one of which was completed beginning in 2020. We will continue to evaluate all options to comply with IMO regulations. Our fuel costs and fuel inventories may increase as a result of these sulfur emission regulations. Low sulfur fuel is more expensive than standard marine fuel containing 3.5% sulfur content and may become more expensive or difficult to obtain as a result of increased demand. If the cost differential between low sulfur fuel and high sulfur fuel is significantly higher than anticipated, or if low sulfur fuel is not available at ports on certain trading routes, it may not be feasible or competitive to operate vessels on certain trading routes without installing scrubbers or without incurring deviation time to obtain compliant fuel. Conversely, if the cost differential between low sulfur fuel and high sulfur fuel is significantly lower than anticipated, or if regulations are passed negatively impacting the use of open-loop scrubbers, we may not realize the economic benefits or recover the cost of the scrubbers we have installed. In addition, a number of countries have imposed restrictions on the discharge of wash water from open loop scrubbers within their port limits. While there are no restrictions on using open loop scrubbers outside of port limits, any changes in these regulations or more stringent standards globally could impact the use of open loop scrubbers going forward.
Vessel Sales and Acquisitions
On July 2, 2021, we entered into an agreement to purchase two 2017-built, 63,000 dwt Ultramax vessels for a purchase price of $24.6 million each, which were renamed the Genco Mayflower and Genco Constellation, and one 2014-built, 63,000 dwt Ultramax vessel for a purchase price of $21.9 million, which was renamed the Genco Madeleine. The Genco Mayflower, the Genco Constellation and the Genco Madeleine were delivered on August 24, 2021, September 3, 2021 and August 23, 2021, respectively and we used cash on hand to finance the purchases.
On May 18, 2021, we entered into agreements to acquire two 2022-built 61,000 dwt newbuilding Ultramax vessels from Dalian Cosco KHI Ship Engineering Co. Ltd. for a purchase price of $29.2 million each, which were renamed the Genco Mary and the Genco Laddey. The vessels were delivered on January 6, 2022 and we used cash on hand to finance the purchases.
On April 20, 2021, we entered into an agreement to purchase a 2016-built, 64,000 dwt Ultramax vessel for a purchase price of $20.2 million, to be renamed the Genco Enterprise. The vessel was delivered on August 23, 2021 and we used cash on hand to finance the purchase.
On December 17, 2020, we entered into an agreement to acquire three modern, eco Ultramax vessels in exchange for six of our older Handysize vessels. The Genco Magic, a 2014-built Ultramax vessel, and the Genco Vigilant and the Genco Freedom, both 2015-built Ultramax vessels, were delivered to the Company on December 23, 2020, January 28, 2021 and February 20, 2021, respectively. We delivered the Genco Ocean, the Baltic Cove and Baltic Fox, all 2010-built Handysize vessels, and the Genco Spirit, the Genco Avra and the Genco Mare, all 2011-built Handysize vessels, on December 29, 2020, January 30, 2021, February 2, 2021, February 15, 2021, February 21, 2021 and February 24, 2021, respectively.
During 2021, we completed the sale of five Supramax vessels and six Handysize vessels, which includes five of the Handysize vessels in the exchange described above.
During 2020, we completed the sale of nine of our vessels, including one of the vessels in the exchange described above. Three vessels were classified as held for as of December 31, 2020 and the remaining five Handysize vessels were classified as held for exchange as of December 31, 2020.
We will continue to seek opportunities to renew our fleet going forward.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that the following table reflects important measures for analyzing trends in our results of operations. The table reflects our ownership days, chartered-in days, available days, operating days, fleet utilization, TCE rates and daily vessel operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 on a consolidated basis.
(1) Ownership days. We define ownership days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which each vessel in our fleet has been owned by us. Ownership days are an indicator of the size of our fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of expenses that we record during a period.
(2) Chartered-in days. We define chartered-in days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which we chartered-in third party vessels.
(3) Available days (owned and chartered-in fleet). We define available days as the number of our ownership days and chartered-in days less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to familiarization upon acquisition, repairs or repairs under guarantee, vessel upgrades or special surveys. Companies in the shipping industry generally use available days to measure the number of days in a period during which vessels should be capable of generating revenues.
(4) Available days (owned fleet). We define available days for the owned fleet as available days less chartered-in days.
(5) Operating days. We define operating days as the number of our total available days in a period less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to unforeseen circumstances. The shipping industry uses operating days to measure the aggregate number of days in a period during which vessels actually generate revenues.
(6) Fleet utilization. We calculate fleet utilization as the number of our operating days during a period divided by the number of ownership days plus chartered-in days less drydocking days.
(7) Time Charter Equivalent (“TCE”). We define TCE rates as our voyage revenues less voyage expenses and charter-hire expenses, divided by the number of the available days of our owned fleet during the period. TCE rate is a common shipping industry performance measure used primarily to compare daily earnings generated by vessels on time charters with daily earnings generated by vessels on voyage charters, because charterhire rates for vessels on voyage charters are generally not expressed in per-day amounts while charterhire rates for vessels on time charters generally are expressed in such amounts.
(8) Daily vessel operating expenses. We define daily vessel operating expenses to include crew wages and related costs, the cost of insurance, expenses relating to repairs and maintenance (excluding drydocking), the costs of spares and consumable stores, tonnage taxes and other miscellaneous expenses. Daily vessel operating expenses are calculated by dividing vessel operating expenses by ownership days for the relevant period.
Operating Data
The following tables represent the operating data and certain balance sheet and other data as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 on a consolidated basis.
(1) EBITDA represents net income (loss) attributable to Genco Shipping & Trading Limited plus net interest expense, taxes and depreciation and amortization. EBITDA is included because it is used by management and certain investors as a measure of operating performance. EBITDA is used by analysts in the shipping industry as a common
performance measure to compare results across peers. Our management uses EBITDA as a performance measure in our consolidated internal financial statements, and it is presented for review at our board meetings. We believe that EBITDA is useful to investors as the shipping industry is capital intensive which often results in significant depreciation and cost of financing. EBITDA presents investors with a measure in addition to net income to evaluate our performance prior to these costs. EBITDA is not an item recognized by U.S. GAAP (i.e., non-GAAP measure) and should not be considered as an alternative to net income, operating income or any other indicator of a company’s operating performance required by U.S. GAAP. EBITDA is not a measure of liquidity or cash flows as shown in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The definition of EBITDA used here may not be comparable to that used by other companies. The following table demonstrates our calculation of EBITDA and provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to net income (loss) attributable to Genco Shipping & Trading Limited for each of the periods presented above:
Results of Operations
VOYAGE REVENUES-
Our revenues are driven primarily by the number of vessels in our fleet, the number of days during which our vessels operate, the type of fixture our vessels are chartered on (spot market voyage charters or fixed rate time charters), and the amount of daily charterhire or freight rates that our vessels earn, that, in turn, are affected by a number of factors, including:
● the duration of our charters;
● our decisions relating to vessel acquisitions and disposals;
● the amount of time that we spend positioning our vessels;
● the amount of time that our vessels spend in drydock undergoing repairs;
● maintenance and upgrade work;
● the age, condition and specifications of our vessels;
● levels of supply and demand in the drybulk shipping industry; and
● other factors affecting spot market charter rates for drybulk carriers.
During 2021, voyage revenues increased by $191.6 million, or 53.9%, to $547.1 million as compared to $355.6 million during 2020. The increase in voyage revenues was primarily due to higher rates achieved by both our major and minor bulk vessels, as well as our third party time chartered-in vessels, which was partially offset by the operation of fewer vessels in our fleet. In 2021, drybulk freight rates reached decade highs led by a rise in iron ore shipments from Brazil and Australia, strong global economic activity, higher port congestion, increased demand for coal due to tightness
in the energy complex and manageable net fleet growth due to the historically low orderbook. In early 2022 to date, rates have declined from the levels seen during the second half of 2021. Various seasonal factors are currently influencing freight rates including weather related cargo disruptions in Brazil reducing iron ore volumes, the timing of the Lunar New Year in China, the Beijing Olympics, as well as the frontloaded nature of the orderbook. Additionally, Indonesia imposed a temporary coal export ban during the month of January 2022 in order to rebuild domestic stockpiles.
The average Time Charter Equivalent (“TCE”) rate of our overall fleet increased by 138.7% to $24,402 a day during 2021 from $10,221 a day during 2020. The TCE for our major bulk vessels increased by 82.2% from $14,977 a day during 2020 to $27,293 a day during 2021. This increase was primarily a result of higher rates achieved by our Capesize vessels. The TCE for our minor bulk vessels increased by 186.0% from $7,832 a day during 2020 to $22,397 a day during 2021 primarily a result of higher rates achieved by our Ultramax and Supramax vessels.
For 2021 and 2020, we had ownership days of 15,176.5 days and 18,956.8 days, respectively. The decrease in ownership days is primarily due to the sale of nine vessels during 2020 and eleven vessels during 2021, partially offset by the delivery of one and six vessels during 2020 and 2021, respectively. Fleet utilization increased marginally from 97.1% during 2020 to 97.9% during 2021.
Please see pages 8 - 9 for a table that sets forth information about the current employment of the vessels in our fleet.
VOYAGE EXPENSES-
In time charters, spot market-related time charters and pool agreements, operating costs including crews, maintenance and insurance are typically paid by the owner of the vessel and specified voyage costs such as fuel and port charges are paid by the charterer. These expenses are borne by the Company during spot market voyage charters. There are certain other non-specified voyage expenses such as commissions which are typically borne by us. Voyage expenses include port and canal charges, fuel (bunker) expenses and brokerage commissions payable to unaffiliated third parties. Port and canal charges and bunker expenses primarily increase in periods during which vessels are employed on spot market voyage charters because these expenses are for the account of the vessel owner. At the inception of a time charter, we record the difference between the cost of bunker fuel delivered by the terminating charterer and the bunker fuel sold to the new charterer as a gain or loss within voyage expenses. Voyage expenses also include the cost of bunkers consumed during short-term time charters pursuant to the terms of the time charter agreement. Additionally, we may record lower of cost and net realizable value adjustments to re-value the bunker fuel on a quarterly basis for certain time charter agreements where the inventory is subject to gains and losses. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Voyage expenses were $146.2 million and $157.0 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to the operation of fewer vessels, partially offset by higher bunker expenses and certain costs incurred related to our spot market voyages.
VESSEL OPERATING EXPENSES-
Vessel operating expenses decreased by $5.3 million from $87.4 million during 2020 to $82.1 million during 2021. This decrease was primarily due to fewer owned vessels during 2021 as compared to 2020, partially offset by higher crew expenses as a result of COVID-19 related expenses and disruptions. Restrictions on crew rotations led to a temporary decline in crewing related expenses during the first half of 2020. However, such costs began to increase in June 2020, which also contributed to higher crew related expenses during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Daily vessel operating expenses (“DVOE”) for our fleet increased to $5,409 per vessel per day during 2021 from $4,612 per vessel per day during 2020. The increase in daily vessel operating expenses was predominantly due to higher crew expenses as a result of COVID-19 related expenses and disruptions. We believe daily vessel operating expenses are best measured for comparative purposes over a 12-month period in order to take into account all of the expenses that each vessel in our fleet will incur over a full year of operation. Our actual daily vessel operating expenses per vessel per day for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $409 above the original weighted-average budgeted rate of $5,000 per vessel per day.
As a result of COVID-19 restrictions with regard to crew rotations, we expect higher crew related costs due to ongoing travel and port restrictions. Together with promoting the health of the on-signing crew boarding the ship while the off-signing crew gets home safely, these have all been increasing challenges that shipowners are facing globally. The timing of crew rotations remains dependent on the duration and severity of COVID-19 in countries from which our crews are sourced as well as any restrictions in place at ports in which our vessels call. As crew members worldwide have in many cases (including on certain of our vessels) exceeded the duration of their contracts, there is an increased urgency to work towards completing more crew rotations in the coming months. Given this urgency, since June 2020, certain of these crew rotations have led to and could continue to lead to additional deviation time of our vessels as well as unbudgeted expenses due to testing, PPE, quarantine periods, higher than normal travel expenses due to increased airfare costs, and crew bonuses to retain the existing crew during rotation delays.
Our vessel operating expenses, which generally represent fixed costs for each vessel, increase to the extent our fleet expands. Other factors beyond our control, some of which may affect the shipping industry in general, including, for instance, developments relating to market prices for crewing, lubes, and insurance, may also cause these expenses to increase. The impact of COVID-19 could result in potential shortages or a lack of access to required spare parts for the operation of our vessels, potential delays in any unscheduled repairs, deviations for crew changes or increased costs to successfully execute a crew change, which could lead to business disruptions and delays. We expect that crew costs for the crew that we utilize on our vessels will increase going forward due to expected higher wages, as well as the impact of COVID-19 restrictions. We also expect higher costs during 2022 in relation to crew, spares and parts primarily due to industry-wide inflationary pressures and higher regulatory-related costs.
Based on estimates provided by our technical managers, our DVOE budget for the first quarter of 2022 is $5,825 per vessel per day on a fleet-wide basis, which includes an estimated amount for COVID-19 related expenses. The potential impacts of COVID-19 are beyond our control and are difficult to predict due to uncertainties surrounding the pandemic, and the actual amount of our DVOE could be higher or lower than budgeted as a result.
CHARTER HIRE EXPENSES-
Charter hire expenses increased by $26.1 million from $10.3 million during 2020 to $36.4 million during 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher charter in rates during 2021 as compared to 2020, in addition to an increase in chartered-in days.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES-
We incur general and administrative expenses which relate to our onshore non-vessel-related activities. Our general and administrative expenses include our payroll expenses, including those relating to our executive officers, operating lease expense, legal, auditing and other professional expenses. General and administrative expenses include nonvested stock amortization expense which represent the amortization of stock-based compensation that has been issued to our Directors and employees pursuant to the 2015 Equity Incentive Plan. Refer to Note 17 - Stock-Based Compensation in our Consolidated Financial Statements. General and administrative expenses also include legal and professional fees associated with our credit facilities, which are not capitalizable to deferred financing costs. We also incur general and administrative expenses for our overseas offices located in Singapore and Copenhagen.
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.2 million from $21.3 million during 2020 to $24.5 million during 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher compensation related expenses, as well as higher legal and professional fees.
TECHNICAL MANAGEMENT FEES-
We incur management fees to third party technical management companies we have engaged for the day-to-day management of our vessels, including performing routine maintenance, attending to vessel operations and arranging for crews and supplies. In addition, technical management fees also include the direct costs, including the operating costs, incurred by GSSM for the technical management of the vessels under its management.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, technical management fees were $5.6 million and $7.0 million, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the operation of a smaller fleet.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION-
We depreciate the cost of our vessels on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of each vessel. Depreciation is based on the cost of the vessel less its estimated residual value. We estimate the useful life of our vessels to be 25 years and we estimate the residual value by taking the estimated scrap value of $310 per lightweight ton multiplied by the weight of the ship in lightweight tons.
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $8.9 million from $65.2 million during 2020 to $56.2 million during 2021. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in depreciation for certain vessels in our fleet that were impaired during 2020, as well as a decrease in the depreciation of vessels due to the operation of a smaller fleet during 2021 as compared to 2020.
IMPAIRMENT OF VESSEL ASSETS-
During 2020, we recorded $208.9 million of impairment of vessel assets. This included impairment losses for 20 of our Supramax vessels and ten of our Handysize vessels. There was no vessel impairment recorded during 2021.
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(GAIN) LOSS ON SALE OF VESSELS-
During 2021, we recorded a $4.9 million net gain on sale of vessels related primarily to the sale of the Genco Provence, partially offset by net losses related to the sale of the Baltic Panther, the Baltic Hare, the Baltic Cougar, the Baltic Leopard and the Genco Lorraine, as well as net losses associated with the exchange of the Baltic Cove, the Baltic Fox, the Genco Spirit, the Genco Avra and the Genco Mare.
During 2020, we recorded a $1.9 million net loss on sale of vessels related primarily to the sale of the Genco Charger, the Genco Thunder, the Baltic Wind, the Baltic Breeze, the Genco Bay, the Baltic Jaguar, the Genco Loire, the Genco Normandy and the Genco Ocean.
OTHER (EXPENSE) INCOME-
NET INTEREST EXPENSE-
Net interest expense decreased by $6.2 million to $15.2 million during 2021 as compared to $21.4 million during 2020. Net interest expense during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of interest expense under our credit facilities and amortization of deferred financing costs for those facilities. The decrease is primarily due to a $7.1 million decrease in interest expense as a result of lower outstanding debt, as well as lower interest rates. This was offset by a $0.9 million decrease in interest income due to a decrease in interest earned on our time deposits and cash accounts. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our credit facilities.
LOSS ON DEBT EXTINGUISHMENT -
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $4.4 million loss on debt extinguishment as a result of the refinancing of our $495 Million Credit Facility and $133 Million Credit Facility with the $450 Million Credit Facility on August 31, 2021. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our credit facilities.
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO NONCONTROLLING INTEREST -
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was $0.04 million which is associated with the net income attributable to the noncontrolling interest of GSSM, which was formed during September 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flow from operations, cash on hand, equity offerings and credit facility borrowings. We currently use our funds primarily for the acquisition of vessels generally, fleet renewal, drydocking for our vessels, payment of dividends, debt repayments and satisfying working capital requirements as may be needed to support our business. Our ability to continue to meet our liquidity needs is subject to and will be affected by cash utilized in operations, the economic or business environment in which we operate, shipping industry conditions, the financial condition of our customers, vendors and service providers, our ability to comply with the financial and other covenants of our indebtedness, and other factors.
We believe, given our current cash holdings, if drybulk shipping rates do not decline significantly from current levels, our capital resources, including cash anticipated to be generated within the year, are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. Such resources include unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $114.6 million as of December 31, 2021 in addition to the $184.8 million availability under the revolver of the $450 Million Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021, which compares to a minimum liquidity requirement under our credit facility of approximately $21 million as of the date of this report. Given the remaining $40.8 million that was paid during January 2022 for the remainder of the purchase price of two newbuilding vessels that were delivered on January 6, 2022, anticipated capital expenditures related to drydockings and the installation of ballast water treatment systems (“BWTS”) and fuel efficiency upgrade costs of $34.3 million and $2.4 million during 2022 and 2023, respectively, as well as any quarterly dividend payments, we anticipate to continue to have significant cash expenditures. Refer to “Capital Expenditures” below for further details. However, if market conditions were to worsen significantly due to the current COVID-19 pandemic or other causes, then our cash resources may decline to a level that may put at risk our ability to pay dividends per our capital allocation strategy or at all. Throughout 2021, the Company paid down $203 million of debt, in addition to an $8.8 million prepayment of debt on January 26, 2022, resulting in a reduced cash flow breakeven rate from previous levels. After this additional prepayment during January 2022, there will be no mandatory debt repayments until we must repay $237.3 million in 2026. Although we do not have any mandatory debt repayments until 2026, we intend to continue to pay down debt on a voluntary basis with a medium term goal of zero net debt.
As of December 31, 2021, the $450 Million Credit Facility contained collateral maintenance covenants that require the aggregate appraised value of collateral vessels to be at least 140% of the principal amount of the loan outstanding under such facility. If the values of our vessels were to decline as a result of COVID-19 or otherwise, we may not satisfy this collateral maintenance requirement. If we do not satisfy the collateral maintenance requirement, we will need to post additional collateral or prepay outstanding loans to bring us back into compliance, or we will need to seek waivers, which may not be available or may be subject to conditions.
In the future, we may require capital to fund acquisitions or to improve or support our ongoing operations and debt structure, particularly in light of economic conditions resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We may from time to time seek to raise additional capital through equity or debt offerings, selling vessels or other assets, pursuing strategic opportunities, or otherwise. We may also from time to time seek to incur additional debt financing from private or public sector sources, refinance our indebtedness or obtain waivers or modifications to our credit agreements to obtain more favorable terms, enhance flexibility in conducting our business, or otherwise. We may also seek to manage our interest rate exposure through hedging transactions. We may seek to accomplish any of these independently or in conjunction with one or more of these actions. However, if market conditions are unfavorable, we may be unable to accomplish any of the foregoing on acceptable terms or at all.
We entered into the $450 Million Credit Facility on August 3, 2021. Proceeds from the $450 Million Credit Facility were used to refinance our $495 Million Credit Facility and our $133 Million Credit Facility on August 31, 2021. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding the terms of the $450 Million Credit Facility, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the $450 Million Credit facility.
Dividends
We disclosed on April 19, 2021 that, on management’s recommendation, our Board of Directors adopted a new quarterly dividend policy for dividends payable commencing in the first quarter of 2022 in respect of our financial results for the fourth quarter of 2021. Under the new quarterly dividend policy, the amount available for quarterly dividends is to be calculated based on the following formula:
Operating cash flow
Less: Debt repayments
Less: Capital expenditures for drydocking
Less: Reserve
Cash flow distributable as dividends
The amount of dividends payable under the foregoing formula for each quarter of the year will be determined on a quarterly basis.
For purposes of the foregoing calculation, operating cash flow is defined as voyage revenue less voyage expenses, charter hire expenses, vessel operating expenses, general and administrative expenses other than non-cash restricted stock expenses, technical management fees, and interest expense other than non-cash deferred financing costs. Anticipated uses for the reserve include, but are not limited to, vessel acquisitions, debt repayments, and general corporate purposes. In order to set aside funds for these purposes, the reserve will be set on a quarterly basis in the discretion of our Board and is anticipated to be based on future quarterly debt repayments and interest expense.
On February 23, 2022, our Board declared a quarterly dividend of $0.67 per share. Our quarterly dividend policy and declaration and payment of dividends are subject to legally available funds, compliance with applicable law and contractual obligations (including our credit facility) and our Board’s determination that each declaration and payment is at that time in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders after its review of our financial performance.
In connection with our new dividend policy, we have paid down additional indebtedness under our credit facilities and utilized the $450 Million Credit Facility to refinance our two prior credit facilities as noted above.
The declaration and payment of any dividend or any stock repurchase is subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors and management continue to closely monitor market developments together with the evaluation of our quarterly dividend policy in the current market environment. The principal business factors that our Board of Directors expects to consider when determining the timing and amount of dividend payments or stock repurchases include our earnings, financial condition, and cash requirements at the time. Marshall Islands law generally prohibits the declaration and payment of dividends or stock repurchases other than from surplus. Marshall Islands law also prohibits the declaration and payment of dividends or stock repurchases while a company is insolvent or would be rendered insolvent by the payment of such a dividend or such a stock repurchase. Heightened economic uncertainty and the potential for renewed drybulk market weakness as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic conditions may result in our suspension, reduction, or termination of future quarterly dividends.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of Dividends
U.S. Holders
For purposes of this discussion, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of our common stock that is, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, (i) an individual U.S. citizen or resident, (ii) a corporation that is created or organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia, or any other U.S. entity taxable as a corporation, (iii) an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source, or (iv) a trust if either (x) a court within the United States is able to exercise primary jurisdiction over the administration of the trust and one or more U.S. persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or (y) the trust has a valid election in effect under applicable Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person. If a partnership, or an entity treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a partnership, such as a limited liability company, holds common stock, the tax treatment of a partner will generally depend on the status of the partner and upon the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner in such a partnership holding our common stock, you are encouraged to consult your tax advisor. A beneficial owner of our common stock (other than a partnership) that is not a U.S. Holder is referred to below as a “Non-U.S. Holder.”
Subject to the discussion of passive foreign investment company (PFIC) status on pages 36 - 37 of this report, any distributions made by us to a U.S. Holder with respect to our common shares generally will constitute dividends to the extent of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. Distributions in excess of those earnings and profits will be treated first as a nontaxable return of capital to the extent of the U.S. Holder’s tax basis in our common shares (determined on a share-by-share basis), and thereafter as capital gain. U.S. Holders that own at least 10% of our shares may be able to claim a dividends-received-deduction and should consult their tax advisors.
Dividends paid on our common shares to a U.S. Holder who is an individual, trust or estate, or a “non-corporate U.S. Holder,” will generally be treated as “qualified dividend income” that is taxable to such non-corporate U.S. Holder at preferential tax rates, provided that (1) our common shares are readily tradable on an established securities market in the United States (such as the NYSE, on which our common shares are traded); (2) we are not a PFIC for the taxable year during which the dividend is paid or the immediately preceding taxable year (which we do not believe we have been, are, or will be); (3) the non-corporate U.S. Holder’s holding period of our common shares includes more than 60 days in the 121-day period beginning 60 days before the date on which our common shares becomes ex-dividend; and (4) the non-corporate U.S. Holder is not under an obligation to make related payments with respect to positions in substantially similar or related property. A non-corporate U.S. Holder will be able to take qualified dividend income into account in determining its deductible investment interest (which is generally limited to its net investment income) only if it elects to do so; in such case, the dividend will be taxed at ordinary income rates. Non-corporate U.S. Holders also may be required to pay a 3.8% surtax on all or part of such holder’s “net investment income,” which includes, among other items, dividends on our shares, subject to certain limitations and exceptions. Investors are encouraged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the effect, if any, of this surtax on their ownership of our shares.
Amounts taxable as dividends generally will be treated as passive income from sources outside the U.S. However, if (a) we are 50% or more owned, by vote or value, by U.S. Holders and (b) at least 10% of our earnings and profits are attributable to sources within the U.S., then for foreign tax credit purposes, a portion of our dividends would be treated as derived from sources within the U.S. With respect to any dividend paid for any taxable year, the U.S. source ratio of our dividends for foreign tax credit purposes would be equal to the portion of our earnings and profits from sources within the U.S. for such taxable year divided by the total amount of our earnings and profits for such taxable year. The rules related to U.S. foreign tax credits are complex and U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisors to determine whether and to what extent a credit would be available.
Special rules may apply to any “extraordinary dividend” - generally, a dividend in an amount which is equal to or in excess of 10% of a shareholder’s adjusted basis (or fair market value in certain circumstances) in a share of our common shares - paid by us. If we pay an “extraordinary dividend” on our common shares that is treated as “qualified dividend income”, then any loss derived by a non-corporate U.S. Holder from the sale or exchange of such common shares will be treated as long-term capital loss to the extent of such dividend.
Tax Consequences if We Are a Passive Foreign Investment Company
As discussed in “U.S. tax authorities could treat us as a ‘passive foreign investment company,’ which could have adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. shareholders” in Item 1.A Risk Factors in this report, a foreign corporation generally will be treated as a PFIC for U.S. federal income tax purposes if, after applying certain look through rules, either (1) at least 75% of its gross income for any taxable year consists of “passive income” or (2) at least 50% of the average value or adjusted bases of its assets (determined on a quarterly basis) produce or are held for the production of passive income, i.e., “passive assets.” As discussed above, we do not believe that our past or existing operations would cause, or would have caused, us to be deemed a PFIC with respect to any taxable year. No assurance can be given that the IRS or a court of law will accept our position, and there is a risk that the IRS or a court of law could determine that we are a PFIC. Moreover, there can be no assurance that we will not become a PFIC in any future taxable year because the PFIC test is an annual test, there are uncertainties in the application of the PFIC rules, and although we intend to manage our business so as to avoid PFIC status to the extent consistent with our other business goals, there could be changes in the nature and extent of our operations in future taxable years.
If we were to be treated as a PFIC for any taxable year in which a U.S. Holder owns shares of our common stock (and regardless of whether we remain a PFIC for subsequent taxable years), the tax consequences to such a U.S. holder upon the receipt of distributions in respect of such shares that are treated as “excess distributions” would differ from those described above. In general, an excess distribution is the amount of distributions received during a taxable year that exceed 125% of the average amount of distributions received by a U.S. Holder in respect of the common shares during the preceding three taxable years, or if shorter, during the U.S. Holder’s holding period prior to the taxable year of the distribution. The distributions that are excess distributions would be allocated ratably over the U.S. Holder’s holding period for the common shares. The amount allocated to the current taxable year and any taxable year prior to the first taxable year in which we were a PFIC would be taxed as ordinary income. The amount allocated to each of the other taxable years would be subject to tax at the highest marginal rate in effect for the U.S. Holder for that taxable year, and an interest charge for the deemed deferral benefit would be imposed on the resulting tax allocated to such other taxable years. The tax liability with respect to the amount allocated to taxable years prior to the year of the distribution cannot be offset by net operating losses. As an alternative to such tax treatment, a U.S. Holder may make a “qualified electing fund” election or “mark to market” election, to the extent available, in which event different rules would apply. The U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder if we were to be classified as a PFIC are complex. A U.S. Holder should consult with his or her own advisor with regard to those consequences, as well as with regard to whether he or she is eligible to and should make either of the elections described above.
Non-U.S. Holders
Non-U.S. Holders generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on dividends received from us on our common shares unless the income is effectively connected with the conduct by the Non-U.S. Holder of a trade or business in the United States (“effectively connected income”) (and, if an applicable income tax treaty so provides, the dividends are attributable to a permanent establishment maintained by the Non-U.S. Holder in the U.S.). Effectively connected income (or, if an income tax treaty applies, income attributable to a permanent establishment maintained in the U.S.) generally will be subject to regular U.S. federal income tax in the same manner discussed above relating to taxation of U.S. Holders. In addition, earnings and profits of a corporate Non-U.S. Holder that are attributable to such income, as determined after allowance for certain adjustments, may be subject to an additional branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, or at a lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty. Non-U.S. Holders may be subject to tax in jurisdictions other than the United States on dividends received from us on our common shares.
Dividends paid on our common shares to a non-corporate U.S. Holder may be subject to U.S. federal backup withholding tax if the non-corporate U.S. Holder:
● fails to provide us with an accurate taxpayer identification number;
● is notified by the IRS that they have become subject to backup withholding because they previously failed to report all interest and dividends required to be shown on their federal income tax returns; or
● fails to comply with applicable certification requirements
A holder that is not a U.S. Holder or a partnership may be subject to U.S. federal backup withholding with respect to such dividends unless the holder certifies that it is a non-U.S. person, under penalties of perjury, or otherwise establishes an exemption therefrom. Backup withholding tax is not an additional tax. Holders generally may obtain a refund of any amounts withheld under backup withholding rules that exceed their income tax liability by timely filing a refund claim with the IRS.
You are encouraged to consult your own tax advisor concerning the overall tax consequences arising in your own particular situation under U.S. federal, state, local, or foreign law from the payment of dividends on our common stock.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $231.1 million and $36.9 million, respectively. This increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to higher rates achieved by our major and minor bulk vessels, changes in working capital, as well as a decrease in drydocking related expenditures and interest expense.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $67.6 million as compared to $37.4 million net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. This fluctuation was primarily due to the purchase of four Ultramax vessels which delivered during the third quarter of 2021, as well as deposits made for the two Ultramax vessels that were delivered during January 2022. Additionally, there was a decrease in the net proceeds from the sale of vessels. These fluctuations were partially offset by a decrease in scrubber related expenditures and purchase of other fixed assets during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $222.7 million and $56.9 million, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the refinancing of the $495 Million Credit Facility and the $133 Million Credit Facility with the $450 Million Credit Facility on August 31, 2021. During 2021, the increase in total net cash used in financing activities related to our credit facilities was $156.6 million as compared to 2020. Additionally, there was a $5.6 million increase in deferred financing costs paid in relation to the $450 Million Credit Facility during 2021. Lastly, there was a $3.6 million increase in the payment of dividends during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Credit Facilities
On August 3, 2021, we entered into the $450 Million Credit Facility, which we used to refinance the existing debt outstanding under the $495 Million Credit Facility and the $133 Million Credit Facility as of August 31, 2021.
We entered into the $133 Million Credit Facility on August 14, 2018, which was initially used to finance a portion of the purchase price for the six vessels that were purchased during the third quarter of 2018. On June 11, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $133 Million Credit Facility which provided us with a $25 million revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate and working capital purposes. Additionally, we entered into the $495 Million Credit Facility on May 31, 2018, which was initially used to refinance our prior credit facilities. On February 28, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility, which provides for an additional tranche of up to $35 million to finance a portion of the acquisitions, installations, and related costs for exhaust cleaning systems (or “scrubbers”) for 17 of our Capesize vessels. On June 5, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility to extend the period that collateral vessels can be sold or disposed of without prepayment of the loan if a replacement vessel or vessels meeting certain requirements are included as collateral from 180 days to 360 days. On December 17, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility that allowed us to enter into a vessel transaction in which we agreed to acquire three modern Ultramax vessels in exchange for six of our older Handysize vessels.
Interest Rate Swap Agreements, Forward Freight Agreements and Currency Swap Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, we had three interest rate cap agreements to manage interest costs and the risk associated with changing interest rates. Such agreements cap the borrowing rate on our variable debt to provide a hedge agains the risk of rising rates. At December 31, 2021, the total notional principal amount of the interest rate cap agreements was $200.0 million.
Refer to the table in Note 8 - Derivative instruments of our Consolidated Financial Statements which summarized the interest rate cap agreements in place as of December 31, 2021.
As part of our business strategy, we may enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage interest costs and the risk associated with changing interest rates. In determining the fair value of interest rate derivatives, we would consider the creditworthiness of both the counterparty and ourselves immaterial. Valuations prior to any adjustments for credit risk would be validated by comparison with counterparty valuations. Amounts would not and should not be identical due to the different modeling assumptions. Any material differences would be investigated.
As part of our business strategy, we may also enter into arrangements commonly known as forward freight agreements, or FFAs, to hedge and manage our exposure to the charter market risks relating to the deployment of our vessels. Generally, these arrangements would bind us and each counterparty in the arrangement to buy or sell a specified tonnage freighting commitment “forward” at an agreed time and price and for a particular route. Upon settlement, if the contracted charter rate is less than the average of the rates (as reported by an identified index) for the specified route and period, the seller of the FFA is required to pay the buyer an amount equal to the difference between the contracted rate and the settlement rate multiplied by the number of days in the specific period. Conversely, if the contracted rate is greater than the settlement rate, the buyer is required to pay the seller the settlement sum. Although FFAs can be entered into for a variety of purposes, including for hedging, as an option, for trading or for arbitrage, if we decided to enter into FFAs, our objective would be to hedge and manage market risks as part of our commercial management. It is not currently our intention to enter into FFAs to generate a stream of income independent of the revenues we derive from the operation of our fleet of vessels. If we determine to enter into FFAs, we may reduce our exposure to any declines in our results from operations due to weak market conditions or downturns, but may also limit our ability to benefit economically during periods of strong demand in the market. We have not entered into any FFAs as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Interest Rates
The effective interest rate for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 include interest rates associated with the interest expense for our various credit facilities including the following: the $450 Million Credit Facility, as well as the $133 Million Credit Facility and the $495 Million Credit Facility (until these facilities were refinanced with the $450 Million Credit Facility on August 31, 2021).
The effective interest rate for the aforementioned credit facilities, including the cost associated with unused commitment fees, if applicable, was 3.22%, 3.71% and 5.31% during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The interest rate on the debt, excluding unused commitment fees, ranged from 2.24% to 3.48%; 2.65% to 3.50% and 4.05% to 5.76% during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Capital Expenditures
We make capital expenditures from time to time in connection with our vessel acquisitions. Our fleet currently consists of 44 drybulk vessels, including 17 Capesize drybulk carriers, 15 Ultramax drybulk carriers and twelve Supramax drybulk carriers.
As previously announced, we have initiated a fuel efficiency upgrade program for certain of our vessels in an effort to generate fuel savings and increase the future earnings potential for these vessels. The upgrades have been successfully during previous drydockings.
Under U.S. Federal law and 33 CFR, Part 151, Subpart D, U.S. approved BWTS will be required to be installed in all vessels at the first out of water drydocking after January 1, 2016 if these vessels are to discharge ballast water inside 12 nautical miles of the coast of the U.S. U.S. authorities did not approve ballast water treatment systems until December 2016. Therefore, the U.S. Coast Guard (“USCG”) has granted us extensions for our vessels with 2016 drydocking deadlines until January 1, 2018; however, an alternative management system (“AMS”) may be installed in lieu. For example, in February 2015, the USCG added Bawat to the list of ballast water treatment systems that received AMS acceptance. An AMS is valid for five years from the date of required compliance with ballast water discharge standards, by which time it must be replaced by an approved system unless the AMS itself achieves approval. Furthermore, we received extensions for vessels drydocking in 2016 that allowed for further extensions to the vessels’ next scheduled drydockings in year 2021 and 2022. Additionally, for our vessels that were scheduled to drydock in 2017 and 2018, the USCG has granted an extension that enables us to defer installation to the next scheduled out of water drydocking. Any newbuilding vessels that we acquire will have a USCG approved system or at least an AMS installed when the vessel is being built.
In addition, on September 8, 2016, the Ballast Water Management (“BWM”) Convention was ratified and had an original effective date of September 8, 2017. However, on July 7, 2017, the effective date of the BWM Convention was extended two years to September 8, 2019 for existing ships. This requires vessels to have a BWTS installed to coincide with the vessels’ next International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (“IOPP”) renewal survey after September 8, 2019. In order for a vessel to trade in U.S. waters, it must be compliant with the installation date as required by the USCG as outlined above.
Furthermore, under our comprehensive IMO 2023 compliance plan, we intend to install energy saving devices and apply high performance paint systems in order to reduce fuel consumption and emissions among other key initiatives, on select vessels. We plan to undertake most, if not all, of these initiatives while our vessels undergo their regularly scheduled drydocking. These estimated expenditures are included in the table below.
During the second half of 2018, we have entered into agreements for the purchase of BWTS for 36 of our vessels. The cost of these systems will vary based on the size and specifications of each vessel and whether the systems will be installed in China. Based on the contractual purchase price of the BWTS and the estimated installation fees, the Company estimates the cost of the systems to be approximately $0.9 million for Capesize and $0.6 million for Supramax vessels. The BWTS will be installed during a vessel’s scheduled drydocking and these costs will be capitalized and depreciated over the remainder of the life of the vessel. During 2020 and 2019, we completed the installation of BWTS on nine and 17 of our vessels, respectively. There were no BWTS installations completed during 2021. Eleven of these vessels have since been sold. We anticipate that we will complete the installation of BWTS on ten vessels during 2022, one of which was in the process of completing its scheduled drydocking as of December 31, 2021. We intend to fund the remaining BWTS purchase price and installation fees using cash on hand.
Under maritime regulations that went into effect January 1, 2020, our vessels were required to reduce sulfur emissions, for which the principal solutions are the use of scrubbers or buying fuel with low sulfur content. We have completed the installation of scrubbers on our 17 Capesize vessels, 16 of which were completed as of December 31, 2019 and the last one of which was completed on January 17, 2020. The remainder of our vessels are consuming VLSFO. The costs for the scrubber equipment and installation was capitalized and depreciated over the remainder of the life of the vessel. This does not include any lost revenue associated with offhire days due to the installation of the scrubbers.
In addition to acquisitions that we may undertake in future periods, we will incur additional expenditures due to special surveys and drydockings for our fleet. Through December 31, 2021, we have paid $42.9 million in cash installments towards our scrubber program and have drawn down $32.8 million under the scrubber tranche under our $495 Million Credit Facility. During the second quarter of 2021, we paid down the debt balance under the scrubber tranche.
We estimate our capitalized drydocking costs, including capitalized costs incurred during drydocking related to vessel assets and vessel equipment, BWTS costs, fuel efficiency upgrades and scheduled off-hire days for our fleet through 2023 to be:
The costs reflected are estimates based on drydocking our vessels in China. Actual costs will vary based on various factors, including where the drydockings are actually performed. We expect to fund these costs with cash on hand. These costs do not include drydock expense items that are reflected in vessel operating expenses.
Actual length of drydocking will vary based on the condition of the vessel, yard schedules and other factors. Higher repairs and maintenance expenses during drydocking for vessels which are over 15 years old typically result in a higher number of off-hire days depending on the condition of the vessel.
During 2021 and 2020, we incurred a total of $4.9 million and $8.6 million of drydocking costs, respectively, excluding costs incurred during drydocking that were capitalized to vessel assets or vessel equipment.
Two vessels completed their respective drydockings during 2021. An additional three of our vessels began their drydockings during the fourth quarter of 2021 and did not complete until first quarter of 2022. In addition to these three vessels, we estimate that 12 of our vessels will be drydocked during 2022 and two of our vessels will be drydocked during 2023.
As of January 17, 2020, we have completed the installation of scrubbers on our 17 Capesize vessels.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of those financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those that reflect significant judgments of uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We have described below what we believe are
our most critical accounting policies, because they generally involve a comparatively higher degree of judgment in their application. For an additional description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 10-K.
Vessels and Depreciation
We record the value of our vessels at their cost (which includes acquisition costs directly attributable to the vessel and expenditures made to prepare the vessel for its initial voyage) less accumulated depreciation. We depreciate our drybulk vessels on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, estimated to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard. Depreciation is based on cost less the estimated residual scrap value of $310/lwt based on the 15-year average scrap value of steel. An increase in the residual value of the vessels will decrease the annual depreciation charge over the remaining useful life of the vessels. Similarly, an increase in the useful life of a drybulk vessel would also decrease the annual depreciation charge. Comparatively, a decrease in the useful life of a drybulk vessel or in its residual value would have the effect of increasing the annual depreciation charge. However, when regulations place limitations over the ability of a vessel to trade on a worldwide basis, we will adjust the vessel’s useful life to end at the date such regulations preclude such vessel’s further commercial use.
Effective January 1, 2022, we increased the estimated scrap value of the vessels from $310 per lwt to $400 per lwt prospectively based on the 15-year average scrap value of steel. The change in the estimated scrap value will result in a decrease in depreciation expense over the remaining life of the vessel assets. We expect depreciation to decrease by approximately $4.5 million during 2022 as a result of the prospective change in the scrap value.
The carrying value of each of our vessels does not represent the fair market value of such vessel or the amount we could obtain if we were to sell any of our vessels, which could be more or less. Under U.S. GAAP, we would not record a loss if the fair market value of a vessel (excluding its charter) is below our carrying value unless and until we determine to sell that vessel or the vessel is impaired as discussed below under the heading “Impairment of long-lived assets.”
There were no impairment losses during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded losses of $208.9 million and $27.4 million, respectively, related to the impairment of our vessel assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment for 20 of our Supramax vessels (the Genco Loire, the Genco Lorraine, the Genco Normandy, the Genco Picardy, the Genco Predator, the Genco Provence, the Genco Warrior, the Baltic Cougar, the Baltic Jaguar, the Baltic Leopard, the Baltic Panther, the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone) and ten of our Handysize vessels (the Genco Avra, the Genco Bay, the Genco Mare, the Genco Ocean, the Genco Spirit, the Baltic Breeze, the Baltic Cove, the Baltic Fox, the Baltic Hare and the Baltic Wind). During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded impairment for two of our Panamax vessels (the Genco Raptor and Genco Thunder) and three of our Handysize vessels (the Genco Challenger, the Genco Champion and the Genco Charger). Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the impairment recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Under our credit facility, we regularly submit to the lenders valuations of our vessels on an individual charter free basis in order to evidence our compliance with the collateral maintenance covenants under our bank credit facility. Such a valuation is not necessarily the same as the amount any vessel may bring upon sale, which may be more or less, and should not be relied upon as such. We were in compliance with the collateral maintenance covenant under our $450 Million Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. We obtained valuations for all of the vessels in our fleet pursuant to the terms of the $450 Million Credit Facility. In the chart below, we list each of our vessels, the year it was built, the year we acquired it, and its carrying value as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Vessels have been grouped according to their collateralized status as of December 31, 2021 and does not include any vessels held for sale or held for exchange. The carrying value of our twelve and fifteen Supramax vessels that were not held for sale as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, reflect the impairment loss recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the vessel valuations of all of our vessels for covenant compliance purposes under our credit facility as of the most recent compliance testing date were higher than their carrying values at December 31, 2021, with the exception of eleven of our Capesize vessels, as a result of an overall increase in vessel values. Comparatively, as of December 31, 2020, the vessel valuations of all of our vessels for covenant compliance purposes under our credit facilities as of the most recent compliance testing date were lower than their carrying values as of December 31, 2020, with the exception of nine of the Supramax vessels that were impaired as of December 31, 2020 (the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone) and the Genco Magic that was acquired on December 23, 2020 during the fourth quarter of 2020.
The amount by which the carrying value at December 31, 2021 of eleven of our Capesize vessels exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliances ranged, on an individual vessel basis, from $4.3 million to $7.0 million per vessel, and $62.7 million on an aggregate fleet basis. Comparatively, the amount by which the carrying value as of December 31, 2020 of all of the vessels in our fleet, with the exception of the ten aforementioned vessels, exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliance purposes ranged, on an individual basis, from $0 million to $18.3 million per vessel, and $260.8 million on an aggregate fleet basis. The average amount by which the carrying value of these vessels exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliance purposes was $5.7 million and $9.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. However, neither such valuation nor the carrying value in the table below reflects the value of long-term time charters, if any, related to some of our vessels.
If we were to sell a vessel or hold a vessel for sale, and the carrying value of the vessel were to exceed its fair market value, net of commission, we would record a loss in the amount of the difference. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 - Vessel Acquisitions and Dispositions in our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the sale of vessel assets and the classification of vessel assets held for sale and exchange as of December 31, 2020.
Deferred drydocking costs
Our vessels are required to be drydocked approximately every 30 to 60 months for major repairs and maintenance that cannot be performed while the vessels are operating. We defer the costs associated with drydockings as they occur and amortize these costs on a straight-line basis over the period between drydockings. Deferred drydocking costs include actual costs incurred at the drydock yard; cost of travel, lodging and subsistence of our personnel sent to the drydocking site to supervise; and the cost of hiring a third party to oversee the drydocking. We believe that these criteria are consistent with U.S. GAAP guidelines and industry practice and that our policy of deferral reflects the economics and market values of the vessels. Costs that are not related to drydocking, including routine maintenance and repairs, are expensed as incurred. If the vessel is drydocked earlier than originally anticipated, any remaining deferred drydock costs that have not been amortized are expensed at the end of the next drydock.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We follow the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) subtopic 360-10, “Property, Plant and Equipment” (“ASC 360-10”) which requires impairment losses to be recorded on long-lived assets used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts. If indicators of impairment are present, we perform an analysis of the anticipated undiscounted future net cash flows to be derived from the related long-lived assets.
Although rates have improved during 2021, the drybulk charter market has been volatile over the past five years. Shipping rates for key drybulk routes increased during 2021 after a decline in 2020 which was principally as a result of the global economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
When indicators of impairment are present and our estimate of future undiscounted cash flows for any vessel is lower than the vessel’s carrying value, the carrying value is written down, by recording a charge to operations, to the vessel’s fair market value if the fair market value is lower than the vessel’s carrying value.
We determined that as of December 31, 2021, the future income streams expected to be earned by such vessels over their remaining operating lives and upon disposal on an undiscounted basis would be sufficient to recover their carrying values. As of December 31, 2021, only certain of the Capesize vessels had indicators of impairment and the estimated future undiscounted cash flows for those Capesize vessels exceeded each of those vessels’ carrying values by a margin of approximately 35% to 77% of the carrying value. Our vessels remain fully utilized and have a relatively long average remaining useful life of approximately 15 years in which to recover sufficient cash flows on an undiscounted basis to recover their carrying values as of December 31, 2021. Management will continue to monitor developments in charter rates in the markets in which it participates with respect to the expectation of future rates over an extended period of time that are utilized in the analyses.
In developing estimates of future undiscounted cash flows, we make assumptions and estimates about the vessels’ future performance, with the significant assumptions being related to charter rates, fleet utilization, vessels’ operating expenses, vessels’ capital expenditures and drydocking requirements, vessels’ residual value and the estimated remaining useful life of each vessel. The assumptions used to develop estimates of future undiscounted cash flows are based on historical trends. Specifically, we utilize the rates currently in effect for the duration of their current time charters or spot market voyage charters, without assuming additional profit sharing. For periods of time where our vessels are not fixed on time charters or spot market voyage charters, we utilize an estimated daily time charter equivalent for our vessels’ unfixed days based on the most recent ten year historical one-year time charter average. In addition, we consider the current market rate environment and, if necessary, adjust our estimates of undiscounted cash
flows to reflect the current rate environment. It is reasonably possible that the estimate of undiscounted cash flows may change in the future due to changes in current rates which could adversely affect the average rates being utilized and could result in impairment of certain of our older vessels. It is also reasonably possible that vessels that were not subject to impairment testing during 2021 because there was no indicator of impairment could be subject to such testing in the future. Actual equivalent drybulk shipping rates are currently higher than the estimated rates. We believe current rates have been driven by strong global economic activity during 2021 due to decade highs led by a rise in iron ore shipments from Brazil and Australia, higher port congestion and an increased demand for coal due to tightness in the energy complex and manageable net fleet growth due to the historically low orderbook, as well as seasonal issues and other factors as discussed under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Voyage Revenues.”
Of the inputs that the Company uses for its impairment analysis, future charter rates are the most significant and most volatile. Based on the sensitivity analysis performed by the Company, the Company would record impairment on its vessels for time charter declines from their most recent ten-year historical one-year time charter averages as follows (this table excludes any vessels held for sale or vessels held for exchange as of December 31, 2020):
(1) There were no indicators of impairment for our Ultramax and Supramax vessels as of December 31, 2021, as the respective fair market values of these vessels were higher than their respective carrying values. As such, these vessels were not subject to impairment as of December 31, 2021.
(2) We excluded the Genco Magic from this sensitivity analysis for the year ended December 31, 2020 as the vessel was acquired on December 23, 2020.
(3) We excluded the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone from this sensitivity analysis for the year ended December 31, 2020 as these vessels were impaired during the fourth quarter of 2020.
For our impairment analysis, we utilize the ten-year historical one-year time charter average, as well as considering the current rate environment, to project future charter rates, which we believe appropriately takes into account the volatility and highs and lows of the shipping cycle.
Our time charter equivalent (TCE) rates for our fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were above or (below) the ten-year historical one-year time charter average as of such dates as follows:
The projected net operating cash flows are determined by considering the future voyage revenues from existing time charters for the fixed fleet days and an estimated daily time charter equivalent for the unfixed days over the
estimated remaining life of the vessel, assumed to be 25 years from the delivery of the vessel from the shipyard, reduced by brokerage and address commissions, expected outflows for vessels’ maintenance and vessel operating expenses (including planned drydocking and special survey expenditures) and required capital expenditures adjusted annually for inflation, assuming fleet utilization of 98%. The salvage value used in the impairment test is estimated to be $310 per light weight ton, consistent with our vessels’ depreciation policy discussed above.
Although we believe that the assumptions used to evaluate potential impairment are reasonable and appropriate, such assumptions are highly subjective. There can be no assurance as to how long charter rates and vessel values will remain at their currently low levels or whether they will improve by any significant degree. Charter rates may remain at depressed levels for a prolonged period of time, which could adversely affect our revenue and profitability, and future assessments of vessel impairment.