ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Founded in 2005, Greenlane is the premier global platform for the development and distribution of premium cannabis accessories, child-resistant packaging, vape solutions, and lifestyle products. In August 2021, we completed our transformational merger with KushCo, creating the leading ancillary cannabis company and house of brands. The combined company serves a diverse and expansive customer base with more than 8,500 retail locations, which includes many of the leading multi-state-operators and licensed producers, the top smoke shops in the United States, and millions of consumers globally. In addition to enhancing our financial size and scale, along with creating an optimized platform with significant potential revenue and cost saving synergies, the merger strengthened our best-in-class proprietary owned brands and exclusive third-party brand offerings.
We have been developing a world-class portfolio of our own proprietary brands (the "Greenlane Brands") that we believe will, over time, deliver higher margins and create long-term value for our customers and shareholders. Our Greenlane Brands are comprised of child-resistant packaging innovator Pollen Gear; VIBES rolling papers; the Marley Natural accessory line; the K. Haring Glass Collection accessory line; Aerospaced & Groove grinders; Cookies lifestyle line; and Higher Standards, which is both an upscale product line and an innovative retail experience with flagship stores at New York City’s famed Chelsea Market and the iconic Malibu Village in California. During 2021, we have taken significant strides to grow our brand portfolio including with the March acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Eyce LLC and more recently, the November acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Organicix LLC dba DaVinci Tech. Furthermore, as a pioneer in the ancillary cannabis space, Greenlane is the partner of choice for many of the industry's leading MSOs, LPs, and brands, including PAX Labs, Grenco Science, Storz & Bickel, Firefly, Santa Cruz Shredder, Cookies, and CCELL.
We also own and operate several industry-leading e-commerce platforms, including Vapor.com, Higherstandards.com, Harringglass.com, Eycemolds.com, Vapor.ca, Vaposhop.com, and recently-acquired websites Puffitup.com and Davincivaporizer.com. These e-commerce platforms offer convenient, flexible shopping solutions directly to consumers.
We merchandise vaporizers, packaging, and other products in the United States, Canada, and Europe and we distribute to retailers through wholesale operations and to consumers through e-commerce activities and our retail stores. We operate distribution centers in the United States, Canada, and Europe. With the completion of the distribution center consolidation and the merger with KushCo, we have established a lean and scalable distribution network that leverages a mix of leased warehoused spaces in California and Massachusetts along with third-party logistics ("3PL") locations in the U.S., Canada, and Europe.
2022 Plan
On March 10, 2022, the Company announced via press release its 2022 Plan to reduced its cost structure, increase liquidity, and accelerate its path to profitability. The 2022 Plan includes a recently completed reduction in force, reduction of facility footprints worldwide, a sale leaseback of the Company's headquarter building, disposition of non-core assets, discontinuation of lower-margin third-party brands, increase of prices on select products, and the securing of an asset based loan that will support working capital needs.
Management believes that the 2022 Plan will significantly reduce costs, help accelerate the Company's path to profitability, support the growth of the business in a non-dilutive manner, and allow the Company to reinvest capital into its highest margin and highest growth potential product lines, such as its Greenlane Brands.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus known as COVID-19 was reported in Wuhan, China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, we have closely monitored developments and operated with the health and safety of our employees as the Company's top priority.
Although the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant adverse impact on our operations, we cannot reasonably estimate the length or severity of this pandemic on the macroeconomic environment which we operate in. Accordingly, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our financial condition or results of operations will depend on future developments, such as the duration and intensity of the pandemic, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines and and booster shots, and the overall impact on our customers, employees, vendors, and operations.
Discontinuation of Nicotine Sales
Over the course of 2021, we reduced our reliance on lower-margin third-party nicotine brands and increased our focus on our Greenlane Brands, as part of our strategy to scale our portfolio of proprietary brands to build the leading house of brands in the ancillary cannabis industry. As evidence of this, sales from nicotine products decreased to $2.1 million, or 1.3% of total net sales, from $13.0 million, or 9.4% of total net sales. Meanwhile, Greenlane Brand sales increased 52.3% to $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by strong growth in sales from Eyce and VIBES products. We intend to eliminate lower-margin third-party nicotine brands entirely over the course of 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience, outside advice from parties believed to be experts in such matters, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that
are not readily apparent from other sources. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. See "Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a description the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories, consisting of finished products, are primarily accounted for using the weighted-average method, and are valued at the lower of cost and net realizable value. This valuation requires us to make judgments, based on currently available information, about the likely method of disposition, such as through sales to customers or liquidations. Assumptions about the future disposition of inventory are inherently uncertain and changes in our estimates and assumptions may cause us to realize material write-downs in the future.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill to reporting units based on the expected benefit from the business combination. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year and at interim dates if indicators of impairment exist. Goodwill is assessed for impairment at the reporting unit level.
We are required to apply judgment when determining whether or not indications of impairment exist. The determination of the occurrence of a triggering event is based on various considerations, including on our knowledge of the industry, historical experience, market conditions, and specific information available at the time of the assessment. The results of our analysis could vary from period to period depending on how our judgment is applied and the facts and circumstances available at the time of the analysis. Judgment is also required in determining the assumptions and estimates used when calculating the fair value of the reporting unit or the indefinite-lived intangible asset.
For additional information about goodwill and intangible assets, see "Note 3-Business Acquisitions" and "Note 8-Supplemental Financial Statement Information" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes and TRA Liability
We are subject to U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income or loss of Greenlane Holdings, LLC and will be taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates on such income. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision or benefit for income taxes and in evaluating uncertain tax positions. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets or deferred tax liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events included in our financial statements.
Greenlane Holdings, LLC is a limited liability company and is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. As a result, we are not liable for U.S. federal or state and local income taxes in most jurisdictions in which we operate, and the income, expenses, gains and losses are reported on the returns of our members. Greenlane Holdings, LLC is subject to Canadian, Dutch, and U.S. state and local income tax in certain jurisdictions in which it is not treated as a partnership for income tax purposes, and in which jurisdictions it pays an immaterial amount of taxes.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, management performed an assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets based upon which management determined that it is not more likely than not that the results of operations will generate sufficient taxable income to realize portions of the net operating loss benefits. Consequently, we established a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, and reflected a carrying balance of $0 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the event that management determines that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance will be made, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
We do not record U.S. income taxes on the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, except for the Canadian subsidiary, based upon our intention to permanently reinvest undistributed earnings to ensure sufficient working capital and
further expansion of existing operations outside the United States. In the event we are required to repatriate funds from outside of the United States, such repatriation would be subject to local laws, customs, and tax consequences.
In addition to tax expenses, we may incur expenses related to our operations and may be required to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement (the "TRA"), which could be significant. Pursuant to the Greenlane Operating Agreement, Greenlane Holdings, LLC will generally make pro rata tax distributions to its members in an amount sufficient to fund all or part of their tax obligations with respect to the taxable income of Greenlane Holdings, LLC that is allocated to them and possibly in excess of such amount.
Legal Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in legal proceedings involving a variety of matters. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We evaluate the associated developments on a regular basis and accrue a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine there is a reasonable possibility that we may incur a loss and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements to the extent material.
We review the developments in our contingencies that could affect the amount of the provisions that have been previously recorded, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed. We make adjustments to our provisions and changes to our disclosures accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability of loss and the estimated amount of loss.
The outcome of these matters is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more legal proceedings were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management's expectations, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period in which any such outcome becomes probable and estimable, could be materially adversely affected. See "Note 7-Commitments and Contingencies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding these contingencies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table presents operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
*Not meaningful
Consolidated Results of Operations
Net Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total net sales were approximately $166.1 million, compared to approximately $138.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $27.8 million, or 20.1%. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to the merger with KushCo, which was completed on August 31, 2021, and which contributed $43.5 million in total net sales. The increase was partially offset by a $10.9 million decrease in sales of lower-margin third-party nicotine brands and a $7.2 million decrease in sales of other lower-margin third-party brands.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales increased by $22.8 million, or 19.8%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to the impact of the KushCo merger of $36.7 million, offset by a decrease in revenue of 11.4% excluding the impact of the KushCo merger.
Gross margin remained relatively flat at 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gross margin of 16.5% for the same period in 2020. Excluding inventory write-offs of damaged and obsolete inventory in 2021 and 2020 of $10.5 million and $6.7 million, respectively, associated with post-merger and ongoing product rationalization initiatives, gross margins increased 1.7% to 23.0% in 2021, compared to 21.3% for the same period in 2020. The increase in margin is related to an increase in Greenlane Brands sales of 52.3% with a higher margin profile than 3rd-party brand sales with a lower margin profile for the comparable period.
Gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of net sales, has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including the average mark-up over the cost of our products; the mix of products sold; purchasing efficiencies; the level
of sales for certain third-party brands, which carry contractual profit sharing obligations; and the potential impact on freight costs arising from passing of the PACT Act amendment noted under Regulatory Developments. Many of our products are sourced from suppliers who may use their own third-party manufacturers, and our product costs and gross margins may be impacted by the product mix we sell in any given period. Furthermore, legacy Greenlane and legacy KushCo margins are significantly different, due to their respective customer bases, product mix and types of transactions. Legacy KushCo revenue is comprised of a stable customer base of wholesale and business to business customers, resulting in a lower-volume of transactions with a higher average transaction price and lower margin sales. Conversely, legacy Greenlane sales are comprised of business to business, retail and e-commerce sales that consist of a higher volume of transactions with lower average prices and higher margins.
Salaries, Benefits and Payroll Taxes
Salaries, benefits and payroll taxes expenses increased by approximately $9.1 million, or 36.5%, to $34.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $24.9 million for the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase related to the KushCo merger of $5.9 million and $5.7 million in stock compensation expense, the majority of which is related to post-merger acceleration of vesting periods triggered by the KushCo merger, offset by a salaries and payroll taxes decrease of $1.7 million related to a transformation initiative to reduce salary operating expense.
As we continue to closely monitor the evolving business landscape, including the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers, vendors, and overall business performance, we remain focused on identifying cost-saving opportunities while delivering on our strategy to recruit, train, promote and retain the most talented and success-driven personnel in the industry. In light of the merger, management is continuing to explore opportunities in 2022 to further reduce salary expenses and other operating expenses.
As part of our aforementioned 2022 Plan to reduce our cost structure, increase liquidity and accelerate our path to profitability, we completed a reduction in force in March 2022, which we expect to result in approximately $8.0 million in annualized cash compensation cost savings.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $6.4 million, or 18.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of approximately $3.8 million in professional fees related to our ERP system implementation and M&A; an increase of $3.3 million in insurance expense primarily driven by directors and officers insurance premiums incurred with respect to the completed KushCo merger, an increase of $2.4 million in legal fees driven by M&A activity, an increase of $1.2 million third party logistics full year costs versus partial year cost related to 3PL facilities in Kentucky and Canada first implemented in 2020 and the addition of KushCo 3PL Canada facility; an increase in write-offs of $1.1 million principally related to vendor inventory deposits identified during a post-merger inventory rationalization initiative; offset by a decrease of $6.6 million bad debt expense with the majority of the decrease related to gain of 1.7 million due indemnification asset recovery related to VAT liability versus a loss of approximately $4.5 million related to the same indemnification asset which was not probable of recovery for the same comparable period.
Impairment Charge
Due to market conditions and estimated adverse impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, management concluded that a triggering event occurred in the first quarter of 2020, requiring a quantitative impairment test of our goodwill for our United States and Europe reporting units. Based on this assessment, we concluded that the fair value of our Europe reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and no impairment charge was required. However, the estimated fair value of the United States reporting unit was determined to be below its carrying value, which resulted in a $9.0 million goodwill impairment charge, recorded in the first quarter of 2020. We did not recognize incremental impairment charges to goodwill as a result of our annual impairment assessment as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $2.2 million, or 86.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase of $2.2 million is primarily related to the additional depreciation and amortization expense related to the KushCo merger.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest expense.
Interest expense consists of interest incurred on our Real Estate Note, promissory notes related to the Eyce and DaVinci acquisitions and Bridge loan. We also experienced an increase of interest expense of approximately $0.1 million
during the year ended December 31, 2021, due to the addition of promissory notes related to the Eyce and DaVinci acquisitions and the Secured Promissory Note (the "Bridge Loan") with Aaron LoCascio during 2021.
Other expense, net.
Other income (expense), net, decreased by approximately $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The change is primarily due a loss related to the revaluation of contingent consideration of $0.2 million in 2021, which was offset by a gain from the fair value adjustment of contingent consideration of approximately $0.7 million in 2020, which was largely attributed to changes in forecasted revenues and gross profits in our European operations over the remainder of 2021, driven primarily by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease in interest income in 2021 of $0.2 million, as well as general other expenses incurred in 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes
As a result of the IPO and the related transactions (defined in "Note 1-Business Operations and Organizations" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), we own a portion of the Common Units of the Operating Company, which is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. As a partnership, the Operating Company is not subject to U.S. federal and certain state and local income taxes. Any taxable income or loss generated by the Operating Company is passed through to, and included in the taxable income or loss of, its members, including us, in accordance with the terms of the Operating Agreement. We are subject to federal income taxes, in addition to state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of the Operating Company’s taxable income or loss.
As discussed above, prior to the consummation of the IPO, the provision for income taxes included only income taxes on income from the Operating Company’s Canadian subsidiary, based upon an estimated annual effective tax rate of approximately 26.5%. After the consummation of the IPO, Greenlane became subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to Greenlane’s allocable share of the Operating Company’s taxable income or loss. Furthermore, after completing the Conscious Wholesale acquisition in September 2019, the Operating Company became subject to Dutch income taxes on income from its Netherlands-based subsidiary, based upon an estimated effective tax rate of approximately 25.0%.
During the third quarter of 2019, management performed an assessment of our ability to realize our deferred tax assets based upon which management determined that it is not more likely than not that our results of operations will generate sufficient taxable income to realize portions of the net operating loss benefits. Consequently, we established a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, thus reducing the carrying balance to $0. In the event that management determines that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance will be made which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
Segment Operating Performance
Following the completion of the KushCo merger in late August 2021, we reassessed our operating segments based on our new organizational structure. Based on this assessment, we determined we had two operating segments as of December 31, 2021, which are the same as our reportable segments: (1) Consumer Goods, which largely comprises Greenlane's legacy operations across the United States, Canada, and Europe, and (2) Industrial Goods, which largely comprises KushCo's legacy operations. These changes in operating segments align with how we manage our business as of the fourth quarter of 2021.
The Consumer Goods segment focuses on serving consumers across wholesale, retail and e-commerce operations-through both our proprietary brands, including Eyce, DaVinci, VIBES, Marley Natural, Keith Haring, and Higher Standards, as well as lifestyle products and accessories from leading brands, like PAX, Storz and Bickel, Grenco Science, and many more. The Consumer Goods segment forms a central part of our growth strategy, especially as it relates to scaling our own portfolio of higher-margin proprietary owned brands.
The Industrial Goods segment focuses on serving the premier cannabis brands, operators, and retailers through our wholesale operations by providing ancillary products essential to their growth, such as customizable packaging and supply products, which includes our Greenlane Brand Pollen Gear and vaporization solutions offering which includes CCELL branded products.
Our CODM allocates resources to and assesses the performance of our two operating segments based on the operating segments' net sales and gross profit. The following table sets forth information by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Consumer Goods
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Consumer Goods operating segment reported net sales of approximately $110.1 million compared to approximately $122.2 million for the same period in 2020, representing a decrease of $12.1 million or 9.9%. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to a $10.9 million decrease in sales of lower-margin third-party nicotine brands. The decrease was also due, to a lesser extent, to a $7.2 million decrease in sales of other lower-margin third-party brands. The decrease was offset by a $11.9 million increase in the sales of Greenlane Brands, which increased 52.3% to $34.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales decreased by $9.2 million, or 9.0%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in cost of sales was primarily due to the 9.9% decrease in Consumer Goods net sales.
Gross margin remained relatively flat at approximately 15.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gross margin of approximately 16.5% for the same period in 2020. Excluding post-merger strategic product rationalization initiative charges of $5.1 million, gross margin was approximately 20.6% for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gross margin of approximately 22.0%, excluding damaged and obsolete charges of $6.7 million, for the same period in 2020.
Industrial Goods
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Industrial Goods operating segment reported net sales of approximately $56.0 million compared to approximately $16.1 million for the same period in 2020, representing an increase of $39.8 million or 247.2%. The increase is directly related to net sales of approximately $43.5 million contributed by our merger with KushCo, which have been included in our results of operations beginning with August 31, 2021, which is the merger completion date.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales increased by $32.0 million, or 236.2%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase is directly related to cost of sales of approximately $36.7 million contributed by our merger with KushCo, which have been included in our results of operations beginning with August 31, 2021, which is the merger completion date.
Gross margin was approximately 18.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gross margin of approximately 15.9% for the same period in 2020, representing 2.6% year over year increase. Excluding post-merger strategic product rationalization initiative charges of $5.0 million, gross margin was approximately 25.8% for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gross margin of approximately 15.9% for the same period in 2020. The year over year increase in gross margin of approximately 9.9% is related to improved supply and packaging margins and a freight recovery surcharge introduced in the fourth quarter of 2021 to offset increased freight-in costs.
Net Sales by Geographic Regions
United States
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our United States net sales were approximately $146.0 million, compared to approximately $112.5 million for the same period in 2020, representing an increase of $33.5 million, or 29.7%. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to the merger with KushCo, which contributed $40.0 million in total net sales. Excluding net sales contributed by KushCo, total net sales decreased by approximately $6.5 million, or 5.8%, to approximately $106.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to a decrease in wholesale revenue of $3.0 million, and a decrease in consumer retail revenue of $1.6 million.
Canada
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Canadian net sales were approximately $9.7 million, compared to approximately $15.5 million for the same period in 2020, representing a decrease of $5.7 million, or 37.1%. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to a $7.0 million decrease in sales related to our shift away from lower-margin third-party nicotine brands, and was partially offset by $3.5 million in net sales contributed by KushCo.
Europe
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our European net sales were approximately $10.3 million, which were roughly flat on a year-over-year basis. Our European operations continued to endure challenges over the course of the year, including significant COVID-19 restrictions that adversely impacted retail and supply chain operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are working capital, debt service related to recent acquisitions and potential future acquisitions and general corporate needs. Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash on hand and the cash flow that we generate from our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $12.9 million of cash, of which $0.7 million was held in foreign bank accounts, and approximately $53.8 million of working capital, which is calculated as total current assets minus total current liabilities, as compared to approximately $30.4 million of cash, of which $2.3 million was held in foreign bank accounts, and approximately $54.2 million of working capital as of December 31, 2020. The repatriation of cash balances from our foreign subsidiaries could have adverse tax impacts or be subject to capital controls; however, these balances are generally available to fund the ordinary business operations of our foreign subsidiaries without legal or other restrictions.
On October 1, 2018, one of the Operating Company’s wholly-owned subsidiaries closed on the purchase of a building for $10.0 million, which serves as our corporate headquarters. The purchase was financed through a real estate term note (the “Real Estate Note”) in the principal amount of $8.5 million, with one of the Operating Company’s wholly-owned subsidiaries as the borrower and Fifth Third Bank as the lender. Principal amounts plus any accrued interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 2.39% are due monthly. Our obligations under the Real Estate Note are secured by a mortgage on the property. We are seeking to enter into a sale lease-back transaction with respect to our corporate headquarters, at which point we would repay the Real Estate Note, and use the net proceeds from the sale for working capital purposes.
Our future liquidity needs may also include payments in respect of the redemption rights of the Common Units held by its members that may be exercised from time to time (should we elect to exchange such Common Units for a cash payment), payments under the TRA and state and federal taxes to the extent not sheltered by our tax assets, including those arising as a result of purchases, redemptions or exchanges of Common Units for Class A common stock. Although the actual timing and amount of any payments that may be made under the TRA will vary, the payments that we will be required to make to the members may be significant. Any payments made by us to the members under the TRA will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us or to the Operating Company and, to the extent that we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid by us; provided, however, that nonpayment for a specified period may constitute a material breach of a material obligation under the TRA and therefore may accelerate payments due under the TRA.
We believe that our cash on hand, combined with our ability to access the capital markets, will be sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, as well as our debt repayments and other liquidity requirements
associated with our existing operations, for at least the next 12 months. We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the "2021 Shelf Registration Statement") and may opportunistically conduct securities offerings from time to time in order to meet our liquidity needs. However, we may be unable to access the capital markets because of current market volatility and the performance of our stock price.
The 2021 Shelf Registration Statement registers shares of our Class A common stock, preferred stock, $0.0001 par value per share (the "preferred stock"), depository shares representing our preferred stock, warrants to purchase shares of our Class A common stock, preferred stock or depository shares, and rights to purchase shares of our Class A common stock or preferred stock that may be issued by us in a maximum aggregate amount of up to $200,000,000. As described below, on August 2, 2021 we filed a prospectus supplement (the "2021 ATM Program Prospectus Supplement") for the sale of up to $50,000,000 of shares of our Class A common stock pursuant to the ATM Program (as defined below). On March 31, 2022, the date on which this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 is filed with the SEC, the 2021 Shelf Registration Statement became subject to the offering limits set forth in General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3 ("Instruction I.B.6") because our public float is less than $75 million. For so long as our public float is less than $75 million, the aggregate market value of securities sold by us under the 2021 Shelf Registration Statement pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 during any twelve consecutive months may not exceed one-third of our public float. We have not offered any securities pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 in the twelve calendar months preceding the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In August 2021, we established an "at-the-market" equity offering program (the "ATM Program") that provides for the sale of shares of our Class A common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50 million, from time to time. Net proceeds from sales of our shares of Class A common stock under the ATM Program are expected to be used to fund potential business acquisitions and for working capital and general corporate purposes. Since the launch of the ATM program and through March 28, 2022, we sold 11,685,970 shares of our Class A common stock under the ATM Program, which generated gross proceeds of approximately $9.4 million. In light of our low cash position, we have been forced to sell stock under our ATM program at prices that may not otherwise be attractive and are dilutive.
In addition, on August 11, 2021, we completed a public offering of 4,200,000 shares of Class A common stock, 5,926,583 pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of Class A common stock and 6,075,950 standard warrants to purchase shares of Class A common stock (the “Common Stock and Warrant Offering”) for net proceeds of approximately $29.9 million.
In December 2021, we entered into the Bridge Loan with Aaron LoCascio, our co-founder, former Chief Executive Officer and President, and a current director of the Company, in which Mr. LoCascio provided us with a loan in the principal amount of $8.0 million. Accrued interest at a rate of 15.0% is due monthly, and principal amount is due in full in June 2022. The Bridge Loan is secured by a continuing security interest in all of our assets and properties whether then or thereafter existing or required, including our inventory and receivables (as defined under the Universal Commercial Code) and includes negative covenants restricting our ability to incur further indebtedness and engage in certain asset dispositions until the earlier of June 30, 2022 or the Bridge Loan has been fully repaid.
We are in the process of securing an asset backed loan to assist us with working capital needs. We can provide no assurances as to the timing of our entry into this loan or that we will enter into it at all.
Our opinions concerning liquidity are based on currently available information. To the extent this information proves to be inaccurate, or if circumstances change, future availability of trade credit or other sources of financing may be reduced and our liquidity could be adversely affected. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. Depending on the severity and direct impact of these factors on us, we may be unable to secure additional financing to meet our operating requirements on terms favorable to us, or at all.
Cash Flows
The following summary of cash flows for the periods indicated has been derived from our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During 2021, net cash used in operating activities of approximately $37.3 million consisted of (i) net loss of $53.4 million, offset by non-cash adjustments to net loss of approximately $9.6 million, including stock-based compensation expense of approximately $5.7 million, depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $4.7 million, and an offsetting reversal on the allowance of an indemnification receivable of approximately $1.7 million, and (ii) $6.5 million cash used in working
capital primarily driven by decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and customer deposits of approximately $6.9 million, offset by decreases in accounts receivable, inventories, vendor deposits and other current assets of approximately $13.4 million, which included the collection of an indemnification asset of approximately $0.9 million, and the reduction of our VAT receivable balance upon the collection of a refund from the Dutch tax authorities of approximately $4.1 million.
During 2020, net cash used in operating activities of approximately $12.3 million was a result of a net loss of $47.7 million offset by non-cash adjustments to net loss of $17.7 million, and a $17.7 million increase in cash provided by working capital primarily driven by increases in our accrued expenses and accounts payable, and decreases in inventories offset by higher other current assets.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During 2021, net cash used in investing activities of approximately $19.7 million consisted of (i) approximately $15.6 million of cash used for the acquisition of Eyce, KushCo, and DaVinci, net of cash acquired, (ii) $4.4 million for capital expenditures, including development costs for our new enterprise resource planning system, and (iii) $0.3 million of cash for the purchase of intangible assets, offset by proceeds from the sale of assets held for sale of approximately $0.7 million.
During 2020, we used approximately $4.1 million of cash for capital expenditures, including computer hardware and software to support our growth and development, and warehouse supplies and equipment, including the build-out of our two retail locations, and the purchase of a domain name and VIBES trademarks in Europe.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
During 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $39.0 million primarily consisted of cash proceeds of approximately $32.6 million from the issuance of Class A common stock in conjunction with our Common Stock and Warrant Offering in August 2021 and ATM Program, net proceeds from the issuance of the Bridge Loan of approximately $7.9 million, and cash proceeds of approximately $0.3 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants, offset primarily by approximately $1.1 million in payments on other long-term liabilities, notes payable and finance lease obligations and $0.2 million in distributions.
During 2020, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of approximately $1.1 million in payments on other long-term liabilities, notes payable and finance lease obligations.