Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) contains certain forward-looking statements. Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward- looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Overview
We are a clinical stage gene therapy company pioneering the development of gene-based therapies for large patient populations with unmet medical needs. Our oncology platform utilizes our non-viral ONCOPREX™ Nanoparticle Delivery System. Using this system, we encapsulate plasmids that express tumor suppressor genes within lipid nanoparticles and intravenously administer the encapsulated plasmids which are taken up by the tumor cells, after which the tumor suppressor genes express proteins that are missing or found in low quantities in the tumor cells. Our diabetes technology is designed to work by transforming alpha cells in the pancreas into functional beta-like cells, which can produce insulin but are distinct enough from beta cells to evade the body’s immune system.
Oncology Platform
Our lead oncology drug candidate, REQORSA Immunogene Therapy, also sometimes referred to as GPX-001, initially is being developed in combination with top selling cancer drugs to treat NSCLC and SCLC. The active agent in REQORSA is a plasmid that expresses a tumor suppressor gene named TUSC2. REQORSA has a multimodal mechanism of action whereby it interrupts cell signaling pathways that cause replication and proliferation of cancer cells, re-establishes pathways for apoptosis, or programmed cell death, in cancer cells, and modulates the immune response against cancer cells. REQORSA also has been shown to block mechanisms that create drug resistance and to be complementary with targeted drugs and immunotherapies. We believe REQORSA’s unique attributes position REQORSA to provide treatment for patients with NSCLC, SCLC, and possibly other cancers, who are not benefitting from current therapies.
We currently are enrolling one Phase 1/2 clinical trial in NSCLC and are about to begin enrolling a second Phase 1/2 clinical trial in NSCLC. The Acclaim-1 clinical trial is using a combination of REQORSA with AstraZeneca PLC’s Tagrisso® in patients with late-stage NSCLC with activating EGFR mutations, whose disease progressed after treatment with Tagrisso. The first patient was dosed in Acclaim-1 in February 2022. We expect the Phase 1 portion of Acclaim-1 to be completed by year end 2022. Our Acclaim-2 clinical trial is expected to begin enrolling patients in April 2022 and is using a combination of REQORSA with Merck & Co.’s Keytruda® in patients with late-stage NSCLC whose disease progressed after treatment with Keytruda. We expect to complete the Phase 1 portion of Acclaim-2 by the first quarter of 2023.
The FDA has granted two Fast Track Designations, one for use of REQORSA in the patient population targeted in each of these trials.
The TUSC2 gene is one of a series of genes whose therapeutic use is covered by our exclusive worldwide licenses from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center ("MD Anderson"). We believe that our ONCOPREX Nanoparticle Delivery System allows for delivery of a number of cancer-fighting genes, alone or in combination with other cancer therapies, to combat multiple types of cancer and are in early stages of discovery programs to identify early-stage candidates.
Diabetes Gene Therapy
In diabetes, we are developing a gene therapy that is exclusively licensed from the University of Pittsburgh of the Commonwealth System of Higher Education (“University of Pittsburgh”) for the treatment of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. This potential treatment is designed to work by transforming alpha cells in the pancreas into functional beta-like cells, which can produce insulin but are distinct enough from beta cells to evade the body’s immune system. The therapy utilizes a procedure in which an adeno-associated virus vector delivers Pdx1 and MafA genes to the pancreas. Our diabetes product candidate is currently being evaluated in preclinical studies at the University of Pittsburgh.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. Although we are an emerging growth company, we have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies. We have implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and may affect our financial statements, and we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that would have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain exemptions, including, without limitation, the exemption from the requirements (i) to provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and (ii) to comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our initial public offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for costs invoiced from research and development activities conducted on our behalf by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials and contract research, manufacturing, and testing activities. We record the costs of research and development activities based upon the amount of services provided, and we include these costs in accrued liabilities in the condensed balance sheets and within research and development expense in the condensed statements of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. Purchased materials to be used in future research are capitalized and included in research and development supplies.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed, the number of patients enrolled and the rate of patient enrollment in any of our clinical trials may vary from our estimates and could result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from contract research organizations ("CROs") and other third-party service providers. To date, there have been no material differences from our accrued expenses to actual expenses.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets or liabilities are recorded for temporary differences between financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, using applicable rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have provided a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, which primarily consist of cumulative net operating losses from April 1, 2009 (inception) to December 31, 2021. Due to our history of operating losses since inception and losses expected to be incurred in the foreseeable future, a full valuation allowance was considered necessary.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Management reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be realizable or at a minimum annually during the fourth quarter of the year. If an evaluation is required, the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to the asset’s carrying value to determine if an impairment of such asset is necessary. The effect of any impairment would be to expense the difference between the fair value of such asset and its carrying value.
Components of our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into three categories: research and development, general and administrative, and depreciation.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our current and potential product candidates;
•
costs related to the production and storage of supplies for engineering purposes and storage and usage of clinical supplies, including waste created in the process of producing clinical materials, spoilage, and testing of clinical materials;
•
costs related to the use of contract manufacturers, manufacturing consultants, testing organizations, cold-storage facilities, and logistics service providers;
•
fees paid to clinical consultants, clinical trial sites and vendors, including CROs in conjunction with implementing and monitoring our clinical trials and acquiring and evaluating clinical trial data, including all related fees, such as patient screening fees, laboratory work, and statistical compilation and analysis;
•
costs related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements; and
•
costs related to staffing and personnel associated with research and development activities, including wages, taxes, benefits, leases, overheads, supplies, and share-based compensation.
We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Clinical trial costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our current and future product candidates into and through clinical trials, as we pursue regulatory approval of our current and potential product candidates in the United States and Europe, and as we expand our research programs to include new therapies and new therapy combinations. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our current and potential product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including the quality of our current and potential product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability, and limited contracted partners. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our current or future product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates, if at all.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs, which include salaries, as well as the costs of professional services, such as accounting and legal, travel, facilities, information technology and other administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in future periods due to the anticipated growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as accounting, insurance, investor relations, and other costs associated with being a public company.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense consists of depreciation from our fixed assets consisting of our property, equipment, and furniture. We depreciate our assets over their estimated useful life. We estimate furniture and computer and office equipment to have a five-year life.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development ("R&D") expense was $8,607,751 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $7,302,923 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $1,304,828, or 18%, is due to (i) advancements and expansions in our manufacturing programs, including manufacturing and testing of our drug product, for our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials, (ii) increased usage of third-parties, including CROs, to develop clinical strategies and setup clinical trial electronic data systems for our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials in preparation for the opening of our clinical sites which has begun, and (iii) significant increase in R&D personnel to support our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 trials and our planned clinical trial for SCLC and our advancing discovery programs. We anticipate that these R&D activities will continue throughout 2022 and thereafter and will continue to include costs related to the ongoing support of our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials and the commencement of a clinical study in SCLC as well as continued activities related to our discovery programs.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative ("G&A") expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10,970,472 as compared to $10,635,881 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $334,591, or 3% is due to an increase in headcount and support from 10 full-time employees at the start of 2021 to 15 full-time employees at December 31, 2021, accrual of paid time off ("PTO") and employee bonuses due to new PTO policies and implementation of a total rewards strategy for recruitment and retention of employees, and increases in insurance premiums.
Interest Income. Interest income was $5,133 and $18,811 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease of $13,678, or 73%%, was due to changes in balances and a significant drop in interest rates of our money market instruments for the year ended December 31, 2021 as opposed to the prior year.
Interest Expense. There was no interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 because we satisfied all debt obligations and repaid all short-term loans prior to 2019. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding debt.
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense was $22,534 and $22,777 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $243, or 1%, in depreciation was due to the timing of purchases of computer equipment for new employees.
Net Loss. We had a net loss of $19,595,624, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $17,942,770 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of 1,652,854, or 9%, in net loss was due to the expansion of our personnel and our clinical and manufacturing programs to support our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have never generated revenue from product sales and have incurred net losses in each year. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $78,017,853. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of capital stock. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 16,697,884 shares of common stock for total net proceeds of $34,493,423 pursuant to registered direct offerings and issued 7,104,524 shares of common stock with gross proceeds of $3,857,886 from warrant and option exercises. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 4,000,000 shares of common stock for total net proceeds of $23,192,500 pursuant to a registered direct offering and issued 670,889 shares of common stock upon the exercise of options for gross proceeds of $677,912.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $38,628,876 in cash.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development of, obtain regulatory approval for and begin to commercialize one or more of our current or potential product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and which is subject to significant uncertainty. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will need to raise additional capital to fund our future operations, which include conducting our Acclaim-1 and our Acclaim-2 clinical trials. Both trials are currently open for enrollment. We have dosed the first patient in Acclaim-1 and expect to dose the first patient in Acclaim-2 in April 2022. We expect the Phase 1 portion of the Acclaim-1 trial to be completed by year end 2022 and we expect the Phase 1 portion of the Acclaim-2 trial to be completed by the first quarter of 2023. Until such time as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operating activities through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings and we may seek to raise additional capital through strategic collaborations. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, which would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our development programs or commercialization efforts or grant rights to others to develop or market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. Failure to receive additional funding could cause us to curtail or cease our operations. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations.
Based on our current cash and cash equivalents, we estimate that we will be able to fund our expenditure requirements for our current operations and planned clinical trial activities into 2024. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently plan due to incorrect assumptions or due to a decision to expand our activities beyond those currently planned. We also have been experiencing delays related to COVID-19 with respect to the launch of our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials. Specifically, we have experienced delays in engaging clinical sites as a result of a backlog of clinical trial protocols requiring review, created by an accumulation of protocols while clinical trials have been widely disrupted during the pandemic and workforce shortages that have been impacting the U.S. economy in general. Although, continued delays will enable us to fund our expenditure requirements for our current operations and planned clinical trial activities longer, we would not be advancing our clinical trials as anticipated and utilizing our available capital resources to support our operations only.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Short Term Cash Requirements
We believe that our existing cash is sufficient to fund our expected short-term needs. We currently have certain cash fixed obligations with respect to development of materials used in our clinical studies and payment obligations associated with our ongoing conduct and monitoring of our Acclaim-1 and our Acclaim-2 clinical trials, and we expect that we have sufficient cash to cover these requirements. We do not expect our operations will require significant increases in our short-term cash needs.
Long Term Cash Requirements
We regularly evaluate our business plans and strategy. These evaluations often result in changes to our business plans and strategy, some of which may be material and significantly change our cash requirements. Ongoing business development activity may require us to use some of our liquidity for an acquisition, or additional capital to fund newly acquired operations. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our existing security holders will likely experience dilution; and the incurring of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that could restrict operations.
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the costs and timing of our development activities and preclinical and clinical trials;
•
the cost of manufacturing our existing and future products;
•
the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•
the costs associated with being a public company;
•
the costs associated with additional business development or mergers and acquisitions activity, including acquisition-related costs, earn-outs or other contingent payments and costs of developing and commercializing any technologies to which we obtain rights;
•
third-party costs associated with the development and commercialization of our existing and future products and the ability of our development partners to satisfy our requirements on a timely basis;
•
the scope and terms of our business plans from time to time, and our ability to realize upon our business plans; and
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing possible patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of any such litigation.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $14,284,924 and $13,935,086 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $349,838, or 3%, in net cash used in operating activities in 2021 was due to us increasing headcount and advancing manufacturing and clinical programs in anticipation of our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $83,796 and $2,337,250 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities of $2,253,454, or 96%, was primarily due to a major investment in manufacturing materials for the year ended December 31, 2020 to provide a stockpile of raw materials that are currently being used to manufacture REQORSA for our Acclaim-1 and Accliam-2 clinical trials. Additions to property and equipment and reductions to intellectual property investment were marginal and due to timing for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $25,677,911 and $41,589,529 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $15,911,618, or 38%, in net cash provided by financing activities was due to our selling of more common stock in capital raising activities throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021.