ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in "Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are subject to certain risks and uncertainties and are based on certain assumptions that we believe are reasonable but may prove to be inaccurate. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to, among other things, future events and our financial performance. These statements are often, but not always, made through the use of words or phrases such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “predict,” “potential,” “believe,” “will likely result,” “expect,” “continue,” “will,” “anticipate,” “seek,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “projection,” “would” and “outlook,” or the negative version of those words or other comparable words or phrases of a future or forward-looking nature. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, and are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, management’s beliefs and certain assumptions made by management, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and beyond our control. Accordingly, we caution you that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, assumptions and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable as of the date made, actual results may prove to be materially different from the results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
There are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the following:
•our ability to prudently manage our growth and execute our strategy;
•risks associated with our acquisition and de novo branching strategy;
•business and economic conditions generally and in the financial services industry, nationally and within our primary markets;
•deterioration of our asset quality;
•changes in the value of collateral securing our loans;
•changes in management personnel;
•liquidity risks associated with our business;
•interest rate risk associated with our business;
•our ability to maintain important deposit customer relationships and our reputation;
•operational risks associated with our business;
•volatility and direction of market interest rates;
•increased competition in the financial services industry, particularly from regional and national institutions;
•changes in the laws, rules, regulations, interpretations or policies relating to financial institution, accounting, tax, trade, monetary and fiscal matters;
•further government intervention in the U.S. financial system;
•natural disasters and adverse weather, acts of terrorism, an outbreak of hostilities or public health outbreaks (such as coronavirus) or other international or domestic calamities, and other matters beyond our control; and
•other factors that are discussed in "Item 1A. Risk Factors."
The foregoing factors should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read together with the other cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If one or more events related to these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may differ materially from what we anticipate. Accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we do not undertake any obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict which will arise. In addition, we cannot assess the impact of each factor on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
General
We were incorporated in 1990 to serve as the holding company for Guaranty Bank & Trust. Since our founding, we have built a reputation based on financial stability and community leadership. In May 2017, we consummated an initial public offering of our common stock, which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market
As of December 31, 2021, we operate 32 banking locations in the East Texas, Dallas/Fort Worth, Central Texas and Greater Houston regions of the state. Our principal executive office is located at 16475 Dallas Parkway, Suite 600, Addison, Texas, 75001 and our telephone number is (888) 572-9881. Our website address is gnty.com. Information contained on our website does not constitute a part of this Report and is not incorporated by reference into this filing or any other report.
As a bank holding company that operates through one segment, we generate most of our revenue from interest on loans and investments, customer service and loan fees, fees related to the sale of mortgage loans, and trust and wealth management services. We incur interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds, as well as noninterest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses. We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and control the interest expenses of our liabilities, measured as net interest income, through our net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in Texas, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, financial services, insurance, transportation, manufacturing and energy sectors within our target markets and throughout the State of Texas.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 ("COVID-19") was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Global health concerns relating to COVID-19 and variants of the virus, have had, and may continue to have, a severe impact on the macroeconomic environment, including lower interest rates, heightened financial market volatility and significant disruption in banking and other financial activity in the areas we serve. Since March 2020, governmental responses to the pandemic included orders closing businesses not deemed essential and directing individuals to restrict their movements, observe social distancing and shelter in place. These actions, together with responses to the pandemic by businesses and individuals, resulted in rapid decreases in commercial and consumer activity, temporary or permanent closures of many businesses that led to a loss of revenues and a rapid increase in unemployment, material decreases in business valuations, disrupted global supply chains, market downturns and volatility, changes in consumer behavior related to pandemic fears and related emergency response legislation. Despite the wide availability of vaccines, these risks and uncertainties remain as some members of the American public are unwilling to receive the vaccines and more contagious strains of the virus may mutate both in the US and abroad.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act was signed into law. It contained substantial tax and spending provisions intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act included the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), a program designed to aid small- and medium-sized businesses through federally guaranteed loans distributed through banks. PPP loans were intended to provide eligible businesses with funding for payroll and other costs to help those businesses remain viable and allow their workers to pay their bills. PPP loans are forgivable to the extent that the borrower can demonstrate that the funds were used for such costs. Any amounts not forgiven will bear interest at 1% and be repayable over a term of 24 to 60 months from origination. PPP has been subject to amendments to increase the size of the program, extend the period in which loans could be made, extend the period for which costs could be forgiven and to provide additional flexibility to borrowers. In December 2020, several portions of the CARES Act were extended as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, including additional stimulus payments to consumers and a second round of PPP loans ("PPP2") for small businesses during 2021.
Uncertainties as to future economic conditions still exist, and we have taken measured actions during the pandemic, to ensure that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients and communities, including increases in liquidity and reserves supported by a strong capital position. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 closely, as well as any effects that may result from government stimulus and relief programs.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates, and the potential sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, is critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements are appropriate.
Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses (ACL)
Loans are stated at the amount of unpaid principal, reduced by unearned income and an allowance for credit losses. Interest on loans is recognized using the simple-interest method on the daily balances of the principal amounts outstanding. Fees associated with the origination of loans and certain direct loan origination costs are netted and the net amount is deferred and recognized over the life of the loan as an adjustment of yield.
The accrual of interest on loans is discontinued when there is a clear indication that the borrower’s cash flow may not be sufficient to meet payments as they become due, which is generally when a loan is 90 days past due. A loan may continue to accrue interest, even if it is more than 90 days past due, if the loan is both well collateralized and it is in the process of collection. When a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, all previously accrued and unpaid interest is reversed. Interest income is subsequently recognized on a cash basis as long as the remaining book balance of the asset is deemed to be collectible. If collectability is questionable, then cash payments are applied to principal. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement.
The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the loans' amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged off against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a loan balance is confirmed. Recoveries will not exceed the aggregate of loan amounts previously charged-off and expected to be charged-off.
Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. We use the weighted-average remaining maturity method (WARM method) as the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. The WARM method uses a historical average annual charge-off rate. This average annual charge-off rate contains loss content over a historical lookback period and is used as a foundation for estimating the credit loss reserve for the remaining outstanding balances of loans in a pool or segment of our loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The average annual charge-off rate
is applied to the contractual term, further adjusted for estimated prepayments, to determine the unadjusted historical charge-off rate. The calculation of the unadjusted historical charge-off rate is then adjusted for current conditions and for reasonable and supportable forecast periods. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency level, or term as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values, or other relevant factors. These qualitative factors serve to compensate for additional areas of uncertainty inherent in the portfolio that are not reflected in our historic loss factors. In early 2020, to address the uncertainties resulting from COVID-19, an additional qualitative factor was added to specifically address COVID-related economic factors and potential credit losses, in addition to our standard qualitative factors.
The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective (pool or segment) basis when similar risk characteristics exist. Our loan portfolio segments include both regulatory call report codes and internally identified risk ratings for our commercial loan segments and delinquency status for our consumer loan segments. We also have separate segments for our warehouse lines of credit, for our internally originated SBA loans, for our SBA loans acquired from Westbound Bank, and for loans originated under the PPP program.
In general, the loans in our portfolio have low historical credit losses. The credit quality of loans in our portfolio is impacted by delinquency status and debt service coverage generated by our borrowers’ businesses and fluctuations in the value of real estate collateral. Management considers delinquency status to be the most meaningful indicator of the credit quality of one-to-four single family residential, home equity loans and lines of credit and other consumer loans. In general, these types of loans do not begin to show signs of credit deterioration or default until they have been outstanding for some period of time, a process we refer to as “seasoning.” As a result, a portfolio of older loans will usually behave more predictably than a portfolio of newer loans. We consider the majority of our consumer type loans to be “seasoned” and that the credit quality and current level of delinquencies and defaults represents the level of reserve needed in the allowance for credit losses. If delinquencies and defaults were to increase, we may be required to increase our provision for loan losses, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Delinquency statistics are updated at least monthly.
Internal risk ratings are considered the most meaningful indicator of credit quality for new commercial and industrial, construction, and commercial real estate loans. Internal risk ratings are a key factor that impacts management’s estimates of loss factors used in determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses. Internal risk ratings are updated on a continuous basis.
Loans with unique risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Loans evaluated individually are excluded from the collective evaluation. When management determines that foreclosure is probable, expected credit losses are based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, adjusted for selling costs as appropriate.
For off-balance sheet credit exposures, we estimate expected credit losses over the contractual period in which we are exposed to credit risk via a contractual obligation to extend credit, unless that obligation is unconditionally cancellable by us. The allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is adjusted as a provision for credit loss expense. The estimate includes consideration of the likelihood that funding will occur and an estimate of expected credit losses on commitments expected to be funded over its estimated life.
From time to time, we modify our loan agreement with a borrower. A modified loan is considered a troubled debt restructuring (TDR) when two conditions are met: (i) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty and (ii) concessions are made by us that would not otherwise be considered for a borrower with similar credit risk characteristics. Modifications to loan terms may include a lower interest rate, a reduction of principal, or a longer term to maturity. We review each troubled debt restructured loan and determine on a case-by-case basis if the loan can be grouped with its like segment for allowance consideration or whether it should be individually evaluated for a specific allowance for credit loss allocation. If individually evaluated, an allowance for credit loss allocation is based on either the present value of estimated future cash flows or the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral. Most modifications made as a direct result of COVID-19 were not TDRs pursuant to the CARES Act and the April 7, 2020 Interagency guidance and GAAP.
We have certain lending policies and procedures in place that are designed to maximize loan income with an acceptable level of risk. Management reviews and approves these policies and procedures on a regular basis and makes changes as appropriate. Management receives frequent reports related to loan originations, quality, concentrations, delinquencies, non-performing and potential problem loans. Diversification in the loan portfolio is a means of managing risk associated with fluctuations in economic conditions, both by type of loan and geography.
Commercial and industrial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably and effectively. Underwriting standards are designed to determine whether the borrower possesses sound business ethics and practices and to evaluate current and projected cash flows to determine the ability of the borrower to repay their obligations as agreed. Commercial and industrial loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower and, secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable or inventory, and include personal guarantees.
Real estate loans are also subject to underwriting standards and processes similar to commercial and industrial loans. These loans are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows and, secondarily, as loans secured by real estate collateral. The repayment of real estate loans is generally largely dependent on the successful operation of the property securing the loans or the business conducted on the property securing the loan. Real estate loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing our real estate portfolio are generally diverse in terms of type and geographic location throughout the State of Texas. This diversity helps us reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single market or industry.
We utilize methodical credit standards and analysis to supplement our policies and procedures in underwriting consumer loans. Our loan policy addresses types of consumer loans that may be originated as well as the underlying collateral, if secured, which must be perfected. The relatively small individual dollar amounts of consumer loans that are spread over numerous individual borrowers also minimize risk.
Marketable Securities
Securities are classified as held to maturity and carried at amortized cost when management has the positive intent and ability to hold them to maturity. Securities are classified as available for sale when they might be sold before maturity. Securities available for sale are carried at fair value, with unrealized holding gains and losses reported in other comprehensive income. Management determines the appropriate classification of securities at the time of purchase. Interest income includes amortization and accretion of purchase premiums and discounts. Gains and losses on sales are recorded on the trade date and determined using the specific identification method.
From time to time, we have reclassified certain securities from available for sale to held to maturity. Such transfers are made at fair value at the date of transfer. The unrealized holding gains at the date of transfer are retained in other comprehensive income and in the carrying value of the held to maturity securities and are amortized over the remaining life of the security. The net unamortized, unrealized gain remaining on transferred securities included in accumulated other comprehensive income on our balance sheet totaled $8.9 million at December 31, 2021. This amount will be amortized out of accumulated other comprehensive income over the remaining life of the underlying securities as an adjustment of the yield on those securities.
Management evaluates securities for an allowance for credit losses based on whether they are classified as held to maturity or available for sale. For held to maturity securities, management measures expected credit losses on a collective basis by major security type and credit rating. The estimate of expected credit losses considers historical credit loss information that is then adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. For available for sale securities in an unrealized loss position, we first assess whether we intend to sell, or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. If either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met, the security’s amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through income. For securities available for sale that do not meet the aforementioned criteria, we evaluate whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or other factors. In making this assessment, management considers the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost, any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and adverse conditions specifically relate to the security, among other factors. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss exists, the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses is recorded for the credit loss, limited by the amount that the fair value is less than the amortized cost basis. Any impairment that has not been recorded through an allowance for credit losses is recognized in other comprehensive income.
Changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit losses expense. Losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of an available for sale security is confirmed or when either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met.
Fair Values of Financial Instruments
Fair values of financial instruments are estimated using relevant market information and other assumptions. Fair value estimates involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment regarding interest rates, credit risk, prepayments, and other factors, especially in the absence of broad markets for particular items. Changes in assumptions or in market conditions could significantly affect the estimates. The fair value estimates of existing on and off-balance sheet financial instruments do not include the value of anticipated future business or the value of assets and liabilities not considered financial instruments.
Emerging Growth Company
The Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, we have “opted out” of this provision. As a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards to the same extent that compliance is required for non-emerging growth companies. Our decision to opt out of the extended transition period under the JOBS Act is irrevocable.
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
A discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found under “Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at investors.gnty.com.
Net Interest Income
Our operating results depend primarily on our net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates impact the yield and rates paid on interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, respectively. Changes in the amount and type of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities also impact our net interest income. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor (1) yields on our loans and other interest-earning assets, (2) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources, (3) our net interest spread and (4) our net interest margin. Because noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity also fund interest-earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these noninterest-bearing sources.
Net interest income, before the reverse provision for credit losses, was $95.6 million compared to $90.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.6 million, or 6.2%. The increase in net interest income before the provision (or reverse provision) for credit losses resulted primarily from a $6.1 million, or 46.5%, decrease in interest expense. Although there was a $38.6 million, or 2.1%, increase in average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, that increase was offset by a 14 basis point decrease in the average yield on total loans driven by lower rates on new and variable rate loans, partially offset by recognition of PPP origination fees, which are described in more detail in a table below.
The increase in average loans outstanding was primarily due to organic growth from the prior year. Excluding PPP loans, the average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $61.5 million, or 3.5%, from the prior year. The $6.1 million decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing deposits of 44 basis points, despite a $133.0 million, or 9.1%, increase in average interest-bearing deposits over the same period in 2020. The average deposit balance increase is the result of continued reductions in interest rates for interest-bearing deposits as markets have allowed and general changes in consumer spending habits.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net interest margin on a taxable equivalent basis and net interest spread were 3.51% and 3.32%, respectively, compared to 3.77% and 3.46% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which reflects a 55 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets, partially offset by a 41 basis point decrease in the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities from the prior year.
Large provisions for credit losses in the prior year, resulting from the effects of COVID-19, and participation in the PPP program, have created temporary extraordinary results in the calculation of net earnings and related performance ratios. The following table illustrates net earnings and net core earnings per share, which are pre-tax, pre-provision and pre-extraordinary PPP income, as well as net core performance ratios for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Average Balance Sheet Amounts, Interest Earned and Yield Analysis
The following table presents an analysis of net interest income and net interest spread for the periods indicated, including average outstanding balances for all major categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the interest earned or paid on such amounts, and the average rates earned or paid on such assets or liabilities, respectively. The table also sets forth the net interest margin on average total interest-earning assets for the same periods. Interest earned on loans that are classified as nonaccrual is not recognized in income; however, the balances are reflected in average outstanding balances for the period. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amount of interest income not recognized on nonaccrual loans was not material. Any nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield.
The Bank’s continued participation in the PPP program has created temporary extraordinary results in the calculation of net interest margin. To illustrate the impact of the PPP program on net interest margin, the table below excludes PPP loans and their associated fees and costs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table presents the change in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for all major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is a charge to income in order to bring our allowance for credit losses to a level deemed appropriate by management based on factors such as historical loss experience, trends in classified and past due loans, volume and growth in the loan portfolio, current economic conditions in our markets and value of the underlying collateral. Loans are charged off against the allowance for credit losses when determined appropriate. Although management believes it uses the best information available to make determinations with respect to the provision for loan losses, future adjustments may be necessary if economic conditions differ from the assumptions used in making the determination. For a full description of the factors taken into account by our management in determining the allowance for credit losses see “- Financial Condition-Allowance for Credit Losses.”
During the year ended December 31, 2020, a total allowance for credit losses provision of $13.2 million was recorded primarily to account for the estimated impact of COVID-19 on credit quality and resulted largely from changes to individual loan risk ratings, as well as COVID-specific qualitative factors. During 2021, we recorded no provision in the first and the fourth quarters, a $1.0 million reverse provision in the second quarter and a $700,000 reverse provision in the third quarter of 2021, for a total reverse provision during the year of $1.7 million. While the provision reversals captured
improvements that have occurred to macro-economic factors evaluated at the onset of the pandemic, as well as risk rating upgrades for certain loans, management remains cautious about the recent surge in COVID-19 cases and the conclusion of various government stimulus programs. As such, management remains conservative in releasing COVID related provisions prior to gaining a good understanding of the residual effects of the pandemic and government relief efforts. Management understands that the economic effects of the pandemic may continue through at least the first half of 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $5.9 million in loan balances past due 30 or more days and $2.8 million in loan balances for nonperforming (nonaccrual) loans, compared to $15.5 million and $12.7 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The decrease in non-performing assets during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 resulted primarily from the resolution of three problem loans, made to two borrowers, with outstanding combined book balances of $8.7 million at December 31, 2020, that were acquired during the 2018 Westbound acquisition and which were fully reserved prior to the onset of COVID-19.
Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $1.5 million, compared to $331,000 in 2020. During the first quarter of 2021, one of these loans was resolved when the underlying collateral, a hotel, was sold to a third party. The bank charged off $475,000 in connection with the sale, all of which had previously been specifically reserved within the allowance for credit losses, or ACL. The other two loans, both to one borrower and collateralized by the same hotel, were resolved through a bankruptcy judgment during the first quarter of 2021 that allows the borrower to adequately service their debt coverage. The bankruptcy order resulted in a charge-off of $270,000, which had previously been fully reserved in the ACL. These loans were internally identified as problem assets prior to COVID-19 and were properly reserved.
The following table shows the ratio of net charge-offs (recoveries) to average loans outstanding by loan category for the dates indicated:
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges on deposit accounts, merchant and debit card fees, fiduciary income, gains on the sale of both mortgage and SBA loans, and income from bank-owned life insurance. Noninterest income does not include loan origination fees to the extent they exceed the direct loan origination costs, which are generally recognized over the life of the related loan as an adjustment to yield using the interest method.
The following table presents components of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the period-over-period variations in the categories of noninterest income:
Total noninterest income increased $1.5 million, or 6.7%, for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. Material changes in the components of noninterest income are discussed below.
Service Charges on Deposit Accounts. We earn fees from our customers for deposit related services, and these fees typically constitute a significant and generally predictable component of our non-interest income. Service fee income was $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.1 million for the same period in 2020, an increase of $708,000, or 23.1%, resulting from the expiration of COVID-related fee waivers and consumer spending activity and habits returning to more normal, pre-pandemic, levels.
Gain on Sale of Loans. We originate long-term fixed-rate mortgage loans and Small Business Administration (SBA) loans for resale into the secondary market. We sold 501 mortgage loans for $116.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 705 mortgage loans for $164.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gain on sale of loans was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1.3 million, or 19.1%, compared to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. $4.4 million and $1.1 million of the gain in the current year was attributable to the sales of mortgage loans and SBA 7(a) loans, respectively, while the gain during the prior year consisted of $6.1 million in mortgage loan sales and $756,000 in SBA 7(a) loan sales.
Fiduciary and Custodial Income. We have trust powers and provide fiduciary and custodial services through our trust and wealth management division. Fiduciary income was $2.3 million and $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $321,000, or 16.0%. The revenue increase resulted primarily from 35 new accounts that opened in 2021, which have generated additional income. Furthermore, revenue for our services fluctuates by month with the market value for all publicly traded assets, which are primarily held in irrevocable trusts and investment management accounts that carry higher fees. Additionally, our custody-only assets are carried in a tiered percentage rate fee schedule charged against market value.
Merchant and Debit Card Fees. We earn interchange income related to the activity of our customers’ merchant debit card usage. Debit card interchange income was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.5 million for 2020, an increase of $1,202,000, or 21.8%. The increase was primarily due to a change in contract terms, an annual earnings credit received from our debit card vendor and growth in the number of DDAs and debit card usage volume during 2021. The total number of DDAs increased by 3,240 accounts, from 49,608 as of December 31, 2020 to 52,848 as of December 31, 2021.
Warehouse Lending Fees. A portion of our lending involves the origination of mortgage warehouse lines of credit.
The decrease in warehouse lending fees of $145,000, or 15.2%, results from a decrease in overall warehouse lending activity in 2021. The average annual balance of mortgage warehouse lines decreased from $81.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $66.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $14.8 million or 18.2%.
Mortgage Fee Income. Mortgage fee income consists of lender processing fees such as underwriting fees, administrative fees and funding fees that are collected from mortgage loans that the Bank intends to sell on the secondary
market. The decrease of $159,000, or 20.6%, from December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a lower volume of mortgage purchases and refinances due primarily to increased mortgage loan rates in 2021.
Other. This category includes a variety of other income producing activities, including mortgage loan origination fees, wire transfer fees, loan administration fees, and other fee income. Other noninterest income increased $875,000, or 36.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, due primarily to a $637,000 increase in bank-owned life insurance proceeds, in part due to a gain of $277,000 resulting from the death of a former bank officer. Additionally, there was a $53,000 increase in wire transfer fee income, as well as a $44,000 increase in the gain on sale of assets in 2021 compared to 2020.
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of all employee expenses and costs associated with operating our facilities, obtaining and retaining customer relationships and providing bank services. The largest component of noninterest expense is salaries and employee benefits. Noninterest expense also includes operational expenses, such as occupancy expenses, depreciation and amortization of our facilities and our furniture, fixtures and office equipment, professional and regulatory fees, including FDIC assessments, data processing expenses, and advertising and promotion expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, noninterest expense totaled $73.3 million, an increase of $6.8 million, or 10.2%, compared to $66.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest expense:	
Material changes in the components of noninterest expense are discussed below.
Employee Compensation and Benefits. Salaries and employee benefits are the largest component of noninterest expense and include payroll expense, the cost of incentive compensation, benefit plans, health insurance and payroll taxes. Salaries and employee benefits were $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.2 million, or 13.9%, compared to $37.2 million in 2020. Employee compensation and benefits expense increased due to higher salaries, higher insurance expense accruals due to increased claims experience, higher payroll tax expense and bonus accruals. The bonus accrual in the prior year was lower during the first nine months of 2020 because of lower net income resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Occupancy Expenses. Occupancy expenses are mainly comprised of depreciation expense on fixed assets, and lease expense related to ASC 842 accounting. Occupancy expenses increased $724,000, or 7.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period of the prior year. Depreciation expense and ASC 842 lease expense increased $249,000 and $299,000, respectively, compared to the prior year period.
Software and Technology. Software and technology expenses increased $490,000, or 11.9%, from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is attributable primarily to new software investments to improve online deposit account opening, further enhance treasury management
capabilities, improve cybersecurity monitoring and tools, and improve connectivity to support remote working and other technology capabilities.
Amortization. Amortization costs include amortization of software and core deposit premiums. Amortization costs were $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $195,000, or 14.5%, compared to $1.3 million in 2020. The reason for the decrease in amortization in 2021 was primarily due to a decline in amortization expense on core deposit premiums from $854,000 in 2020 to $686,000 in 2021.
Advertising and Promotions. Advertising and promotion-related expenses were $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $260,000, or 17.4%. The increase was primarily due to the resumption of Bank-sponsored promotional events and advertising campaigns that were halted or delayed during the prior year due to the pandemic.
ATM and Debit Card Expense. We pay processing fees related to the activity of our customers’ ATM and debit card usage. ATM and debit card expenses were $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $494,000, or 25.3%, compared to $2.0 million for the same period in 2020 as a result of increased ATM and debit card usage by our customers.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of income tax expense we incur is influenced by the amounts of our pre-tax income, tax-exempt income and other nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at current income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, income tax expense totaled $8.8 million and $5.9 million, respectively. The increase in income tax expense was primarily due to an increase in net earnings before taxes of $15.3 million. Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 18.02% and 17.70%, respectively.
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition as of December 31, 2021
Assets
Our total assets increased $345.2 million, or 12.6%, from $2.74 billion as of December 31, 2020 to $3.09 billion as of December 31, 2021. Our asset growth was primarily due to increases in cash and cash equivalents of $147.8 million, total securities of $145.7 million and gross loans of $41.2 million. The increase in cash and cash equivalents is due to a $213.2 million increase in federal funds sold, partially offset by decreases in interest-bearing cash deposits and due from balances of $60.5 million and $4.9 million, respectively. The increase in loans resulted largely from our participation in the PPP2 loan program, as well as organic loan growth, and the increase in cash and cash equivalents resulted largely from increases in deposit balances that resulted from government stimulus payments, PPP2 loan proceeds and general changes in consumer spending and saving habits.
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is derived through interest earned on loans to small- to medium-sized businesses, commercial companies, professionals and individuals located in our primary market areas. A substantial portion of our loan portfolio consists of commercial and industrial loans and real estate loans secured by commercial real estate properties located in our primary market areas. Our loan portfolio represents the highest yielding component of our earning asset base.
Our loan portfolio is the largest category of our earning assets. As of December 31, 2021, total loans held for investment were $1.91 billion, an increase of $41.2 million, or 2.2%, from the December 31, 2020 balance of $1.87 billion. In addition to these amounts, $4.1 million and $5.5 million in loans were classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The increase in gross loans during the period included outstanding PPP loan balances of $50.6 million, to 393 borrowers, as of December 31, 2021. Excluding the outstanding balance of PPP loans, gross loans increased 7.6%, or $130.4 million, from December 31, 2020, primarily the result of organic growth and period-end increases in commercial real estate and multi-family residential portfolios.
Total loans, excluding those held for sale, as a percentage of deposits, were 71.4% and 81.6% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Total loans, excluding those held for sale, as a percentage of total assets, were 61.8% and 68.1% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table summarizes our loan portfolio by type of loan as of the dates indicated:
Commercial and Industrial. Commercial and industrial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably and effectively. These loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower, and secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable or inventory, and generally include personal guarantees. Commercial and industrial loans decreased $165.2 million, or 37.1%, to $324.3 million as of December 31, 2021 from $445.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in the commercial and
industrial portfolio is primarily because most PPP loans are included in this group, in addition to normal variances in the balances of underlying lines of credit.
Construction and Development. Construction and land development loans are comprised of loans to fund construction, land acquisition and land development construction. The properties securing the portfolio are located throughout Texas and are generally diverse in terms of type. Construction and development loans increased $37.4 million, or 13.8%, to $307.8 million as of December 31, 2021 from $270.4 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase resulted from normal fluctuations in construction project volume in our markets.
1-4 Family Residential. Our 1-4 family residential loan portfolio is comprised of loans secured by 1-4 family homes, which are both owner occupied and investor owned. Our 1-4 family residential loans have a relatively small balance spread across many individual borrowers compared to our other loan categories. Our 1-4 family residential loans increased $21.6 million, or 5.5%, to $410.7 million as of December 31, 2021 from $389.1 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase is due to normal fluctuations in residential loans, as well as retaining several or the loans originated in our mortgage department within our bank portfolio, rather than selling them on the secondary market.
Commercial Real Estate. Commercial real estate loans are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows and, secondarily, as loans secured by real estate. These loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing the portfolio are located primarily within our markets and are generally diverse in terms of type. This diversity helps reduce our exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single industry. Commercial real estate loans increased $28.6 million, or 4.8%, to $622.8 million as of December 31, 2021 from $594.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in commercial real estate loans during the periods was mostly driven by organic growth.
Other Loan Categories. Other categories of loans included in our loan portfolio include farmland and agricultural loans made to farmers and ranchers relating to their operations, multi-family residential loans and consumer loans. None of these categories of loans represents a significant portion of our total loan portfolio.
Contractual Loan Maturities. The contractual maturity ranges of loans in our loan portfolio and the amount of such loans with fixed and floating interest rates in each maturity range as of December 31, 2021 are summarized in the following table:
Nonperforming Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. In general, we place loans on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days past due. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than
90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed from income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are, in management’s opinion, reasonably assured.
We believe our conservative lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio. We have established underwriting guidelines to be followed by our bankers, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative or adverse trends. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
Nonperforming assets as a percentage of total loans were 0.15% at December 31, 2021, compared to 0.70% at December 31, 2020. The Bank’s nonperforming assets consist primarily of nonaccrual loans. During 2020, nonperforming assets included three SBA 7(a), partially guaranteed (75%) loans that were acquired in the June 2018 acquisition of Westbound Bank, with combined book balances of $8.7 million as of December 31, 2020. During the first quarter of 2021, one of these loans was resolved when the underlying collateral, a hotel, was sold to a third party. The bank charged off $475,000 in connection with the sale, all of which had previously been specifically reserved within the allowance for credit losses, or ACL. The other two loans, both to one borrower and collateralized by the same hotel, were resolved through a bankruptcy judgment during the first quarter of 2021 that allows the borrower to adequately service their debt coverage. The bankruptcy order resulted in a charge-off of $270,000, which had previously been fully reserved in the ACL. These loans were internally identified as problem assets prior to COVID-19 and were properly reserved.
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents information regarding nonaccrual loans by category as of the dates indicated:
Potential Problem Loans
From a credit risk standpoint, we classify loans in one of five risk ratings: pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful or loss. Within the pass rating, we classify loans into one of the following five subcategories based on perceived credit risk, including repayment capacity and collateral security: superior, excellent, good, acceptable and acceptable/watch. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. We review the ratings on credits monthly. Ratings are adjusted to reflect the degree of risk and loss that is believed to be inherent in each credit as of each monthly reporting period. Our methodology is structured so that specific ACL allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss).
Credits rated special mention show clear signs of financial weaknesses or deterioration in creditworthiness; however, such concerns are not so pronounced that we generally expect to experience significant loss within the short-term. Such credits typically maintain the ability to perform within standard credit terms and credit exposure is not as prominent as credits with a lower rating.
Credits rated substandard are those in which the normal repayment of principal and interest may be, or has been, jeopardized by reason of adverse trends or developments of a financial, managerial, economic or political nature, or important weaknesses which exist in collateral. A protracted workout on these credits is a distinct possibility. Prompt corrective action is therefore required to reduce exposure and to assure that adequate remedial measures are taken by the borrower. Credit exposure becomes more likely in such credits and a serious evaluation of the secondary support to the credit is performed.
Credits rated as doubtful have the weaknesses of substandard assets with the additional characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full questionable and there is a high probability of loss based on currently existing facts, conditions and values.
Credits rated as loss are charged-off. We have no expectation of the recovery of any payments in respect of credits rated as loss.
Loans that were modified for reasons related to the COVID-19 pandemic that avoided TDR status have all returned to contractual payment schedules and are monitored for risk rating classification consistent with all other loans.
The following tables summarize the internal ratings of our performing, classified and nonaccrual (as well as substandard) loans, by category, as of:
Allowance for Credit Losses
We maintain an allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) that represents management’s best estimate of the appropriate level of losses and risks inherent in our applicable financial assets under the current expected credit loss model. The amount of the allowance for credit losses should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in those amounts, or at all. The determination of the amount of allowance involves a high degree of judgment and subjectivity. Refer to Note 1 of the notes to the financial statements for discussion regarding our ACL methodologies for loans held for investment and available for sale securities.
For available for sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position, the Company evaluates the securities at each measurement date to determine whether the decline in the fair value below the amortized cost basis (impairment) is due to credit-related factors or noncredit-related factors. Any impairment that is not credit related is recognized in other comprehensive income, net of applicable taxes. Credit-related impairment is recognized as an ACL on the balance sheet, limited to the amount by which the amortized cost basis exceeds the fair value, with a corresponding adjustment to earnings through provision for credit loss expense. As of December 31, 2021, the Company determined that all available for sale securities that experienced a decline in fair value below the amortized costs basis were due to noncredit-related factors, therefore no related ACL was recorded and there was no related provision expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For held to maturity debt securities, the Company evaluates expected credit losses on a collective basis by major security type with each type sharing similar risk characteristics, and considers historical credit loss information that is adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. With regard to U.S. Treasury and residential mortgage backed securities issued by the U.S. governments, or agencies thereof, it is expected that the securities will not be settled at prices less than the amortized cost bases of the securities as such securities are backed by the full faith and credit of and/or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Accordingly, no allowance for credit losses has been recorded for these securities. With regard to municipal securities, management considers 1) issuer bond ratings, 2) whether issuers continue to make timely principal and interest payments under the contractual terms of the securities, 3) internal forecasts and 4) whether or not such securities are guaranteed by the Texas Permanent School Fund or pre-refunded by the issuers. As of December 31, 2021, the Company determined there were no credit related concerns that warrant an ACL for the held to maturity portfolio.
In determining the ACL for loans held for investment, we primarily estimate losses on segments of loans with similar risk characteristics and where the potential loss can be identified and reasonably determined. For loans that do not share similar risk characteristics with our existing segments, they are evaluated individually for an ACL. Our portfolio is segmented by regulatory call report codes, with additional segments for warehouse mortgage loans, SBA loans acquired from Westbound Bank, SBA loans originated by us and SBA PPP loans. The segments are further disaggregated by internally assigned risk rating classifications. The balance of the ACL is determined using the current expected credit loss model, which considers historical loan loss rates, changes in the nature of our loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, industry concentrations, delinquency trends, current economic factors and reasonable and supportable forecasts of the impact of future economic conditions on loan loss rates. Please see “Critical Accounting Policies - Allowance for Credit Losses.”
In connection with the review of our loan portfolio, we consider risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories in assessing the quality of individual loans. Some of the risk elements we consider include:
•for commercial and industrial loans, the debt service coverage ratio (income from the business in excess of operating expenses compared to loan repayment requirements), the operating results of the commercial, industrial or professional enterprise, the borrower’s business, professional and financial ability and expertise, the specific
risks and volatility of income and operating results typical for businesses in that category and the value, nature and marketability of collateral;
•for commercial mortgage loans and multifamily residential loans, the debt service coverage ratio, operating results of the owner in the case of owner occupied properties, the loan to value ratio, the age and condition of the collateral and the volatility of income, property value and future operating results typical of properties of that type;
•for 1-4 family residential mortgage loans, the borrower’s ability to repay the loan, including a consideration of the debt to income ratio and employment and income stability, the loan-to-value ratio, and the age, condition and marketability of the collateral; and
•for construction and development loans, the perceived feasibility of the project including the ability to sell developed lots or improvements constructed for resale or the ability to lease property constructed for lease, the quality and nature of contracts for presale or prelease, if any, experience and ability of the developer and loan to value ratio.
As of December 31, 2021, the allowance for credit losses totaled $30.4 million, or 1.59%, of total loans, excluding those held for sale, and totaled 1.64%, excluding PPP loans and loans held for sale. As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses totaled $33.6 million, or 1.80%, of total loans, excluding those held for sale, and totaled 1.95%, excluding PPP loans and loans held for sale. The decrease in the ACL of $3.2 million, or 9.5%, is due to COVID-specific qualitative factors established during 2020 that were reduced during the first three quarters of 2021 from 55 basis points across the loan portfolio to 14.75 basis points in order to conservatively capture some of the improvements that have occurred to macroeconomic factors evaluated at the onset of the pandemic as part of the aforementioned COVID-specific qualitative factors, as well as risk rating upgrades for specific loans, which impact the reserve calculations within our model, offset by growth in our overall loan portfolio. Management remains cautious about the recent surge in COVID-19 cases and the conclusion of various government stimulus programs. As such, management remains conservative in releasing COVID related provisions prior to gaining a good understanding of the residual effects of the pandemic and government relief efforts.
The following table presents, as of and for the periods indicated, an analysis of the allowance for credit losses and other related data:
We believe the successful execution of our expansion strategy through organic growth and strategic acquisitions is generally demonstrated by the upward trend in loan balances from December 31, 2017 to December 31, 2021. Loan balances, excluding loans held for sale, increased from $1.36 billion as of December 31, 2017, to $1.91 billion as of December 31, 2021. Total loans excluding PPP loans and loans held for sale were $1.86 billion as of December 31, 2021. Net charge-offs have been minimal, representing on average 0.08% of average loan balances during the same period.
Although we believe that we have established our allowance for credit losses in accordance with GAAP and that the allowance for credit losses was adequate to provide for known and inherent losses in the portfolio at all times shown above, future provisions for credit losses will be subject to ongoing evaluations of the risks in our loan portfolio. If our primary market areas experience economic declines, if asset quality deteriorates or if we are successful in growing the size of our loan portfolio, our allowance could become inadequate and material additional provisions for credit losses could be required.
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for credit losses among loan categories and certain other information as of the dates indicated. The allocation of the allowance for credit losses as shown in the table should neither be interpreted as an indication of future charge-offs, nor as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily
occur in these amounts or in the indicated proportions. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, provide an appropriate return on funds invested, manage interest rate risk, meet collateral requirements and meet regulatory capital requirements. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying amount of our investment securities totaled $526.5 million, an increase of $145.7 million, or 38.3%, compared to $380.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Investment securities represented 17.1% and 13.9% of total assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, securities available for sale totaled $342.2 million and securities held to maturity, which includes the transfer of securities from our available for sale portfolio during the year, totaled $184.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, securities available for sale totaled $380.8 million, and we had no securities held to maturity. Held to maturity securities represented 35.0% of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021.
The carrying values of our investment securities classified as available for sale are adjusted for unrealized gain or loss, and any gain or loss is reported on an after-tax basis as a component of other comprehensive income in shareholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2021, the Company determined that all available for sale securities that experienced a decline in fair value below their amortized cost basis were impacted by noncredit-related factors and that securities held to maturity have not experienced credit deterioration; therefore the Company carried no ACL with respect to our securities portfolio at December 31, 2021.
From time to time, we have reclassified certain securities from available for sale to held to maturity. Such transfers are made at fair value at the date of transfer. The unrealized holding gains at the date of transfer are retained in other comprehensive income and in the carrying value of the held to maturity securities and are amortized over the remaining life of the security. The net unamortized, unrealized gain remaining on transferred securities included in accumulated other comprehensive income on our balance sheet totaled $8.9 million at December 31, 2021. This amount will be amortized out of accumulated other comprehensive income over the remaining life of the underlying securities as an adjustment of the yield on those securities.
The following tables summarize the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our investment securities:
We do not hold any Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac preferred stock, collateralized debt obligations, structured investment vehicles or second lien elements in our investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our investment portfolio did not contain any securities that are directly backed by subprime or Alt-A mortgages, non-U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities or corporate collateralized mortgage obligations.
The following tables set forth the fair value of available for sale securities and the amortized cost of held to maturity securities, and maturities and approximated weighted average yield based on estimated annual income divided by the average amortized cost of our securities portfolio as of the dates indicated. The contractual maturity of a mortgage-backed security is the date at which the last underlying mortgage matures.
The contractual maturity of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations is not a reliable indicator of their expected life because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. Mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations are typically issued with stated principal amounts and are backed by pools of mortgage loans and other loans with varying maturities. The term of the underlying mortgages and loans may vary significantly due to the ability of a borrower to prepay. Monthly pay downs on mortgage-backed securities typically cause the average life of the securities to be much different from the stated contractual maturity. During a period of increasing interest rates, fixed rate mortgage-backed securities do not tend to experience heavy prepayments of principal, and, consequently, the average life of this security is typically lengthened. If interest rates begin to fall, prepayments may increase, thereby shortening the estimated life of this security. The weighted average life of our investment portfolio was 5.72 years with an estimated effective duration of 3.37 years as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, we did not own securities of any one issuer, other than the U.S. government and its agencies, for which aggregate adjusted cost exceeded 10.0% of the consolidated shareholders’ equity.
The average yield of our securities portfolio was 2.29% as of December 31, 2021, down from 2.80% as of December 31, 2020. The decline in average yield resulted primarily from decreases in yields on mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations of 2.02% and 2.56% at December 31, 2020, respectively, to 1.55% and 1.93% at December 31, 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, mortgage-backed securities and municipal securities comprised 41.9% and 35.5% of the portfolio, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, mortgage-backed securities and municipal securities comprised 28.1% and 46.1% of the portfolio, respectively.
Deposits
We offer a variety of deposit products, which have a wide range of interest rates and terms, including demand, savings, money market and time accounts. We rely primarily on competitive pricing policies, convenient locations and personalized service to attract and retain these deposits.
Average deposits for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2,517,937, an increase of $353,130, or 16.3%, compared to $2,164,807 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The average rate paid on total interest-bearing deposits was 0.35% and 0.79% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in average rates for 2021 was driven primarily by lowering of interest paid on all deposit accounts that resulted from the Federal Reserve reducing interest rates.
The following table presents the average balances and average rates paid on deposits for the periods indicated:
The ratio of average noninterest-bearing deposits to average total deposits for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 36.4% and 32.2%, respectively.
Total deposits as of December 31, 2021 were $2.67 billion, an increase of $384.4 million, or 16.8%, compared to $2.29 billion as of December 31, 2020. The majority of the deposit balance increase was due to the deposit of PPP loan proceeds and COVID-related government stimulus payments into demand accounts at the Bank, as well as apparent changes in depositor spending habits in these periods resulting from economic and other uncertainties due to COVID-19.
Noninterest-bearing deposits as of December 31, 2021 were $1.01 billion compared to $779.7 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $234.8 million, or 30.1%.
Total savings and interest-bearing demand account balances as of December 31, 2021 were $1.66 billion, compared to $1.51 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $149.7 million, or 9.9%.
The aggregate amount of certificates and other time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $228.1 million and $266.3 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth the amount of certificates of deposit greater than $100,000 by time remaining until maturity as of December 31, 2021:
Factors affecting the cost of funding interest-bearing assets include the volume of noninterest- and interest-bearing deposits, changes in market interest rates and economic conditions in our primary market areas and their impact on interest paid on deposits, as well as the ongoing execution of our balance sheet management strategy. Cost of total deposits is calculated as total interest expense divided by average total deposits. Our cost of total deposits was 0.22% and 0.54% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in our cost of total deposits for 2021 was primarily due to decreases in rates on interest-bearing deposits, which were 0.35% and 0.79% in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and a $220,108, or 31.6%, increase in the average balance of noninterest-bearing deposits from $696,454 in 2020to $916,562 in 2021.
Borrowings
We utilize short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities, each of which is discussed below.
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, total borrowing capacity of $638.7 million and $476.5 million, respectively, was available under this arrangement. Our outstanding FHLB advances mature within two years. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $1.52 billion in real estate loans were pledged as collateral for our FHLB borrowings. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to hedge interest rate risk. The following table presents our FHLB borrowings as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents our FHLB borrowings by maturity and weighted average rate as of December 31, 2021:
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has an available borrower in custody arrangement, which allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. Certain commercial and industrial and consumer loans are pledged under this arrangement. We maintain this borrowing arrangement to meet liquidity needs pursuant to our contingency funding plan. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, $182.9 million and $158.8 million, respectively, were available under this arrangement. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately $236.4 million and $214.5 million, respectively, in consumer and commercial and industrial loans were pledged as collateral. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, no borrowings were outstanding under this arrangement.
Other Borrowings. We have historically used a line of credit with a correspondent bank as a source of funding for working capital needs, the payment of dividends when there is a temporary timing difference in cash flows, and repurchases of equity securities. In March 2017, we entered into an unsecured revolving line of credit for $25.0 million, and we renewed that line of credit in March 2022. The line of credit bears interest at the prime rate (3.25% as of December 31, 2021) subject to a floor of 3.50%, with quarterly interest payments, and matures in March 2023. As of December 31, 2021, there was a $5.0 million outstanding balance on the line of credit. As of December 31, 2020, there was no outstanding balance on this line of credit with the correspondent bank.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity involves our ability to raise funds to support asset growth and acquisitions or reduce assets to meet deposit withdrawals and other payment obligations, to maintain reserve requirements and otherwise to operate on an ongoing basis and manage unexpected events, such as COVID-19. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, liquidity needs were primarily met by core deposits, security and loan maturities and amortizing investment and loan portfolios. Although access to purchased funds from correspondent banks and overnight or longer term advances from the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas are available, and have been utilized on occasion to take advantage of investment opportunities, we do not generally rely on these external funding sources. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we maintained two federal funds lines of credit with commercial banks that provide for the availability to borrow up to an aggregate $60.0 million in federal funds. There were no funds under these lines of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition to these federal funds lines of credit, our $25.0 million revolving line of credit discussed above in “Other Borrowings” provides an additional source of liquidity.
The following table illustrates, during the periods presented, the composition of our funding sources and the average assets in which those funds are invested as a percentage of average total assets for the period indicated. Average assets were $2.92 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $2.57 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our primary source of funds is deposits, and our primary use of funds is loans. We do not expect a change in the primary source or use of our funds in the foreseeable future. Our average loans, including average loans held for sale, increased $38.6 million, or 2.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, while our average deposits increased $353.1 million, or 16.3%, for the same time periods. We predominantly invest excess deposits in overnight deposits with our correspondent banks, federal funds sold, securities, interest-bearing deposits at other banks or other short-term liquid investments until needed to fund loan growth.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $405.3 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit and $8.4 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, we had $324.3 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit and $8.5 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the total outstanding may not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no exposure to future cash requirements associated with known uncertainties or capital expenditures of a material nature. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $499.6 million, compared to $351.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in federal funds sold of $213.2 million, offset by a decrease in interest-bearing deposits held at other banks of $60.5 million.
Capital Resources
Total shareholders’ equity increased to $302.2 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $272.6 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $29.6 million, or 10.8%. The increase from December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of net earnings, partially offset by a decrease in other comprehensive income and payment of dividends. The Company also issued a 10.0% stock dividend in the first quarter of 2021 that resulted in an additional 1,093,932 shares of common stock issued.
Capital management consists of providing equity and other instruments that qualify as regulatory capital to support current and future operations. Banking regulators view capital levels as important indicators of an institution’s financial soundness. As a general matter, FDIC-insured depository institutions and their holding companies are required to maintain minimum capital relative to the amount and types of assets they hold. We are subject to regulatory capital requirements at the bank holding company and bank levels. See "Item 1. Business-Guaranty Bank & Trust, N.A.-Regulation and Supervision-Capital Adequacy Requirements” for additional discussion regarding the regulatory capital requirements applicable to us and the Bank. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements at the bank and bank holding company levels, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized,” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we deploy our capital, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings and provisions for credit losses. However, we expect to closely monitor our loan portfolio, operating expenses and overall capital levels in order to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents the regulatory capital ratios for our Company and the Bank as of the dates indicated:
Contractual Obligations
We have issued subordinated debentures relating to the issuance of trust preferred securities. In October 2002, we formed Guaranty (TX) Capital Trust II, which issued $3.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $93,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $3.1 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on October 30, 2032. In July 2006, we formed Guaranty (TX) Capital Trust III, which issued $2.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $62,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $2.1 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on October 1, 2036. In March 2015, we acquired DCB Trust I, which issued $5.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $155,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $5.2 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on June 15, 2037.
With certain exceptions, the amounts of the principal and any accrued and unpaid interest on the debentures are subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all of our senior indebtedness. The terms of the debentures are such that they qualify as Tier 1 capital under the Federal Reserve’s regulatory capital guidelines applicable to bank holding companies. Interest on Trust II Debentures is payable at a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 3.35%. Interest on the Trust III Debentures was payable at a fixed rate per annum equal to 7.43% until October 1, 2016 and is a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 1.67%. Interest on the DCB Trust I Debentures is payable at a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 1.80%. The interest is deferrable on a cumulative basis for up to five consecutive years following a suspension of dividend payments on all other capital stock. No principal payments are due until maturity for each of the debentures.
On any interest payment date on or after (1) June 15, 2012 for the DCB Trust I Debentures, (2) October 30, 2012 for the Trust II Debentures and (3) October 1, 2016 for the Trust III Debentures, and before their respective maturity dates, the debentures are redeemable, in whole or in part, for cash at our option on at least 30, but not more than 60, days’ notice at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount to be redeemed, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
On May 1, 2020, the Company issued $10.0 million in debentures to directors and other related parties. The debentures have stated maturity dates between November 1, 2020 and November 1, 2024, and bear interest at fixed annual rates between 1.00% and 4.00%. The Company pays interest semi-annually on May 1st and November 1st in arrears during the term of the debentures. $500,000 of these debentures matured in November of 2020 and $9.5 million remains as of December 31, 2021. The debentures are redeemable by the Company at its option, in whole in or part, at any time on or before the due date of any debenture. The redemption price is equal to 100% of the face amount of the debenture redeemed, plus all accrued but unpaid interest.
The following table summarizes contractual obligations and other commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2021 (other than non-time deposit obligations), which consist of future cash payments associated with our contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of December 31, 2021 are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Standby and commercial letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event of nonperformance by the customer, we have rights to the underlying collateral, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash and/or marketable securities. Our credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as the risk involved in extending loan facilities to our customers. Management evaluated the likelihood of funding the standby and commercial letters of credit as of December 31, 2021, and determined the likelihood to be improbable. Therefore, no ACL was recorded for standby and commercial letters of credit as of December 31, 2021.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn upon, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the customer.
Loan agreements executed in connection with construction loans and commercial lines of credit have standard conditions which must be met prior to the Company being required to provide additional funding, including conditions precedent that typically include: (i) no event of default or potential default has occurred; (ii) that no material adverse events have taken place that would materially affect the borrower or the value of the collateral, (iii) that the borrower remains in compliance with all loan obligations and covenants and has made no misrepresentations; (iv) that the collateral has not been damaged or impaired; (v) that the project remains on budget and in compliance with all laws and regulations; and (vi) that all management agreements, lease agreements and franchise agreements that affect the value of the collateral remain in force. If the conditions precedent have not been met, the Company retains the option to cease current draws and/or future funding. As a result of these conditions within our loan agreements, management believes the credit risk of these off balance sheet items is minimal and we recorded no ACL with respect to these loan agreements as of December 31, 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are summarized and discussed in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report.
Impact of Inflation
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. GAAP requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or deflation.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, we also evaluate our performance based on certain additional financial measures discussed in this Report as being non-GAAP financial measures. We classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, that are included or excluded, as the case may be, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP as in effect from time to time in the United States in our statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measures that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Report should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate the non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Report may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. It is important to understand how other banking organizations calculate their financial measures with names similar to the non-GAAP financial measures we have discussed in this Report when comparing such non-GAAP financial measures.
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share. Tangible book value per common share is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate (1) tangible common equity as total shareholders’ equity, less goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization, and (2) tangible book value per common share as tangible common equity divided by shares of common stock outstanding. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible book value per common share is book value per common share.
We believe that the tangible book value per common share measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in changes from period to period in book value per common share exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing total book value while not increasing our tangible book value.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total shareholders’ equity to tangible common equity and presents tangible book value per common share compared to book value per common share:
Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets. Tangible common equity to tangible assets is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate tangible common equity, as described above, and tangible assets as total assets less goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible common equity to tangible assets is total common shareholders’ equity to total assets.
We believe that this measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in the relative changes from period to period of tangible common equity to tangible assets, each exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing both total shareholders’ equity and assets while not increasing our tangible common equity or tangible assets.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total tangible common equity and total assets to tangible assets:
Core Earnings and Other COVID-19 Adjusted Measures. The following tables reconcile, as of and for the dates set forth below, various metrics impacted by the effects of COVID-19 on reported data (dollars in thousands, except per share data).
Net Core Earnings and Net Core Earnings per Common Share
Net Core Earnings to Average Assets, as Adjusted, and Average Equity
Total Interest-Earning Assets, net of PPP Effects
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin, Net of PPP Effects
Efficiency Ratio, Net of PPP Effects
ACL to Total Loans, Excluding PPP
Loan Yield, Net of PPP Effects