ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those described in "Item 1A. Risk Factors" or set forth in other sections of this report.
We operate on a fiscal year that ends on the Saturday closest to December 31st each year. References to fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019 refer to the fiscal years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021, and December 28, 2019, respectively. Our 2021 and 2019 fiscal years consisted of 52 weeks while our 2020 fiscal year consisted of 53 weeks.
OVERVIEW
We are a high-growth, extreme value retailer of quality, name-brand consumables and fresh products sold through a network of independently operated stores. Our flexible buying model allows us to offer quality, name-brand opportunistic products at prices generally 40% to 70% below those of conventional retailers. Entrepreneurial independent operators ("IOs") run our stores and create a neighborhood feel through personalized customer service and a localized product offering. As of January 1, 2022, we had 415 stores in California, Washington, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Idaho, Nevada and New Jersey.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. As a result, many states, including states where we have significant operations, declared a state of emergency, closed non-essential businesses and enacted limitations on the size of gatherings. As we compare fiscal 2021 financial performance with the comparable period in fiscal 2020 that included significantly elevated COVID-related demand (only partially offset by periods of store closures) and financial outperformance relative to historical growth, we are reporting declines in year-over-year net sales and comparable store sales growth. In fiscal 2021, and ongoing to an extent, consumer behavior has been impacted by increased consumer mobility and travel, higher food-away-from-home spend, continued consolidation of grocery store visits, higher levels of government stimulus (the latter of which has led consumers to prioritize convenience over value) and elevated grocery e-commerce usage, all of which have negatively impacted our net sales. The combination of these factors, coupled with the evolving nature of the pandemic (especially with respect to the possibility of different variants in the future) and inflationary pressures, makes it difficult to predict near term consumer behavior and resulting sales trends for our business.
We and our IOs also had in fiscal 2021, and continue to have, staffing challenges and increased labor costs for a variety of reasons that are attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic and regulatory environment. There was also a surge of positive COVID-19 cases related to the Delta variant around the country during the third quarter of fiscal 2021 and an additional surge of positive COVID-19 cases related to the Omicron variant in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, including states in which we operate, creating additional uncertainty and having a negative impact on staffing.
Since the start of the pandemic, certain inventory items have at times been, and may in the future again be, in short supply. COVID-19-related supply chain disruptions more recently have caused logistical challenges for us and many other retailers and manufacturers, causing delays in product delivery to our distribution centers, stores and customers. These logistical challenges also have caused increased delivery costs resulting from higher fuel costs, carrier rates and driver wages due to driver shortages, decreases in transportation capacity, and slowdowns. All of these factors could impact the ability of stores to operate normal hours of operation or have sufficient inventory at all times, which could result in our inability to satisfy customer demand and potential loss of market share. Further, we have experienced varying levels of inflation, resulting in part from supply disruptions, increased shipping and transportation costs, increased commodity costs, increased labor costs in the supply chain and other disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertain economic environment, which we have not been able to fully offset through price increases.
Planned construction and opening of new stores also have been, and may continue to be, negatively impacted due to increased lead times to acquire materials such as steel, obtain permits and licenses and set up utilities. Additionally, certain fixture upgrades and new refrigeration units now have longer lead times. Finally, we have incurred additional COVID-related expenses as a result of certain increased costs related to our IOs. For example, in fiscal 2021 we paid a portion of the costs of personal protective equipment and cleaning supplies for our IOs as well as reduced interest rates on outstanding IO notes.
The trends leading consumers to prioritize convenience over value that we experienced in fiscal 2021 may continue into fiscal 2022, which could continue to negatively impact same store sales. The increased costs associated with staffing challenges and fuel, freight and distribution have negatively impacted our cost of sales and gross margin, and we expect this increased cost to continue into fiscal 2022. We also expect planned construction and opening of new stores to continue to experience delays, which has caused us to plan for lower new store growth in fiscal 2022 than our original goal of 10% and with more new stores weighted towards the second half of the year.
Our operating performance and financial results during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 and the volatility within those periods may not be meaningful indicators of future results. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and changing consumer behavior could continue to have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations, and consolidated cash flows in fiscal 2022. In spite of these headwinds, we believe the flexibility of our unique buying model, our strong vendor relationships and our agile approach to inventory management have allowed us to maintain healthy inventory levels and an assortment of products for our customers.
Initial Public Offering and Secondary Public Offerings
In June 2019, we completed our initial public offering ("IPO") for net proceeds of $400.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs payable by us.
We used the net proceeds from our IPO, together with excess cash on hand, to prepay a portion of the term loan outstanding under our First Lien Credit Agreement and to repay in full our Second Lien Term Loan, allowing us to terminate such agreement. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information.
Between October 2019 and April 2020, certain of our selling stockholders completed secondary public offerings of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any proceeds from such offerings, but we incurred related offering costs of $3.2 million in the aggregate and received $6.2 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of options by certain participating stockholders.
In May 2020, the H&F Investor distributed the remainder of its holdings representing 9.6 million shares of our common stock to its equity holders. We did not receive any proceeds or incur any material costs related to this distribution.
Key Factors and Measures We Use to Evaluate Our Business
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") financial measures we use are net sales, gross profit and gross margin, selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") and operating income. The key operational metrics and non-GAAP financial measures we use are number of new stores, comparable store sales, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share.
Fiscal 2021 Overview
Key financial and operating performance results for our fiscal 2021 (52 weeks) compared to our fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) were as follows:
•Net sales decreased 1.8% to approximately $3.08 billion for fiscal 2021 from approximately $3.13 billion for fiscal 2020; on a 52-week basis, comparable store sales decreased by 6.0% in fiscal 2021 compared to a 12.7% increase in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2020 contained one additional week ("53rd week") as compared to fiscal 2021. The 53rd week included $53.3 million in net sales.
•We opened 36 new stores and closed one, ending fiscal 2021 with 415 stores in seven states.
•Net income decreased 41.6% to $62.3 million, or $0.63 per diluted share for fiscal 2021, compared to net income of $106.7 million, or $1.08 per diluted share, for fiscal 2020.
•Adjusted EBITDA(1) decreased 11.0% to $198.5 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $222.9 million for fiscal 2020.
•Adjusted net income(1) decreased 20.2% to $89.9 million, or $0.90 per adjusted diluted share(1), for fiscal 2021 compared to $112.7 million, or $1.14 per adjusted diluted share, for fiscal 2020.
_______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share are non-GAAP financial measures, which exclude the impact of certain special items. Please note that our non-GAAP financial measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. See the "Operating Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures" section below for additional information about these items, including their definitions, how management utilizes such non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations of the non-GAAP measures and the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Net Sales
We recognize revenues from the sale of products at the point of sale, net of any taxes or deposits collected and remitted to governmental authorities. Discounts provided to customers by us are recognized at the time of sale as a reduction in sales as the products are sold. Discounts that are funded solely by IOs are not recognized as a reduction in sales as the IO bears the incidental costs arising from the discount. We do not accept manufacturer coupons. Sales consist of sales from comparable stores and non-comparable stores, described below under "Comparable Store Sales." Growth of our sales is generally driven by expansion of our store base in existing and new markets as well as comparable store sales growth. Sales are impacted by the spending habits of our customers, product mix and availability, as well as promotional and competitive activities. Our ever-changing selection of offerings across diverse product categories supports growth in sales by attracting new customers and encouraging repeat visits from our existing customers. The spending habits of our customers are affected by changes in macroeconomic conditions, such as those experienced due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and changes in discretionary income. Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer behavior has been impacted by consolidation of grocery store visits, elevated grocery e-commerce usage and higher levels of government stimulus, leading consumers to prioritize convenience over value and negatively impacting our sales. Our customers' discretionary income is primarily impacted by wages, fuel and other cost-of-living increases including food-at-home inflation, as well as consumer trends and preferences, which fluctuate depending on the environment. Because we offer a broad selection of merchandise at extreme values, historically our business has benefited from periods of economic uncertainty.
Cost of Sales, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of sales includes, among other things, merchandise costs, inventory markdowns, inventory losses and transportation, distribution and warehousing costs, including depreciation. Gross profit is equal to our sales less our cost of sales. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of our sales. Gross margin is a measure used by management to indicate whether we are selling merchandise at an appropriate gross profit. Gross margin is impacted by product mix and availability, as some products generally provide higher gross margins, and by our merchandise costs, which can vary. Gross margin is also impacted by the costs of distributing and transporting product to our stores, which can vary. Our gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in sales. While our disciplined buying approach has produced consistent gross margins throughout economic cycles which we believe has helped to mitigate adverse impacts on gross profit and results of operations, changes in consumer demand like we experienced and continue to experience as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including inflationary cost increases for goods, labor and transportation, supply chain constraints and changes in discretionary income, have resulted and could continue to result in unexpected changes to our gross margins. The components of our cost of sales may not be comparable to the components of cost of sales or similar
measures of our competitors and other retailers. As a result, our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to similar data made available by our competitors and other retailers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses are comprised of both store-related expenses and corporate expenses. Our IO store-related expenses include commissions paid to IOs, occupancy and our portion of maintenance costs and the cost of opening new IO stores. Company-operated store-related expenses include payroll, benefits, supplies and utilities. In addition, beginning in fiscal 2020, SG&A included incremental costs associated with COVID-19, such as cleaning and safety costs, costs for PPE and supplies. Corporate expenses include payroll and benefits for corporate and field support, marketing and advertising, insurance and professional services and operator recruiting and training costs. SG&A generally increases as we grow our store base and invest in our corporate infrastructure. SG&A expenses related to commissions paid to IOs are variable in nature and generally increase as gross profits rise and decrease as gross profits decline. The remainder of our expenses are primarily fixed in nature. We continue to closely manage our expenses and monitor SG&A as a percentage of sales. The components of our SG&A may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of our competitors and other retailers. We expect that our SG&A will continue to increase in future periods as we continue to grow our sales revenue and gross profits.
Operating Income
Operating income is gross profit less SG&A, depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation. Operating income excludes interest expense, net, gain on insurance recoveries, debt extinguishment and modification costs and income tax expense (benefit). We use operating income as an indicator of the productivity of our business and our ability to manage expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations both in dollars and as a percentage of net sales (amounts in thousands, except for percentages):
_______________________
(1)Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Operating Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Number of New Stores
The number of new stores reflects the number of stores opened during a particular reporting period. New stores require an initial capital investment in the store build-outs, fixtures and equipment which we amortize over time as well as cash required for inventory and pre-opening expenses.
We expect new store growth to be the primary driver of our sales growth over the long term. We lease substantially all of our store locations. Our initial lease terms on stores are typically ten years with options to renew for two or three successive five-year periods.
Comparable Store Sales
We use comparable store sales as an operating metric to measure performance of a store during the current reporting period against the performance of the same store in the corresponding period of the previous year. Comparable store sales are impacted by the same factors that impact net sales.
Comparable store sales consists of net sales from our stores beginning on the first day of the fourteenth full fiscal month following the store's opening, which is when we believe comparability is achieved. Included in our comparable store definition are those stores that have been remodeled, expanded, or relocated in their existing location or respective trade areas. Excluded from our comparable store definition are those stores that have been closed for an extended period as well as any planned store closures or dispositions. When applicable, as was the case with fiscal 2020, we exclude the net sales in the non-comparable week of a 53-week year from the same store sales calculation after comparing the current and prior year weekly periods that are most closely aligned.
Opening new stores is a primary component of our growth strategy and, as we continue to execute on our growth strategy, we expect a significant portion of our sales growth will be attributable to non-comparable store sales. Accordingly, comparable store sales is only one measure we use to assess the success of our growth strategy.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are supplemental key metrics used by management and our Board of Directors to assess our financial performance. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate us and other companies in our industry. We use EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, and adjusted earnings per share to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In addition, we use adjusted EBITDA to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate our performance in connection with compensation decisions. Management believes it is useful to investors and analysts to evaluate these non-GAAP measures on the same basis as management uses to evaluate our operating results. We believe that excluding items from operating income, net income and net income per diluted share that may not be indicative of, or are unrelated to, our core operating results, and that may vary in frequency or magnitude, enhances the comparability of our results and provides additional information for analyzing trends in our business.
We define EBITDA as net income before net interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization expenses. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA adjusted to exclude share-based compensation expense, non-cash rent, asset impairment and gain or loss on disposition, provision for (write-off of) accounts receivable reserves and certain other expenses that may not be indicative of, or are unrelated to, our core operating results, and that may vary in frequency or magnitude. Adjusted net income represents net income adjusted for the previously mentioned adjusted EBITDA adjustments, further adjusted for costs related to amortization of purchase accounting assets and deferred financing costs, tax adjustment to normalize the effective tax rate, and tax effect of total adjustments. Basic adjusted earnings per share is calculated using adjusted net income, as defined above, and basic weighted average shares outstanding. Diluted adjusted earnings per share is calculated using adjusted net income, as defined above, and diluted weighted average shares outstanding. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are non-GAAP measures and may not be comparable to similar measures reported by other companies. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, and adjusted earnings per share have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. We address the limitations of the non-GAAP measures through the use of various GAAP measures. In the future we will incur expenses or charges such as those added back to calculate adjusted EBITDA or adjusted net income. Our presentation of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by the adjustments we have used to derive our non-GAAP measures.
The following table summarizes key operating metrics and non-GAAP financial measures for the periods presented (amounts in thousands, except for percentages and store counts):
_______________________
(1)Comparable store sales consist of net sales from our stores beginning on the first day of the fourteenth full fiscal month following the store's opening, which is when we believe comparability is achieved. For fiscal 2020, which is a 53-week year, we excluded the sales in the non-comparable week from the comparable store sales calculation after comparing the current and prior year weekly periods that are most closely aligned.
(2)See "-GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations" section below for a reconciliation from our net income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, net income to adjusted net income and GAAP earnings per share to adjusted earnings per share for the periods presented.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations
The following tables provide a reconciliation from our GAAP net income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, GAAP net income to adjusted net income, and our GAAP earnings per share to adjusted earnings per share for the periods presented (amounts in thousands, except per share data):
___________________________
(1)Includes depreciation related to our distribution centers which is included within the cost of sales line item in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. See NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about the components of cost of sales.
(2)Includes non-cash share-based compensation expense and $0.2 million, $0.4 million, and $3.6 million of cash dividends paid in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively, on vested share-based awards as a result of dividends declared in connection with recapitalizations that occurred in fiscal 2018 and 2016.
(3)Consists of the non-cash portion of rent expense, which represents the difference between our straight-line rent expense recognized under GAAP and cash rent payments. The adjustment can vary depending on the average age of our lease portfolio, which has been impacted by our significant store growth in recent years.
(4)Represents impairment charges with respect to planned store closures and gains or losses on dispositions of assets in connection with store transitions to new IOs.
(5)Represents non-cash changes in reserves related to our IO notes and accounts receivable.
(6)Represents other non-recurring, non-cash or non-operational items, such as gain on insurance recoveries, technology upgrade implementation costs, personnel-related costs, costs related to employer payroll taxes associated with equity awards, legal settlements and other legal expenses, store closing costs, strategic project costs, secondary equity offering transaction costs, debt extinguishment and modification costs, and miscellaneous costs.
(7)Represents the amortization of debt issuance costs and incremental amortization of an asset step-up resulting from purchase price accounting related to our acquisition in 2014 by an investment fund affiliated with Hellman & Friedman LLC, which included trademarks, customer lists, and below-market leases.
(8)Represents adjustments to normalize the effective tax rate for the impact of unusual or infrequent tax items that we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing performance, including excess tax benefits related to stock option exercises and vesting of RSUs that are recorded in earnings as discrete items in the reporting period in which they occur.
(9)Represents the tax effect of the total adjustments. We calculate the tax effect of the total adjustments on a discrete basis excluding any non-recurring and unusual tax items.
Comparison of fiscal 2021 (52 weeks) to fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) (amounts in thousands, except percentages)
Net Sales
The decrease in net sales for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to a decrease in comparable stores sales as well as the impact of the 53rd week of fiscal 2020 which included $53.3 million of net sales, partially offset by non-comparable store sales growth attributable to the net 35 new stores opened during fiscal 2021.
Comparable store sales decreased 6.0% for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 on a 52-week basis for both periods. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in customer traffic, partially offset by an increase in average transaction size.
Cost of Sales
The decrease in cost of sales for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of the comparable store sales decrease discussed above combined with cost of sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020, partially offset by new store growth and higher costs as a percentage of net sales.
Costs as a percentage of net sales increased for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due in large part to inflationary cost increases for goods, labor and transportation as well as supply chain constraints.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The decrease in gross profit for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of a decrease in comparable stores sales and gross profit from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020, partially offset by new store growth. Our gross margin decreased modestly for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to higher cost of sales as a percentage of net sales, as discussed previously.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in SG&A for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by higher store occupancy and maintenance costs due to a higher store count and increased marketing expenses, partially offset by lower personnel costs as a result of decreased incentive compensation expenses and decreased commission payments to IOs.
As a percentage of net sales, SG&A increased slightly for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to lower expense leverage as a result of reduced net sales.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by new store growth and existing store investments.
Share-based Compensation Expense
The decrease in share-based compensation expenses for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to $26.1 million in share-based compensation expense we incurred in fiscal 2020 related to 5.8 million performance-based stock options that vested in connection with performance events achieved with the closing of our February and April 2020 secondary offerings. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in expense driven by RSUs and PSUs granted during fiscal 2021.
See NOTE 8-Share-based Awards to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by lower effective interest rates experienced under our First Lien Credit Agreement as a result of decreases in the London Inter-bank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"). Furthermore, fiscal 2020 included interest expense from the $90.0 million borrowed under the revolving credit facility of our First Lien Credit Agreement between March and May 2020, compared to no borrowings thereunder in fiscal 2021.
See NOTE 6-Long-term Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Gain on Insurance Recoveries
During fiscal 2021, we recorded a $4.0 million gain on insurance due to proceeds received related to the loss of our Paradise, California store due to a wildfire in 2018.
Debt Extinguishment and Modification Costs
During fiscal 2020, we wrote off $0.1 million of debt issuance costs and incurred $0.1 million of debt modification costs related to the repricing and amendment of our First Lien Credit Agreement. No such write-offs were made or debt modification costs incurred in fiscal 2021.
See NOTE 6-Long-term Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
During fiscal 2021, we recorded a net income tax expense of $15.2 million compared to a net income tax benefit of $19.6 million for fiscal 2020. This change was primarily driven by a reduction in excess tax benefits related to the exercise of stock options and vesting of RSUs. Such excess tax benefits totaled $8.0 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $44.1 million for fiscal year 2020.
See NOTE 10-Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing factors, net income decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in gross profit, which was primarily driven by a decrease in comparable store sales, on a 52-week basis, of 6.0% for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, the impact of net sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020, and increases in cost of sales as a percentage of net sales primarily caused by inflationary pressures and supply chain constraints, partially offset by contribution from our non-comparable stores.
Adjusted Net Income
The decrease in adjusted net income for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily a result of the aforementioned drivers of the decrease in Adjusted EBITDA as well as increases in depreciation and amortization expenses caused by new store growth and other capital investments.
Comparison of fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) to fiscal 2019 (52 weeks)
For the comparison of fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019, refer to "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, as amended, under the subheading "Comparison of fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) to fiscal 2019 (52 weeks)."
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Based on our current operations and new store growth plans, we expect to satisfy our short-term and long-term cash requirements through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalents position, funds generated from operating activities, and the borrowing capacity available in the revolving credit facility under our first lien credit agreement (the "First Lien Credit Agreement"). If cash generated from our operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility are not sufficient or available to meet our liquidity requirements, then we will be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in the future. There can be no assurance equity or debt financing will be available to us when we need it or, if available, the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to our then-current stockholders. Additionally, we may seek to take advantage of market opportunities to refinance our existing debt instruments with new debt instruments at interest rates, maturities and terms we deem attractive. We may also, from time to time, in our sole discretion, purchase or retire all or a portion of our existing debt instruments through privately negotiated or open market transactions.
As of January 1, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $140.1 million, which consisted primarily of cash held in checking and money market accounts with financial institutions. In addition, we have a revolving credit facility with $100.0 million in borrowing capacity under our First Lien Credit Agreement. We did not borrow under this revolving credit facility during fiscal 2021 and had no borrowings outstanding thereunder as of January 1, 2022. As of January 1, 2022, we had $3.5 million of outstanding standby letters of credit and $96.5 million of remaining borrowing capacity available under this revolving credit facility.
Material Cash Requirements
Leases
We have operating and finance lease arrangements for substantially all store locations, distribution centers, and certain office space and equipment. As of January 1, 2022, total lease assets and lease liabilities were $905.0 million and $1.0 billion, respectively, and we had executed leases for 25 store locations that we had not yet taken possession of with total undiscounted future lease payments of $141.9 million and lease terms through 2039. See NOTE 4-Leases to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of lease liability maturities.
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments
See NOTE 6-Long-term Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail of our First Lien Credit Agreement, which consists of a $460.0 million senior term loan and a revolving credit facility for an amount up to $100.0 million, and the timing of principal maturities. As of January 1, 2022, based on the then current interest rate of 2.85%, expected future interest payments associated with our debt totaled $50.7 million, with $13.3 million payable during fiscal year 2022.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures are primarily related to new store openings, ongoing store maintenance and improvements, expenditures related to our distribution centers and infrastructure-related investments, including investments related to upgrading and maintaining our information technology systems and corporate offices. We expect to fund capital expenditures through cash generated from our operations. We expect capital expenditures of approximately $115.0 million, net of tenant improvement allowances, in fiscal year 2022, primarily related to new store openings and ongoing store maintenance and improvements.
Working Capital and Purchase Commitments
Our primary working capital requirements are for the purchase of inventory, payroll, rent, issuance of IO notes, other store facilities costs, distribution costs and general and administrative costs. Our working capital requirements fluctuate during the year, driven primarily by the timing of inventory fluctuations, new store openings and capital spending.
Our purchase commitments consist of non-cancelable obligations under service and supply contracts. As of January 1, 2022, we had total purchase obligations of $11.8 million, with $10.1 million payable during fiscal year 2022.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
We may repurchase our common stock pursuant to programs approved by our Board of Directors. As of January 1, 2022, we had $100.0 million of repurchase authority remaining under the current share repurchase program. See "Item 5. Market For Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities" for discussion about our Board-authorized share repurchase program.
As of January 1, 2022, we expect to pay an additional $0.2 million related to dividends declared in our recapitalization in 2018 for stock options that will vest during fiscal 2022 and beyond, of which $0.1 million is expected to be paid in fiscal 2022. Pursuant to The Globe Holding Corp. 2014 Plan, if we are unable to make those payments, we may instead elect to reduce the per share exercise price of each such option by an amount equal to the dividend amount in lieu of making the applicable dividend payment.
Debt Covenants
The First Lien Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, subject to limitations and exceptions, and affirmative and customary covenants. The First Lien Credit Agreement restricts us from entering into certain types of transactions and making certain types of payments including dividends and stock repurchases and other similar distributions, with certain exceptions. Additionally, borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility under our First Lien Credit Agreement is subject to a first lien secured leverage ratio of 7.00 to 1.00 (as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement), tested quarterly if, and only if, the aggregate principal amount outstanding and/or issued, as applicable, from the revolving facility, letters of credit (to the extent not cash collateralized or backstopped or, in the aggregate, not in excess of the greater of $10.0 million and the stated face amount of letters of credit outstanding on the closing date) and swingline loans exceeds 35% of the total amount of the revolving credit facility commitments.
As of January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with all applicable financial covenant requirements for our First Lien Credit Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (amounts in thousands):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $165.6 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $181.2 million for fiscal 2020. The $15.7 million decrease was primarily due to lower net sales driven by a decrease in comparable store sales combined with fiscal 2020 including net sales from its 53rd week, partially offset by contribution from non-comparable stores. The decrease was additionally due to an increase of $4.6 million in cash used for merchandise inventory.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $181.2 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $132.8 million for fiscal 2019. The $48.4 million increase was primarily the result of increased net sales driven by new store growth and comparable store sales growth, partially offset by increased cost of sales and operating expenses, particularly commissions paid to IOs.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019 was primarily for capital expenditures and loans to IOs.
Net cash used in investing activities was $136.7 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $133.8 million for fiscal 2020. The $2.9 million increase was primarily related to an increase of investments in computer software intangible assets in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Of the $136.7 million net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021, $123.4 million represented purchases of property and equipment prior to the application of tenant improvement allowances.
Net cash used in investing activities was $133.8 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $108.0 million for fiscal 2019. The $25.8 million increase was primarily related to an increase in the number of stores opened and under construction in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Of the $133.8 million net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020, $124.9 million represented purchases of property and equipment prior to the application of tenant improvement allowances.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.9 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $29.8 million for fiscal 2020. The $23.9 million decrease was primarily due to a decrease in proceeds received from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $29.8 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $17.8 million net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2019. The net cash provided by financing activities of $29.8 million for fiscal 2020 was primarily due to proceeds received from the exercise of share-based awards slightly offset by principal payments on debt. The net cash used in financing activities of $17.8 million for fiscal 2019 was primarily due to $414.8 million of principal payments on debt and $7.2 million of offering cost payments related to our IPO, partially offset by proceeds of $407.7 million from the IPO, net of $27.1 million of underwriting discounts and commissions paid.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. A summary of our significant accounting policies can be found in NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. These judgments and estimates are based on historical experience and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Management evaluated the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following involves a higher degree of judgment or complexity and is most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position, and is therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policy reflects a significant estimate and judgment used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected results can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations.
Long-lived asset impairment
We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and lease right-of-use assets, for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. For purposes of this evaluation, long-lived assets are grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. Our retail stores are evaluated for impairment at the store level. A long-lived asset or asset group may be impaired if its carrying value exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows over its remaining useful life. The total amount of property and equipment, including store assets, and operating lease right-of-use assets as of January 1, 2022 were $499.4 million and $898.2 million, respectively.
Our impairment calculations contain uncertainties because they require us to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate future cash flows. Key assumptions used in estimating future cash flows include projected sales growth and operating expenses. Estimates of sales growth and operating expenses are based on internal projections and consider the store’s historical performance, length of time the store has been open, the local market economics and the business environment impacting the store’s performance. These estimates are subjective and our ability to realize future cash flows is affected by factors such as ongoing maintenance and improvement of the assets, changes in economic conditions and changes in operating performance. We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to evaluate the impairment of long-lived assets during the last three fiscal years. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions used to calculate impairments of long-lived assets. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used to calculate estimated future cash flows, we may be exposed to impairment losses that could be material.
If a long-lived asset or asset group is determined to be impaired, we record an impairment loss for the amount by which the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds its fair value. The estimated fair value of the asset or asset group is based on the estimated discounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group using a discount rate commensurate with the related risk.
There were no adjustments to the carrying value of long-lived assets due to impairment charges during fiscal 2021 and 2020. We recorded impairment charges of $0.5 million during fiscal 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements.