ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITIONS AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section presents management’s perspective on our financial condition and results of operations. The following discussion and analysis is intended to highlight and supplement data and information presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes, and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying tables. To the extent that this discussion describes prior performance, the descriptions relate only to the periods listed, which may not be indicative of our future financial outcomes. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Summary Risk Factors” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
In certain cases, numbers and percentages in the tables below may not foot due to rounding.
Overview
We are a leading health insurance marketplace and Medicare-focused digital health company whose mission is to improve access to healthcare in America. Our proprietary technology platform leverages modern machine-learning algorithms powered by nearly two decades of insurance behavioral data to reimagine the optimal process for helping individuals find the best health insurance plan for their specific needs. Our differentiated combination of a vertically-integrated consumer acquisition platform and highly skilled and trained agents has enabled us to enroll millions of people in Medicare and individual and family plans since our inception. With a current commissionable market of nearly $30 billion, and nearly 11,000 Americans turning 65 years old every day and our track record of significant growth in net revenues in the Medicare space in the past five years, we believe we will continue to be one of the top choices for insurance advice to help navigate one of the most important purchasing decisions individuals make.
Business Segments
We have four reportable segments: (i) Medicare-Internal, (ii) Medicare-External, (iii) Individual and Family Plans, or IFP and Other-Internal and (iv) IFP and Other-External. We organize the segments by product type, Medicare and IFP and Other, as well as by distribution channel, internal and external, as further described below. In addition, we separately report other expenses (classified as “Corporate expenses” in our financial statements), the primary components of which are corporate overhead expenses and shared service expenses that have not been allocated to the operating segments. The segment results provided herein may not be comparable to other companies. We refer to the Medicare-Internal and Medicare-External segments collectively as the “Medicare segments” and the IFP and Other-Internal and IFP and Other-External segments as the “IFP and Other segments.”
•Medicare-Internal: The Medicare-Internal segment relates to sales of products and plans by GoHealth-employed agents offering qualified prospects plans from multiple carriers, GoHealth-employed agents offering qualified prospects plans on a carrier-specific basis, or sales of products and plans through our online platform without the assistance of our agents, which we refer to as DIY. In this segment, we sell Medicare Advantage, Medicare Supplement, Medicare prescription drug plans, and Medicare Special Needs Plans, or SNPs. We earn revenue in this segment through commissions paid by carriers based on sales we generated, as well as enrollment fees, hourly fees and other fees for services performed for specific carriers and other partners. The Medicare-Internal segment is our largest and fastest growing segment, and represented 94% of segment profits in 2021.
•Medicare-External: The Medicare-External segment relates to sales of products and plans under GoHealth’s carrier contracts using an independent, national network of agents or external agencies, which are not employed by GoHealth. These agents utilize our technology and platform to enroll consumers in health insurance plans and provide us with a means to earn a return on leads that otherwise may have not been addressed. In this segment, we sell Medicare Advantage, Medicare Supplement, Medicare prescription drug plans, and SNPs. We earn revenue in this segment through commissions paid by carriers as a result of policy sales, as well as sales of consumer leads to external agencies.
•IFP and Other-Internal: The IFP and Other-Internal segment relates to sales of products and plans by GoHealth-employed agents offering qualified prospects plans from multiple carriers, GoHealth-employed agents offering qualified prospects plans on a carrier-specific basis, or DIY. In this segment, we sell individual and family plans, dental plans, vision plans and other ancillary plans to individuals who are not Medicare-eligible. We earn revenue in this segment through commissions paid by carriers based on sales we generate, as well as enrollment fees, and hourly fees and other fees for services performed for specific carriers and other partners.
•IFP and Other-External: The IFP and Other-External segment relates to sales of products and plans under GoHealth’s carrier contracts using external agencies, who use agents that are not employed by GoHealth. These agents utilize our technology and platform to enroll consumers in health insurance plans. We also sell consumer leads
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 44
generated by us to external agencies. In this segment, we sell individual and family plans, dental plans, vision plans and other ancillary plans to individuals who are not Medicare-eligible. We earn revenue in this segment through commissions paid by carriers as a result of policy sales, as well as sales of consumer leads to external agencies.
The following table presents the percentages of revenues and profit (loss) generated by each of our operating segments for the periods presented:
The Transactions
Our historical results of operations prior to the completion of the Transactions, including the IPO, do not reflect certain items that we expect will affect our results of operations and financial condition after giving effect to the Transactions and the use of proceeds from the IPO.
Following the completion of the Transactions, GoHealth, Inc. became the sole managing member of GoHealth Holdings, LLC. Although we have a minority economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC, we have the sole voting interest in, and control of the business and affairs of, GoHealth Holdings, LLC and its direct and indirect subsidiaries. As a result, GoHealth, Inc. consolidates GoHealth Holdings, LLC and records significant non-controlling interests in a consolidated entity in GoHealth, Inc.’s Consolidated Financial Statements for the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC held directly or indirectly by the Continuing Equity Owners. As of December 31, 2021, public investors collectively own 64.8% of our outstanding Class A common stock, consisting of 74,804 shares of Class A common stock. As of December 31, 2021, GoHealth, Inc. owns 115,487 LLC Interests, representing 36.5% of the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC, the Founders collectively own 97,718 LLC Interests, representing 30.9% of the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC, Centerbridge owns 80,793 LLC Interests, representing 25.6% of the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC, and the Continuing Equity Owners collectively own 22,124 LLC Interests, representing 7.0% of the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the economic interest in GoHealth Holdings, LLC held by non-controlling interests was 63.5%. GoHealth, Inc. is a holding company that conducts no operations and its principal asset is the LLC Interests we purchased from GoHealth Holdings, LLC.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 45
The percentage ownership of total shares of Class A and Class B common stock issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2021, is as follows:
GoHealth, Inc. is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of GoHealth Holdings, LLC and is taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. In addition to tax expenses, we also incur expenses related to our status as a public company, plus payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which could be significant. We intend to cause GoHealth Holdings, LLC to make distributions to us in an amount sufficient to allow us to pay these expenses and fund any payments due under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Response to COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant economic disruption in the economy. While the situation has improved, namely with the help of vaccines, variants continue to put stress on the recovery. We continue to closely monitor the situation and its impacts on our business, liquidity, and capital planning initiatives. In addition, the Company continues to implement a gradual and phased return to the office for our employees, expecting that some employees will continue to work in a remote environment for the foreseeable future.
We do not yet know the full extent of the impacts on our business, our operations or the global economy as a whole. However, the effects could have a material impact on our results of operations. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken in response thereto impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 46
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion and analysis of changes in the financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. A discussion and analysis regarding our results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021.
The following table sets forth the components of our results of operations for the periods presented:
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We use supplemental measures of our performance that are derived from our consolidated financial information, but which are not presented in our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include net income (loss) before interest expense, income tax (benefit) expense and depreciation and amortization expense, or EBITDA; Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary financial performance measure used by management to evaluate its business and monitor its results of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA as further adjusted for certain items summarized in the following table. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenues.
We use non-GAAP financial measures to supplement financial information presented on a GAAP basis. We believe that excluding certain items from our GAAP results allows management to better understand our consolidated financial performance from period to period and better project our future consolidated financial performance as forecasts are developed at a level of detail different from that used to prepare GAAP-based financial measures. Moreover, we believe these non-GAAP financial
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 47
measures provide our stakeholders with useful information to help them evaluate our operating results by facilitating an enhanced understanding of our operating performance and enabling them to make more meaningful period to period comparisons. There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For example, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
The non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered as indicators of performance in isolation from or as a substitute for net income (loss) prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should be read only in conjunction with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. Reconciliations of each of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net income (loss), are presented in the tables below in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We encourage you to review the reconciliations in conjunction with the presentation of the non-GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented. In future periods, we may exclude similar items, may incur income and expenses similar to these excluded items and include other expenses, costs and non-recurring items.
The following table sets forth the reconciliations of GAAP net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(1)Represents the loss on debt extinguishment related to the Initial Term Loan Facility.
(2)Represents goodwill impairment charges related to the Medicare- Internal and Medicare- External reporting units for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
(3)Represents non-cash share-based compensation expense relating to equity awards.
(4)Represents the loss related to a sublease agreement entered into during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
(5)Represents non-recurring legal fees unrelated to our core operations.
(6)Represents non-cash share-based compensation expense relating to the accelerated vesting of performance-vesting units in connection with the IPO for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
(7)Represents the change in fair value of the contingent consideration liability due to the predecessor owners of the Company arising from the Centerbridge Acquisition.
(8)Represents legal, accounting, consulting, and other costs related to the Centerbridge Acquisition.
(9)Represents legal, accounting, consulting, and other indirect costs associated with the Company’s IPO.
(10)Represents costs associated with the termination of employment.
Net Revenues
Commission Revenues
Commission revenues were $881.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $671.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $210.1 million, or 31.3%, increase was primarily attributable to increases in commission revenue from the Medicare-Internal segment driven by a 87% increase in Medicare commissionable Approved
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 48
Submissions. This was partially offset by negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $165.3 million and decreased LTV Per Approved Submission for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the comparable prior year period driven by unfavorable effectuation and persistency trends.
Enterprise Revenues
Enterprise revenues were $181.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $206.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $25.1 million, or 12.2%, decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of $33.4 million related to partner marketing and enrollment services and a $7.1 million decrease in technology licensing and implementation fees, and consumer lead sales to external third parties in our external segments, as we strategically shifted to generating consumer leads in the internal channels. The decreases were partially offset by a $15.4 million increase in direct partner campaigns in our Medicare-Internal segment.
Operating Expense
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue was $239.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $199.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $40.1 million, or 20.1%, increase was primarily attributable to a 69% increase in commissionable Approved Submissions in the Medicare-External segment, which increased the amount of expense we recognized pursuant to our revenue-sharing agreements with external agents and other partners. This was partially offset by negative cost of revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods.
Marketing and Advertising
Marketing and advertising expense was $365.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $206.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $158.3 million, or 76.5%, increase was primarily attributable to an increase in our advertising costs for the Medicare-Internal segment to generate more qualified prospects, which contributed to a 87% increase in Medicare-Internal commissionable Approved Submissions. Additionally, marketing and advertising expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 included $24.6 million of share-based compensation expense relating to the accelerated vesting of performance-vesting units in connection with the IPO.
Customer Care and Enrollment
Customer care and enrollment expense was $320.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $165.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $154.7 million, or 93.5%, increase was primarily attributable to the hiring of additional agents in the Medicare-Internal segment as well as expenses associated with an increased attrition rate of agents. Additionally, customer care and enrollment expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 included $11.5 million of share-based compensation expense relating to the accelerated vesting of performance-vesting units in connection with the IPO.
Technology
Technology expense was $48.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $59.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $10.9 million, or 18.4%, decrease was primarily attributable to $32.6 million of share-based compensation expense recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 relating to the accelerated vesting of performance-vesting units in connection with the IPO. Absent this share-based compensation expense, the increase was primarily due to the hiring of additional employees in our technology and data science teams, and the expansion of our business intelligence and analytics staffing in order to support the growth of the Medicare-Internal segment.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense was $98.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $197.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $99.0 million, or 50.2%, decrease was primarily attributable to $140.6 million of share-based compensation expense recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 relating to the accelerated vesting of performance-vesting units in connection with the IPO. Absent this share-based compensation expense, the increase was primarily due to investments in corporate infrastructure, such as legal, human resources, and finance, to support general growth and implement the corporate resources needed to support a post-IPO business.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 49
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Liability
Change in fair value of contingent consideration liability was $19.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and relates to the earnout liability incurred in connection with the Centerbridge Acquisition, in which we agreed to pay additional consideration if certain financial targets were achieved. The earnout liability was settled in connection with our IPO.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets expense was $94.1 million for both the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, and relates to the amortization of developed technology and customer relationships.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $33.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $33.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $0.5 million increase was due to additional debt outstanding on our Credit Facilities.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt was $11.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and relates to the expense recognized for the extinguishment of the Initial Term Loan Facility.
Goodwill Impairment Charges
The Company recognized goodwill impairment charges of $380.3 million and $6.2 million for the Medicare-Internal and Medicare- External reporting units, respectively, representing the full amount of goodwill associated with these reporting units, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $33.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $271.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $237.2 million, or 87.5%, decrease was primarily attributable to the net impact of negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $111.9 million, as well as expenses associated with an increased attrition rate of agents.
Segment Information
Our operating segments have been determined in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 280, Segment Reporting. We have four operating segments: Medicare-Internal, Medicare-External, IFP and Other-Internal, and IFP and Other-External. In addition, we separately report other expenses (classified as “Corporate expense” in the following table), the primary components of which are corporate overhead expenses and shared service expenses that have not been allocated to the operating segments, as they are not the responsibility of segment operating management. The segment measurements provided to and evaluated by the chief operating decision maker are described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 50
(1)The twelve months ended December 31, 2021 includes $27.3 million of share-based compensation expense associated with awards with service conditions. The twelve months ended December 31, 2020 includes $6.9 million of share-based compensation expense associated with awards with service conditions, and $209.3 million of share-based compensation expense associated with the accelerated vesting of the Performance-Vesting Units in connection with the IPO. The period from January 1, 2019 through September 12, 2019 includes the Class C share-based compensation and incentive share plan expense recorded in connection with the Acquisition, and which totaled $87.1 million.
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the Medicare-Internal segment were $844.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $667.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $177.6 million, or 26.6%, increase was primarily attributable to the hiring of additional agents and the implementation of new marketing strategies to generate a greater number of qualified prospects, which contributed to a 87% increase in commissionable Approved Submissions. This was offset by negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $117.1 million.
Net revenues for the Medicare-External segment were $189.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $155.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $33.9 million, or 21.8%, increase was primarily attributable to a 69% increase in commissionable Approved Submissions in the Medicare-External segment due to our ability to recruit and onboard additional external agents to enroll consumers in Medicare plans using our technology and platform. This was offset by negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $48.2 million.
Net revenues for the IFP and Other-Internal segment were $19.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $32.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Net revenues for the IFP and Other-External segment were $8.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $22.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. For each of the IFP and Other segments, the decreases were primarily driven by a strategic shift towards higher margin Medicare products.
Segment Profit (Loss)
Segment profit for the Medicare-Internal segment was $84.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $296.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $212.5 million, or 71.6%, decrease was primarily
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 51
attributable to (i) the net impact of negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $103.1 million, (ii) increased expenses associated with an increased attrition rate of agents, and (iii) increased marketing and advertising costs, which contributed to a 87% increase of Medicare-Internal commissionable Approved Submissions, and a 21.1% increase in net revenue.
Segment loss for the Medicare-External segment was $2.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to segment profit of $5.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $3.3 million, or 55.9%, decrease was primarily attributable to the net impact of negative revenue adjustments relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $8.8 million, partially offset by a 69% increase in commissionable Approved Submissions in the Medicare-External segment, which drove a 21.8% increase in commissions revenue.
Segment profit for the IFP and Other-Internal segment was $2.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $1.5 million, or 34.0%, decrease was primarily attributable to a $26.4 million, or 48.6% decrease in revenues, partially offset by a reduction in operating costs driven by less investment in this segment, as we have implemented an overall strategic shift towards higher margin Medicare products.
Segment profit for the IFP and Other-External segment was $0.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $1.7 million, or 87.2%, decrease was primarily attributable to an overall strategic shift towards higher margin Medicare products.
Key Business and Operating Metrics by Segment
In addition to traditional financial metrics, we rely upon certain business and operating metrics to evaluate our business performance and facilitate our operations. Below are the most relevant business and operating metrics for each segment, except for EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are not presented on a segment basis.
Medicare Segments
Lifetime Value of Commissions per Consumer Acquisition Cost
Lifetime value of commissions per consumer acquisition cost, or LTV/CAC, represents (i) aggregate commissions estimated to be collected over the estimated life of all commissionable Approved Submissions for the relevant period based on multiple factors, including but not limited to, contracted commission rates, carrier mix and expected policy persistency with applied constraints, excluding revenue adjustments recorded in the period, but relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods, divided by (ii) the cost to convert a qualified prospect into a Submitted Policy (comprised of cost of revenue, marketing and advertising expenses and customer care and enrollment expenses) less other non-commission carrier revenue for such period, or CAC. CAC is comprised of cost of revenue, marketing and advertising expenses and customer care and enrollment expenses less enterprise revenue and is presented on a per commissionable Approved Submission basis. The estimate of the future renewal commissions is determined by using the contracted renewal commission rates constrained by a persistency-adjusted renewal period. The persistency-adjusted renewal period is determined based on our historical experience and available industry and insurance carrier historical data. Persistency-adjustments allow us to estimate renewal revenue only to the extent probable that a material reversal in revenue would not be expected to occur. These factors may result in varying values from period to period. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Our operating results may be adversely impacted by factors that impact our estimate of LTV” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The LTV/CAC for the Medicare-Internal segment was 1.4x (with a CAC of $580.8 million) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 2.8x (with a CAC of $162.2 million) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 4.2x (with a CAC of $32.5 million) for the Successor 2019 Period and 2.3x (with a CAC of $30.7 million) for the Predecessor 2019 Period. The decrease in LTV/CAC is attributable to the hiring and training of additional agents and the implementation of new marketing strategies to drive the conversion of a greater number of qualified prospects into commissionable Approved Submissions, which increased 87% year over year in the Medicare-Internal segment.
Submitted Policies
Submitted Policies represent completed applications that, with respect to each such application, the consumer has authorized us to submit to the carrier. The applicant may need to take additional actions, including providing subsequent information before the application is reviewed by the carrier.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 52
The following table presents the number of Submitted Policies by product for the Medicare segments for the periods presented, split between those submissions that are commissionable (compensated through commissions received from carriers) and those that are non-commissionable (compensated via hourly fees and enrollment fees):
Total Medicare Submitted Policies were 1,273,859 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and 729,912 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase is attributable to an increase in marketing costs that generated a greater number of prospects, along with increased agent headcount. We were also able to drive an increase in total Submitted Policies in the Medicare-External segment due to our ability to recruit and onboard additional external agents to enroll consumers in Medicare plans using our technology and platform.
Approved Submissions
Approved Submissions represent Submitted Policies approved by carriers for the identified product during the indicated period. Not all Approved Submissions will go in force, as some individuals we enroll may not ultimately pay their insurance premiums or may switch out of a policy within the disenrollment period during the first 90 days of the policy. In general, the relationship between Submitted Policies and Approved Submissions has been steady over time. Therefore, factors impacting the number of Submitted Policies also impact the number of Approved Submissions.
The following tables present the number of Approved Submissions by product relating to commissionable policies for each of the Medicare segments for the periods presented. Only commissionable policies are used to calculate our LTV.
Medicare-Internal
Medicare-Internal commissionable Approved Submissions were 929,043 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and 495,561 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to the hiring of additional agents and increased marketing costs that generated a greater number of prospects.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 53
Medicare-External
Medicare-External commissionable Approved Submissions were 281,670 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and 166,615 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Medicare-External commissionable Approved Submissions was attributable to our ability to recruit and onboard additional external agents to enroll consumers in Medicare plans.
Lifetime Value of Commissions Per Approved Submission
Lifetime value of commissions per commissionable Approved Submission, or LTV per Approved Submission, represents (i) aggregate commissions estimated to be collected over the estimated life of all commissionable Approved Submissions for the relevant period based on multiple factors, including but not limited to, contracted commission rates, carrier mix and expected policy persistency with applied constraints, excluding revenue adjustments recorded in the period, but relating to performance obligations satisfied in prior periods, divided by (ii) the number of commissionable Approved Submissions for such period. LTV per Approved Submission is equal to the sum of the commission revenue due upon the initial sale of a policy, and when applicable, an estimate of future renewal commissions per commissionable Approved Submissions. The estimate of the future renewal commissions is determined by using the contracted renewal commission rates constrained by a persistency-adjusted renewal period. The persistency-adjusted renewal period is determined based on our historical experience and available industry and carrier historical data. Persistency-adjustments allow us to estimate renewal revenue only to the extent probable that a material reversal in revenue would not be expected to occur. These factors may result in varying values from period to period. LTV per Approved Submission represents commissions only from policies sold during the period, but excludes policies originally submitted in prior periods.
The following table presents the LTV per Approved Submission by product for the Medicare segments for the periods presented:
LTV per Approved Submission for Medicare Advantage was $842 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and $900 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to an increase in consumer shopping, resulting in lower persistency and an increased constraint added to the LTV for the three months ended December 31, 2021.
LTV per Approved Submission for Medicare Supplement was $856 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and $849 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to changes in carrier mix.
LTV per Approved Submission for prescription drug plans were relatively unchanged for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
IFP and Other Segments
Submitted Policies
Submitted Policies represent the number of completed applications that, with respect to each such application, the consumer has authorized us to submit to the carrier. The applicant may need to take additional actions, including providing subsequent information before the application is reviewed by the carrier.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 54
Total Submitted Policies for the IFP and Other segments were 63,196 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 120,674 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 146,228 for the Successor 2019 Period, and 150,544 for the Predecessor 2019 Period. The decrease is due to a change in strategy to prioritize agents and marketing and advertising spend in the Medicare segments instead of the IFP and Other segments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our liquidity needs primarily include working capital and debt service requirements. At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $84.4 million. On July 17, 2020, we completed our IPO, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 43,500 shares of common stock at the IPO price of $21.00, and generating net proceeds of $852.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs. We believe that our current sources of liquidity, which include cash and cash equivalents and funds available under the Credit Facilities, as described further below, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating and debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months. Short-term liquidity needs will primarily be funded through the Revolving Credit Facilities, as described further below, if necessary. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $155.0 million outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facilities and had a remaining capacity of $45.0 million. To the extent that our current liquidity is insufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional funds, which may include the sale of equity securities or through debt financing arrangements. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations, and any future instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that could restrict our operations.
The following table presents a summary of cash flows for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Successor 2019 Period, and the Predecessor 2019 Period:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities primarily consists of net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items including share-based compensation; depreciation and amortization; amortization of intangible assets; loss on extinguishment of debt; loss on sublease; change in the fair value of contingent consideration; goodwill impairment charges; noncash lease expense; amortization of debt discount and issuance costs and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
Collection of commissions receivable depends upon the timing of the receipt of commission payments. If there were to be a delay in receiving a commission payment from a carrier within a quarter, the operating cash flows for that quarter could be adversely impacted.
A significant portion of marketing and advertising expense is driven by the number of qualified prospects required to generate the insurance applications submitted to carriers. Marketing and advertising costs are expensed and generally paid as incurred and since commission revenue is recognized upon approval of a submission but commission payments are paid to us over time, there are working capital requirements to fund the upfront cost of acquiring new policies.
Net cash used in operating activities was $299.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to $114.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $184.8 million decrease is primarily driven by an increase in net loss of $437.0 million, an increase in commissions receivable of $25.5 million and a decrease in share-based compensation expense of $188.9 million, partially offset by an increase in goodwill impairment charges of $386.6 million, an increase in commissions payable of $9.9 million, an increase in accounts payable of $35.8 million, and other adjustments for non-cash items of $34.3 million. The increases in commissions receivable and commissions payable were each driven by increases in Medicare commissionable Approved Submissions.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased to $19.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, from $14.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in capitalized internal-use software related to new technology, software, and systems and purchases of property and equipment.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 55
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $259.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, from $260.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company received proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock sold in the IPO, net of offering costs, of $852.4 million. Of the $852.4 million of IPO proceeds, $508.3 million was used to purchase LLC Interests, $100.0 million was used to settle the Senior Preferred Earnout Units, and $96.2 million was used as partial consideration for the Blocker Merger. There were no such proceeds in 2021. This was partially offset by an increase in borrowings, net of repayments and call premium paid on debt extinguishment, of $147.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Term Loan Facilities
On September 13, 2019, in connection with the Acquisition, Norvax (the “Borrower”) entered into a first lien credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) which provided for a $300.0 million aggregate principal amount senior secured term loan facility (the “Initial Term Loan Facility”). During 2020, the Company entered into a series of amendments to the Credit Agreement to provide for, among other items as further described below, $117.0 million of incremental term loans (the “Incremental Term Loan Facility”).
On June 11, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 5 to the Credit Agreement and Incremental Facility Agreement (“Amendment No. 5”). Amendment No. 5 creates a new class of incremental term loans (the “2021 Incremental Term Loans”) in an aggregate principal amount equal to $310.0 million, which was used to refinance $295.5 million of outstanding principal under the Initial Term Loan Facility, pay the related accrued interest and fund the prepayment premium.
On November 10, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 6 to the Credit Agreement and Incremental Facility Agreement (“Amendment No. 6”). Amendment No. 6 provides $100.0 million of incremental term loans, or the “2021-2 Incremental Term Loans”.
The Company collectively refers to the Initial Term Loan Facility, the Incremental Term Loan Facility, the 2021 Incremental Term Loans, and the 2021-2 Incremental Term Loans as the “Term Loan Facilities”.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a principal amount of $115.0 million, $308.4 million, and $100.0 million outstanding under the Incremental Term Loan Facility, the 2021 Incremental Term Loans, and the 2021-2 Incremental Term Loans, respectively.
Revolving Credit Facilities
The Credit Agreement provided for a $30.0 million aggregate principal amount senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). During 2020, the Company entered into a series of amendments (Amendments No. 1 - 5) to the Credit Agreement to provide for $28.0 million of incremental revolving credit (the “Incremental Revolving Credit Facilities”).
On May 7, 2021, the Company entered into a fourth amendment to the Credit Agreement, which provided $142.0 million of incremental revolving credit (the “Incremental No. 4 Revolving Credit Facility”), for a total amount of $200.0 million.
The Company collectively refers to the Revolving Credit Facility, the Incremental Revolving Credit Facilities, and the Incremental No. 4 Revolving Credit Facility as the “Revolving Credit Facilities”.
Amendment No. 5, as described above, also separates the Revolving Credit Facilities into two classes of revolving commitments consisting of Class A Revolving Commitments in the amount of $30.0 million and Class B Revolving Commitments in the amount of $170.0 million.
The Company had $23.2 million outstanding under the Class A Revolving Credit Facilities and $131.8 million outstanding under the Class B Revolving Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2021. The Revolving Credit Facilities have a remaining capacity of $45.0 million in the aggregate as of December 31, 2021.
Covenants and Other Matters
The Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, restrict the Borrower’s and its restricted subsidiaries’ ability to incur indebtedness; incur certain liens; consolidate, merge or sell or otherwise dispose of assets; make investments, loans, advances, guarantees and acquisitions; pay dividends or make other distributions on equity interests, or redeem, repurchase or retire equity interests; enter into transactions with affiliates; alter the business conducted by the Company and subsidiaries; change their fiscal year; and amend or modify governing documents. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains financial and non-financial covenants.
The Credit Agreement also contains certain customary representations and warranties and affirmative covenants, and certain reporting obligations. In addition, the lenders under the Credit Facilities will be permitted to accelerate all outstanding borrowings
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 56
and other obligations, terminate outstanding commitments and exercise other specified remedies upon the occurrence of certain events of default (subject to certain grace periods and exceptions), which include, among other things, payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, certain cross-defaults and cross-accelerations to other indebtedness, certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, certain judgments and changes of control. Subject to certain limited exceptions, substantially all of the Company’s assets are restricted from distribution.
On March 14, 2022, the Company amended its Credit Agreement. Among other terms, the interest rate for the 2021 Incremental Term Loans and the 2021-2 Incremental Term Loans was increased by 150 basis points. The Credit Agreement was amended to remove testing of the Net Leverage Ratio for the December 31, 2021 period and increase the maximum permitted Net Leverage Ratio for certain future reporting periods.
Our material contractual obligations generally include operating leases and capital leases, and long-term debt. Refer to Note 11, “Leases,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our leasing obligations. Refer to Note 5, “Long-Term Debt,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our long-term debt obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements recently adopted and not yet adopted, see Note 1, “Description of Business and Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Seasonality
The Medicare annual enrollment period occurs from October 15th to December 7th. As a result, we experience an increase in the number of submitted Medicare-related applications during the fourth quarter and an increase in expense related to the Medicare segments during the third and fourth quarters. Additionally, as a result of the annual Medicare Advantage open enrollment period that occurs from January 1st to March 31st, commission revenue is typically second-highest in our first quarter. The second and third quarters are known as special election periods, and are our seasonally smallest quarters. A significant portion of our marketing and advertising expenses is driven by the number of health insurance applications submitted through us. Marketing and advertising expenses are generally higher in the fourth quarter during the Medicare annual enrollment period, but because commissions from approved customers are paid to us over time, our operating cash flows could be adversely impacted by a substantial increase in marketing and advertising expenses as a result of a higher volume of applications submitted during the fourth quarter or positively impacted by a substantial decline in marketing and advertising expenses as a result of lower volume of applications submitted during the fourth quarter.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets, and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We regularly assess these estimates; however, actual amounts could differ from those estimates. The impact of changes in estimates is recorded in the period in which they become known.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the effect of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance. The accounting policies we believe to reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions that are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are:
•Revenue recognition and commissions receivable;
•Share-based compensation;
•Goodwill and intangible assets;
•Income taxes; and
•Liabilities pursuant to tax receivable agreements (“TRAs”).
Revenue Recognition and Commissions Receivable
In accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services and is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that an entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 57
Significant management judgments and estimates must be made in connection with determination of the revenue to be recognized in any accounting period. If we made different judgments or utilized different estimates for any period, material differences in the amount and timing of revenue recognized could result. The accounting estimates and judgments related to the recognition of revenue require us to make assumptions about numerous factors, such as the determination of performance obligations and determination of the transaction price. The estimate of renewal commissions are considered variable consideration in the transaction price and requires significant judgment including determining the number of periods in which a renewal will occur and the value of those renewal commissions to be received if renewed. We utilize the expected value approach to do this, incorporating a combination of historical lapse and premium increase data, available industry and carrier experience data, historical payment data by segment and carrier, as well as current forecast data to estimate forecasted renewal considerations, and then to constrain revenue recognized to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. The uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved when the policy renews, and any adjustments in variable consideration are recognized in the period incurred.
Commissions receivable includes the variable consideration for policies that may renew, and therefore, are subject to the same assumptions, judgments and estimates used when recognizing revenue as noted above.
Share-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for all share-based awards, including Profit Units, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock options, based on the estimated grant date fair value of awards. Share-based compensation expense for Time-Vesting Units, RSUs and stock options are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally three to five years.
Effective September 13, 2019 and in conjunction with the Centerbridge Acquisition, the Company authorized the grants of non-voting Profit Units. Profit Units consist of both Time-Vesting Units and Performance-Vesting Units and their fair value is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation. Embedded in the simulation are several assumptions, including the expected life of the award based on estimates of the timing of a liquidity event, the expected dividend yield, the risk-free interest rate and the expected volatility. The Time-Vesting Units’ expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over a five year vesting period. The Performance-Vesting Units’ expense is recognized upon a liquidity event based on certain predetermined criteria. Upon completion of our IPO, the implied performance condition was satisfied, triggering an accelerated vesting and related compensation expense of $209.3 million in the third quarter of 2020.
We granted RSUs and stock options to employees and non-employee directors. The fair value of RSUs is determined based on the stock price on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is calculated using a Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. Embedded in the pricing model are several assumptions, including the expected life of the award, the expected dividend yield, the risk-free interest rate and the expected volatility. The assumptions we use represent management's best estimates. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our compensation expense for stock options could be materially different for future grants. Compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally four years for RSUs and three to four years for stock options. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill and represents the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognized.
When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their useful lives, whereas any indefinite-lived intangible assets, as well as goodwill, are not amortized.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of each year, on November 30th, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the goodwill may be impaired.
Judgment in the assessment of qualitative factors of impairment include macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, cost considerations, our financial performance, events specific to our company, industry or reporting unit, and other relevant events. To the extent we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative test is then performed.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 58
Performing a quantitative impairment test for goodwill includes the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit, and involves significant estimates and assumptions. These level 3 fair value estimates and assumptions include, among others, cash flow projections and selecting an appropriate discount rate.
To estimate the fair value of the Medicare- Internal reporting unit, the Company relied on a combination of the income approach, utilizing the discounted cash flow method, and the market approach, utilizing the guideline company method, with a 75% weighting on the income approach and a 25% weighting on the market approach. To estimate the fair value of the Medicare- External reporting unit, the Company relied on the income approach, utilizing the discounted cash flow method. The Company considered but did not rely on the market approach for the Medicare- External reporting unit due to the lack of comparable companies.
In the income approach used to calculate the fair value of the reporting units, the Company utilized a discounted cash flow analysis, which involves estimating the expected after-tax cash flows that will be generated by the reporting unit and then discounting those cash flows to present value reflecting the relevant risks associated with the reporting unit and the time value of money. This approach requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of future cash flows, estimated revenues, operating margin, and discount rates reflecting the risk inherent in future cash flows for each reporting unit. In estimating future cash flows, the Company relied on internally generated forecasts for each reporting unit and assumed a long-term growth rate of 3%. The discounted cash flow analysis assumed a discount rate of 12.5% for the Medicare- Internal reporting unit and 17.0% for the Medicare- External reporting unit.
The guideline company method under the market approach, which was utilized for the Medicare- Internal reporting unit, involves calculating valuation multiples based on revenues and operating margins from guideline publicly traded companies. Multiples derived from guideline companies provide an indication of how much a knowledgeable investor in the marketplace would be willing to pay for a company. These multiples are evaluated and adjusted based on specific characteristics of the reporting unit relative to the selected guideline companies and applied to the reporting unit’s operating data to arrive at an indication of value.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the Company to make significant judgments, estimates and assumptions. While the Company believes that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodologies are reasonable, these estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on whether or not a goodwill impairment charge is recognized and also the magnitude of any such charge.
As a result of the annual goodwill impairment test conducted as of November 30, 2021, during the fourth quarter of 2021 the Company recognized goodwill impairment charges of $386.6 million, within "Goodwill impairment charges" in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. See Note 4 "Goodwill and Intangibles Assets" for further discussion over the goodwill impairment charges. There was no impairment of goodwill for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and the Successor 2019 period.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment on November 30th of each year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. If the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Determination of fair value involves significant estimates and assumptions including, among others, cash flow projections and selecting appropriate royalty and discount rates.
Intangible assets subject to amortization are also evaluated for impairment when indicators of impairment are determined to exist. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from their use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value.
During the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, no impairment has been recognized for either indefinite-lived or definite-lived intangible assets.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities result from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the Consolidated Financial Statements that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires management’s judgment in the use of estimates and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. Judgment is also required in assessing the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items. We establish liabilities for material, known tax exposures relating to deductions, transactions and other matters involving some uncertainty as to the proper tax treatment of the item. Our liabilities reflect our judgment as to the resolution of the issues involved if subject to judicial review. When facts and circumstances change (including a resolution of an issue or statute of limitations expiration), these liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes in the period of change.
GoHealth, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 59
Liabilities Pursuant to TRAs
In connection with the IPO, the Company entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with GHH, LLC, the Continuing Equity Owners and the Blocker Shareholders that will provide for the payment by the Company to the Continuing Equity Owners and the Blocker Shareholders of 85% of the amount of tax benefits, if any, that the Company actually realizes (or in some circumstances is deemed to realize) as a result of (1) the Company’s allocable share of existing tax basis acquired in connection with the Transactions (including the Blocker Company’s share of existing tax basis) and increases to such allocable share of existing tax basis; (2) increases in tax basis resulting from (a) the Company’s purchase of LLC Interests directly from GHH, LLC and the partial redemption of LLC Interests by GHH, LLC, (b) future redemptions or exchanges (or deemed exchanges in certain circumstances) of LLC Interests for Class A common stock or cash, and (c) certain distributions (or deemed distributions) by GHH, LLC; and (3) certain additional tax benefits arising from payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. The Company may benefit from the remaining 15% of any tax benefits that the Company actually realizes.
The amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the amount, character, and timing of the taxable income of the Company in the future. In projecting future taxable income, the Company considers its historical results and incorporates certain assumptions, including revenue growth and operating margins, among others. The projection of future taxable income involves judgement and actual taxable income may differ from our estimates, which could impact the timing of payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. If the Company determines that it will not be able to fully utilize all or part of the related tax benefits, the Company would reduce the portion of the Tax Receivable Agreement liability related to the tax benefits not expected to be utilized through earnings at that time.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has determined there is no resulting liability related to the Tax Receivable Agreement arising from the Transactions. Should the Company determine that the Tax Receivable Agreement liability is considered probable at a future date based on new information, any changes will be recorded within earnings at that time.