ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information that our management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company corrected the 2020 consolidated financial statements to account for private placement warrants as a liability on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet with subsequent changes in their value recognized in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations at each reporting date. These corrections are reflected in the discussions. The statements in this discussion regarding industry trends, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Certain figures, such as percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Overview
Canoo is a mobility technology company with a mission to bring electric vehicles (“EVs”) to everyone and provide connected services that improve the vehicle ownership experience. We are developing a technology platform that we believe will enable us to rapidly innovate and bring new products, addressing multiple use cases, to market faster than our competition and at lower cost. Our vehicle architecture and design philosophy are aimed at driving productivity and returning capital to our customers, and we believe the software and technology capabilities we are developing, packaged around a modular, customizable product, have the potential to fundamentally alter the value proposition across a vehicle’s lifecycle. We remain committed to the environment and to delivering sustainable mobility that is accessible to everyone. We proudly intend to manufacture our fully electric vehicles in Arkansas and Oklahoma, bringing advanced manufacturing and technology jobs to communities in America's heartland. We are committed to building a diverse workforce that will draw heavily upon the local communities of Native Americans and veterans.
We believe we are one of the first automotive manufacturers focused on capturing value across the entirety of the vehicle lifecycle, across multiple owners. Our platform and data architecture is purpose-built to be durable and serve as the foundation for the vehicles we intend to offer, unlocking a highly differentiated, multi-layer business model. The foundational layer is our Multi-Purpose Platform (“MPP” or “platform”) architecture, which serves as the base of our vehicles, including the Lifestyle Vehicle and its Delivery, Base, Premium, and Adventure trims; the Multi-Purpose Delivery Vehicle (“MPDV”) and the Pickup. The next layer is cybersecurity which is embedded in our vehicle to ensure the privacy and protection of vehicle data. Our top hats, or cabins, are modular and purpose-built to provide tailored solutions for our customers. This intentional design enables us to efficiently use resources to produce only what is necessary, underscoring our focus on sustainability and returning capital to customers. The remaining layers, connected accessories and digital customer ecosystem, present high-margin opportunities that extend beyond the initial vehicle sale, across multiple owners. Owners will further be able to customize their vehicles by adding connected accessories such as Bluetooth devices or infotainment systems. In addition, there are opportunities for software sales throughout the vehicle life, including predictive maintenance and service software or advanced driver assistance systems (“ADAS”) upgrades.
Our platform architecture is a self-contained, fully functional rolling chassis that directly houses the most critical components for operation of an EV, including our in-house designed proprietary electric drivetrain, battery systems, advanced vehicle control electronics and software and other critical components, which all have been optimized for functional integration. Both our true steer-by-wire system, believed to be the first such system applied to a production-intent vehicle, and our flat composite leaf-spring suspension system are core components of our platform’s differentiated functionality, enabling the development of a broad range of vehicle types and use cases due to the chassis’ flat profile and fully variable steering positions. All of our announced vehicles, including the Lifestyle Vehicle and the Lifestyle Delivery Vehicle, the MPDV and the Pickup, will share a common platform architecture paired with different top hats to create a range of uniquely customized and use case optimized purpose-built mobility solutions targeting multiple segments of the rapidly expanding EV marketplace.
In addition to our vehicle technology, we are developing a software platform that aggregates car data from both Canoo and non-Canoo vehicles and delivers valuable insights to our customers. Collected over-the-air for connected vehicles or via an on-board diagnostics (“OBD”) device for non-connected vehicles, we believe car data is critical to powering the customer journey and maximizing utility and value from the vehicle ownership experience. Leveraging our data aggregation platform, we aim to create the Canoo Digital Ecosystem, an application store that centralizes all vehicle information for customers and provides key tools across Security & Safety, Household Management, Fleet Management, Lifecycle Management and Vehicle Asset Management. Through our software offering, we believe we can provide differentiated value to both commercial customers and consumers by staying connected throughout the vehicle lifecycle, across multiple owners.
Core to our ethos is delivering high quality products while empowering local communities, which drove our decision to build in America and source a majority of our parts from America and allied nations. We believe vertical integration across our manufacturing and assembly process will enable us to achieve start of production (“SOP”) with less supply chain risk and provide us better oversight of our vehicle manufacturing. We are building production facilities in states and communities that are investing in high-tech manufacturing alongside us, creating American jobs and driving innovation. We intend to have an advanced industrialization facility in Bentonville, Arkansas and a mega microfactory in Pryor, Oklahoma. We also plan to move our corporate headquarters to Bentonville. The Bentonville manufacturing facility will be a low-volume facility, which we intend to use in the near-term for the initial production of our vehicles, allowing us to test and validate our manufacturing equipment and processes before large-scale production begins in our mega microfactory. In the long term, we expect to use the Bentonville facility for rapidly innovating on product concepts.
We have made strategic investments in our technology and products that position us to capture three large and growing markets - commercial and passenger vehicles, upfitting and accessories, and car data. With the rise of on-demand delivery and eCommerce, it is increasingly important to bring electrification to commercial vehicles, which Mordor Intelligence estimated represented a market opportunity of over $715 billion as of 2020. We also have chosen to pursue the most profitable segments of the passenger vehicle market, the SUV and Pickup segments, which IHS estimates to have generated over $115 billion in profits in 2020. In addition to this opportunity in commercial and passenger vehicle markets, due to the modularity and customization of all our vehicles, we believe there is a significant opportunity in upfitting and accessories across the vehicle lifecycle, which the Specialty Equipment Market Association (“SEMA”) estimated were valued at $24 billion in 2020. Lastly, according to research conducted by McKinsey, the value from car data monetization is expected to generate an over $250 billion market by 2030. Altogether, we estimate our highly strategic total market opportunity could grow to be over $1 trillion.
Since our founding in 2017, we continue to innovate on our technology and strategy. To date, we have achieved critical milestones in the development, testing, and manufacturing of our platform and product, as well as important developments for our business:
•Tony Aquila, who has deep expertise in vehicle lifecycle management software, became CEO in April 2021 in addition to being Executive Chair of the Board of Directors; Mr. Aquila is also our largest shareholder; in addition, we have announced the hire of key executives across all functions, including technology, manufacturing and operations;
•Developed the first Beta prototype in just 19 months from our inception in November 2017;
•Completed 500 thousand miles of Beta testing on our chassis platform and the Lifestyle Vehicle configuration;
•Secured commitments of approximately $400 million in non-dilutive financial incentives from the states of Arkansas and Oklahoma to support facilities development;
•Selected Panasonic, a global technology company and leader in the cylindrical lithium-ion battery industry, as our battery supply partner;
•Commenced prototype Gamma builds leveraging manufacturing equipment that will be utilized at our advanced industrialization facility; and
•Signed advanced manufacturing industrialization facility lease.
We continue to innovate and develop every aspect of our business, from our non-traditional business model to our built in America, highly utilitarian vehicles optimized to return capital to our customers. We believe being forward-
thinking across these areas has set the foundation for us to develop into a scalable business that is differentiated from our peers across the automotive original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) landscape.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On December 21, 2020, we consummated the Business Combination.
Immediately prior to closing of the Business Combination, all Legacy Canoo preference shares that were issued and outstanding were automatically converted into Legacy Canoo ordinary shares. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, each Legacy Canoo ordinary share issued and outstanding was canceled and converted into the right to receive the Per Share Merger Consideration.
Upon the closing of the Business Combination, our Certificate of Incorporation was amended and restated to, among other things, increase the total number of authorized shares of all classes of capital stock to 510,000,000 shares, of which 500,000,000 shares were designated Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share, and of which 10,000,000 shares were designated preferred stock, $0.0001 par value per share.
As part of becoming a public company in December 2020, we have implemented procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur recurring expenses as a publicly traded company for, among other things, costs associated with the employment of additional personnel, compliance under the Exchange Act, directors and officers liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Covid-19 Impact
COVID-19 and actions taken to mitigate its spread have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the geographical area in which we operate.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the ultimate extent of the impact on our business, operating results, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition will be primarily driven by the severity and duration of the pandemic, the pandemic’s further impact on the U.S. and global economies (including on supply chain and inflation) and the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic, as well as emergence of virus variants.
The measures taken by governmental authorities and otherwise to control the spread of the virus have adversely impacted our employees’ ability to collaborate in a discipline that requires a high degree of collaborative work. Our operations have had to change and adapt to meet these new demands. The operations of our suppliers, vendors and business partners have also been impacted. Various aspects of our business cannot be conducted remotely, including the testing and manufacturing of our EVs. Further, as a growing company, the ability for us to hire, onboard and train new employees has been impacted and has required us to evaluate areas of our business that will not result in the best use of our human capital for long-term growth. The spread of COVID-19 has also caused us and many of our contractors and service providers to modify business practices (including employee travel, recommending that all non-essential personnel work from home and cancellation or reduction of physical participation in testing activities, meetings, events and conferences), and collectively with our contractors and service providers, we have been and may further be required to take actions as required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors and business partners. There is no certainty that such actions will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by the virus or otherwise be satisfactory to government authorities. In addition, increased demand for semiconductor chips in 2020, due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic and increased demand for consumer electronics that use these chips, has resulted in a global shortage of chips in 2021. As a result, our ability to source semiconductor chips used in our vehicles may be adversely affected. This shortage may result in increased chip delivery lead times, delays in the production of our vehicles, and increased costs to source available semiconductor chips.
With the expansion of vaccination efforts in the United States and elsewhere, a majority of governmental restrictions have loosened, and businesses are resuming more normal operations. However, while the pandemic continues, if significant portions of our workforce or contractors and service providers are unable to work effectively, including due to illness, quarantines, social distancing, government actions or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations will be impacted. These factors related to COVID-19 are beyond our knowledge and control and, as a result, at this time, we are unable to predict the ultimate impact, both in terms of severity and duration, that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition, but it could be material if the current circumstances continue to exist for a prolonged period of time. Although we have made our best
estimates based upon current information, actual results could materially differ from the estimates and assumptions developed by management. Accordingly, it is reasonably possible that the estimates made in the financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, and if so, we may be subject to future impairment losses related to long-lived assets as well as changes to valuations.
Comparability of Financial Information
Our results of operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable to historical results as a result of the Business Combination, which was completed late in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Successful Development of our Facilities and Commercialization of Our EVs
We expect to derive future revenue from our first vehicle offerings, which are not expected to launch until 2022 or after. In order to reach commercialization, we must develop and tool our facilities and purchase and integrate related property and equipment, as well as achieve several research and development milestones. We may not be able to successfully develop our facilities or commercialize our EVs.
We expect that both our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•commercialize our EVs;
•invest in manufacturing capacity, via both our own owned facilities;
•continue to invest in our technology, research and development efforts;
•increase our investment in marketing, advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure for our EVs and services;
•obtain, maintain and improve our operational, financial and management information systems;
•hire additional personnel;
•obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•continue to operate as a public company.
As a result, we will require substantial additional capital to develop our EVs and services and fund our operations for the foreseeable future. We will also require capital to identify and commit resources to investigate new areas of demand. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from vehicle sales, we expect to primarily finance our operations through commercialization and production with proceeds from the Business Combination, including the proceeds from the PIPE Financing that took place concurrently with the Business Combination, and, as needed, secondary public offerings or debt financings. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements, will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our research and development efforts and our ability to successfully manage and control costs.
Key Components of Statements of Operations
Basis of Presentation
Currently, we conduct business through one operating segment. We are an early stage-growth company with no commercial operations, and our activities to date have been limited and are primarily conducted in the United States. For
more information about our basis of presentation, refer to Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue
During 2020, our revenue was derived from the provision of engineering, development and design consulting services on a project basis. No revenue was generated during 2021. Once we reach commercialization and commence production of our EVs, we expect that the majority of our revenue will be derived initially from sales of our vehicles and commercial products and services when launched.
Cost of Revenue, excluding Depreciation
During 2020, we recorded cost of revenue, excluding depreciation for the consulting services rendered in relation to engineering, development and design services provided on a project basis. No cost of revenue was recorded during 2021. Once we reach commercialization and commence production of our vehicles, we expect cost of revenue to include vehicle components and parts, including batteries, and direct labor costs.
Research and Development Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Research and development expenses, excluding depreciation consist of salaries, employee benefits and expenses for design and engineering personnel, stock-based compensation, as well as materials and supplies used in research and development activities. In addition, research and development expenses include fees for consulting and engineering services from third party vendors.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, excluding Depreciation
The principal components of our selling, general and administrative expenses are salaries, wages, benefits and bonuses paid to our employees; stock-based compensation; travel and other business expenses; and professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax services.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation is provided on property and equipment over the estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis. Upon retirement or disposal, the cost of the asset disposed of and the related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the loss from operations. No depreciation expense is allocated to research and development, cost of revenue and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expenses and debt discount amortization.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Commentary for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 may be found in Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") on March 31, 2021, ("2020 Form 10-K").
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated:
(1) This reflects the immaterial correction to prior period financial statements as outlined within Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue, excluding Depreciation
We did not generate any revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 since the Company is an early stage growth company in the pre-commercialization stage of development.
Revenue was $2.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue in 2020 was generated from the provision of engineering, development and design consulting services on a project basis. Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation expense, was $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The cost of revenue, excluding depreciation for year ended December 31, 2020 includes materials, labor, and other direct costs related to the provision of engineering, development, and design consulting services.
Research and Development Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Research and development expenses increased by $103.4 million, or 72.4%, to $246.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $142.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in research and development costs of $92.5 million and salary and related benefits expense of $38.8 million, partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $33.6 million. The increase in research and development costs primarily is related to expenditures for the Gamma stage engineering design and development costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Salary and related benefits expenses increased $38.8 million, from $48.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $87.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases are primarily due to continued investment in personnel and contract employees to drive and reach our research and development goals.
The decrease in stock-based compensation expenses of $33.6 million was primarily driven by the restricted stock awards modified and issued during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was largely due to $58.7 million of stock-based compensation incurred in 2020 related to the modification of the performance restricted stock awards to time-based vested awards with a merger trigger, which was satisfied on December 21, 2020, partially offset by the recognition of stock compensation expense related to issuance of awards to employees during the year ended December 31, 2021. See further discussion on the stock awards in Note 14 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
We expect to continue to see an overall increase in research and development expenses to support our growth and initiatives related to the Lifestyle Vehicle, Multi-Purpose Delivery Vehicles, and Pickup which are expected to launch as early as 2022 and 2023.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $143.1 million, or 277.3%, to $194.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $51.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases of $57.7 million in stock-based compensation expenses, $41.3 million in professional fees, $17.2 million in salary and related benefits, $11.2 million in occupancy costs, and $6.1 million in marketing and events. Other factors affecting selling, general and administrative expenses were individually immaterial.
The increase in stock-based compensation expenses of $57.7 million was primarily driven by certain awards granted during the year ended December 31, 2021 subject to time, performance and market vesting conditions, primarily in the form of restricted and performance stock units. The remaining increase was primarily driven by the continued recognition of stock compensation expense, resulting from the modification of certain performance restricted stock awards to become time-based vesting with a merger trigger, which was satisfied on December 21, 2020. See further discussion on the restricted stock awards in Note 14 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements. Other factors affecting stock-based compensation expenses were individually immaterial.
Professional fees increased by $41.3 million to $48.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to activities related to the Company’s business development, legal fees, and consulting fees.
Salary and related benefits expenses increased $17.2 million to $29.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $12.3 million in the prior year. These increases were due primarily to investment in personnel to support our growth and achieve start of production in late 2022.
We expect to continue to see an overall increase in selling, general and administrative expenses to support our growth and initiatives related to our vehicle programs, starting with the Lifestyle Vehicle and its variants.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $10.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to interest expense incurred and the amortization of debt discount on related party convertible notes that were repaid in connection with the Business Combination.
Gain on Fair Value Change in Contingent Earnout Shares Liability
As part of the Business Combination, certain stockholders and employees are entitled to receive additional shares of our Common Stock (“Earnout Shares”) to be issued when our Common Stock’s price reaches certain market share price milestones within specified periods following the Business Combination on December 21, 2020. We recognized a non-cash gain on the fair value change of contingent Earnout Shares liability of $104.4 million and $115.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, which was a result of the periodic remeasurement of the fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability. See further discussion on the contingent Earnout Shares liability in Note 13 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
The Company recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $5.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which was a result of the conversion of all of the Company's outstanding convertible notes on August 16, 2020. The
Company did not recognize a gain on extinguishment of debt in 2021. See further discussion on the convertible note conversion in Note 8 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
(Loss)/Gain on Fair Value Change of Private Placement Warrants Liability
We recognized a non-cash loss and a non-cash gain on fair value change of private placement warrants liability of $1.6 million and $3.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This was a result of the periodic remeasurement of the fair value of our private placement warrants liability. See further discussion on the private placement warrants liability in Note 15 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP measures to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation, restructuring charges, asset impairments, and other costs associated with exit and disposal activities, acquisition and related costs, changes to the fair value of contingent earnout shares liability, changes to the fair value of warrants liability, and any other one-time non-recurring transaction amounts impacting the statement of operations during the year. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, when combined with net loss are beneficial to an investor’s complete understanding of our operating performance. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We manage our business utilizing EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental performance measures.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was our unrestricted cash balance in the amount of $224.7 million, which was primarily invested in money market funds that consist of liquid debt securities issued by the U.S. government. In assessing our liquidity requirements and cash needs, we also consider contractual obligations to which we are a party. On October 19, 2021, the Company entered into the Sales Agreement effective October 15, 2021, with Panasonic for the supply of lithium-ion battery cells. The agreement stipulates an upfront non-refundable $30.0 million payment payable in tranches through March 2022. Additionally, see discussion related to the operating lease maturity schedule in Note 11 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
As an early stage growth company in the pre-commercialization stage of development, since inception the Company has incurred negative cash flows from operating activities of $300.8 million and $107.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are consistent with our strategy and budget. We expect to continue to incur net losses, comprehensive losses, and negative cash flows from operating activities in accordance with our operating plan as we continue to expand our research and development activities to complete the development of our EVs, establish our go-to-market model and scale our operations to meet anticipated demand. We expect that both our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•commercialize our EVs;
•continue to invest in our technology, research and development efforts;
•increase our investment in marketing, advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure for our EVs and services;
•obtain, maintain and improve our operational, financial and management information systems;
•hire additional personnel;
•obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•operate as a public company.
As an early stage growth company adjusting to the long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to access capital is critical. Management plans to raise additional capital through a combination of debt financing, other non-dilutive financing and/or equity financing. Additional financing may not be available on favorable terms or at all and
equity financing could be dilutive to current stockholders. Debt financing and other non-dilutive financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants and dilutive financing instruments. Our ability to access capital when needed is not assured and, if capital is not available to us when, and in the amounts needed, we will not be able to expand our operations beyond bringing the Lifestyle Vehicle and its variants to the point of production, and we could be required to delay, scale back, or abandon some or all of our development programs and other operations, which could materially harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared by management assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As of the date of this report, our existing cash resources are sufficient to support planned operations, which comprise bringing our lifestyle vehicle to the point of production, for the next 12 months. As a result, management believes that our existing financial resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for at least one year past the issuance date of the financial statements.
Cash Flows Summary
Presented below is a summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by the growth of our business primarily related to research and development as well as selling, general, and administrative activities. Our operating cash flow is also affected by our working capital needs to support growth in personnel-related expenditures and fluctuations in accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $300.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our cash outflow from operating activities primarily consist of payments related to our research & development and selling, general and administration expenses. Total expenditure as it relates to research & development excluding depreciation was $246.2 million during year ended December 31, 2021, of which $25.8 million related to stock-based compensation expenses during the year. The Company also incurred selling, general and administration expenses of $194.7 million for year ended December 31, 2021, of which $82.6 million related to stock-based compensation expenses during the year. The expenses include salaries and benefits paid to employees as primarily all salaries and benefits are paid in cash during the year.
Net cash used in operating activities was $107.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our cash outflow from operating activities primarily consist of payments related to our research & development and selling, general and administration expenses. The total expenditure as it relates to research & development excluding depreciation was $142.9 million during year ended December 31, 2020, of which $59.4 million related to stock-based compensation expenses during the year. The Company also incurred selling, general and administration expenses of $51.6 million for year ended December 31, 2020, of which $24.9 million related to stock-based compensation expenses during the year. The expenses include salaries and benefits paid to employees as primarily all salaries and benefits are paid in cash during the year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We continue to experience negative cash flows from investing activities as we expand our business and continue to build our infrastructure. Cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to capital expenditures to support our growth.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $162.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of purchases of fixed assets that are recorded in construction in progress specifically related to the development of manufacturing lines as well as equipment and tooling necessary in the production of the Company’s vehicles. Net cash used in investing activities was also comprised of the prepayment made to VDL Nedcar.
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of purchases of machinery and equipment as well as computer hardware and software.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to the $11.3 million in payments for offering costs. The $6.9 million repayment of the PPP loan during the year was offset by $6.9 million in cash received from exercise of public warrants.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $787.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to the proceeds of $607.1 million from the Business Combination, net of transaction costs and advisory fees, issuance of convertible notes totaling $180.5 million and proceeds from long-term debt borrowing of $7.0 million, partially offset by merger offering costs of $5.8 million and payment on stock warrant redemption of $0.8 million. See further discussion on the Business Combination and the convertible note conversion in Note 4 and Note 8, respectively, of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies require a greater degree of judgment and complexity and are the most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations:
Contingent Earnout Shares Liability
As part of the Business Combination, certain stockholders and employees are entitled to receive Earnout Shares to be issued when our Common Stock’s price reaches certain market share price milestones within specified periods following the Business Combination on December 21, 2020. The terms and conditions of the right to receive Earnout Shares are described in Note 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In accordance with the guidance under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, the Earnout Shares right was classified as a Level 3 fair value measurement liability, and the increase or decrease in the fair value during the reporting period is recognized as other expense or other income in our consolidated statement of operations accordingly. The fair value of the contingent Earnout Shares liability was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation of stock prices based on a volatility rate determined from a peer group of public companies and in consideration of other valuation-based inputs. Changes in these inputs or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the contingent earnout shares liability. Changes to contingent earnout shares liability can result from changes to discount rates or accretion of the liability due to the passage of time. The determination of the contingent earnout shares liability requires significant judgments including the appropriateness of the valuation model, reasonableness of estimates and assumptions, and the discount rates applied to such forecasts.
As of December 21, 2020, the initial fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability was recognized at $248.9 million with a corresponding reduction from the additional paid in capital in our stockholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability was estimated to be $133.5 million. We recognized a gain on fair value change in contingent Earnout Shares liability of $115.4 million as other income in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of our contingent Earnout
Shares liability was estimated to be $29.1 million. We recognized a gain on fair value change in contingent Earnout Shares liability of $104.4 million as other income in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards granted to employees and members of our Board based on the awards’ estimated grant date fair value using a fair value method. For awards that vest solely based on continued service (“requisite service”), the resulting fair value is recognized as an expense on an accelerated basis over the requisite service period, which is generally four years. For awards which contain performance conditions, the resulting fair value is recognized over the requisite service period using the graded vesting method, when it is probable the performance conditions will be met. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Prior to consummation of the Business Combination in December 2020, the fair value of our restricted stock units (RSUs) was based on the fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares on the date of grant. As there is no public market for the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares, the Legacy Canoo board of directors, with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, determined the fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares at the time of the grant of RSUs by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including the Legacy Canoo’s actual operating and financial performance, market conditions and performance of comparable publicly-traded companies, development milestones for the Legacy Canoo, the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event and transactions involving the Legacy Canoo’s ordinary shares, among other factors. The fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares was derived from the Legacy Canoo total equity value divided by the number of Legacy Canoo ordinary shares outstanding and was estimated using a probability-weighted expected return model, using different probability weightings estimated for public offering scenario, mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) scenario and dissolution scenario. The factors and scenario weighting estimates require significant judgment and involve inherent uncertainties, which can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of our RSUs and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized.
Following the completion of the Business Combination in December 2020, we estimate the fair value of RSUs based on the market price of our Common Stock underlying the awards on the grant date. Fair value for awards with our stock price performance metrics is calculated using the Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates stock price correlation and other variables over the time horizons matching the performance periods.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and our management uses significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense for future periods could be materially different, including as a result of adjustments to stock-based compensation expense recorded for prior periods.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 total stock-based compensation expense was $108.4 million and $84.3 million, respectively.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
Based on the Company’s aggregate worldwide market value of voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates as of June 30, 2021, the Company became a “large accelerated filer” and lost emerging growth company status as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act beginning with this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. Therefore, our independent registered public accounting firm is required to provide the attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in this Annual Report.
In addition, as a result of becoming a “large accelerated filer”, we no longer qualify to be a smaller reporting company even though our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result, starting with our first quarterly report in 2022, we will no longer be eligible to rely on the scaled disclosure exemptions applicable to smaller reporting companies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.