Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to GoGreen Investments Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the placement units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our ordinary shares;
● could cause a change of control if a substantial number of our ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021 we had $474,799 in cash held outside of our trust account. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
All activity through October 25, 2021, relates to our formation and the initial public offering. Since the initial public offering, our activities have been limited to the evaluation of business combination candidates. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combinations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $475,413, which consists of operating costs of $479,576 partially offset by $4,163 of interest income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of founder shares of $25,000 by the sponsor, and a total of $375,000 from our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note. As of December 31, 2021, the amounts borrowed under the promissory note have been repaid in full.
On October 25, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering in which we sold 27,600,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000 before underwriting fees and expenses. Our sponsor purchased 1,335,000 placement units at a price of $10.00 per unit generating $13,350,000 in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the initial public offering.
In connection with the initial public offering, we incurred offering costs of $15,817,581 (including an underwriting fee of $5,520,000 and deferred underwriting commissions of $9,660,000). Other incurred offering costs consisted principally of preparation fees related to the initial public offering. A total of $281,520,000 ($10.20 per unit sold in the initial public offering) of the net proceeds from the initial public offering and the private placement were deposited in the trust account established for the benefit of our public shareholders.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $474,799 of cash on our balance sheet. We will use these funds primarily to evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender at the time of the business combination. The units would be identical to the placement units sold in the private placement. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor, members of our management team or any of their affiliates as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $575,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations; $150,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $75,000 for NYSE and other regulatory fees; $150,000 for office space, administrative and support services for up to 15 months (which may be extended to up to 21 months as described elsewhere in this Report); and approximately $100,000 for general working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves net of estimated interest income.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following our initial public offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations; Quarterly Results
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial assets.
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any capital lease obligations or operating lease obligations.
The underwriters in our initial public offering were paid a cash underwriting fee of 2% of gross proceeds of the initial public offering or $5,520,000. In addition, the underwriters entitled to aggregate deferred underwriting commissions of $9,660,000 consisting of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Common shares subject to possible redemption
The Company accounts for its common shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common shares (including common shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s common shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for redeemable ordinary shares and income (loss) per share for Class A and Class B non-redeemable shares in a manner similar to the two-class method in calculating net income (loss) per ordinary share. Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for redeemable ordinary shares is computed by dividing the pro rata net income (loss) between the redeemable ordinary share and the non-redeemable ordinary share by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period as adjusted for the effects of deemed dividend under the assumption that they represent dividends to the holders of the redeemable ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable ordinary shares is computed by dividing the pro rata net income (loss) between the redeemable and non-redeemable ordinary shares by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. For the period from March 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares. As a result, diluted income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic ordinary share for the period from March 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.