Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. You should read this discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On December 1, 2020, we completed the previously announced sale of our commercial aviation (“CA”) business to a subsidiary of Intelsat Jackson Holdings S.A. (“Intelsat”) for a purchase price of $400.0 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments (the “Transaction”). As a result, all periods presented in our consolidated financial statements and other portions of this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been conformed to present the CA business as discontinued operations.
The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described under “Risk Factors” in this report. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Our fiscal year ends December 31 and, unless otherwise noted, references to years or fiscal are for fiscal years ended December 31. See “- Results of Operations.”
Company Overview
Gogo is the world’s largest provider of broadband connectivity services for the business aviation market. Our mission is to provide ground-like connectivity to every passenger on every flight around the globe, enabling superior passenger experiences and efficient flight operations. To accomplish our mission, we design, build and operate dedicated air-to-ground (“ATG”) networks, engineer and maintain in-flight systems of proprietary hardware and software, and deliver customizable connectivity and wireless entertainment services and global support capabilities to our aviation partners. Our services include narrowband satellite-based voice and data services made available through strategic partnerships with satellite providers.
Our chief operating decision maker evaluates performance and business results for our operations, and makes resource and operating decisions, on a consolidated basis. As we do not have multiple segments, we do not present segment information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic caused a significant decline in international and domestic business aviation travel, which materially and adversely affected our business in 2020. Beginning in March 2020, our business saw a sharp decrease in flight activity, as well as an increase in requests for account suspensions and decreases in new plan activations. Although these and other key metrics began to recover in the third quarter of 2020 and have since reached pre-COVID levels or better, we continue to monitor the status of the pandemic in the United States and internationally. We are unable to predict whether COVID-19 will have a material adverse effect on our business in the future or with what degree of severity or over what length of time such impact may occur.
Factors and Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that our operating and business performance is driven by various factors that affect the business aviation industry, including trends affecting the travel industry and trends affecting the customer bases that we target, as well as factors that affect wireless Internet service providers and general macroeconomic factors. Key factors that may affect our future performance include:
•costs associated with the implementation of, and our ability to implement on a timely basis, our technology roadmap, including upgrades to and installation of the ATG technologies we currently offer, Gogo 5G, and any other next generation or other new technology;
•our ability to manage issues and related costs that may arise in connection with the implementation of our technology roadmap, including technological issues and related remediation efforts and failures or
delays on the part of antenna and other equipment developers and providers, some of which are single-source;
•our ability to license additional spectrum and make other improvements to our network and operations as technology and user expectations change;
•the number of aircraft in service in our markets, including consolidations or changes in fleet size by one or more of our large-fleet customers;
•the economic environment and other trends that affect both business and leisure aviation travel, including the impact of COVID-19 on restrictions on and demand for air travel;
•disruptions to supply chains and installations, including COVID-19-related shortages of electronic components that have resulted in longer lead times and delays in obtaining certain electronic components used in the airborne equipment that we manufacture;
•the extent of our customers’ adoption of our products and services, which is affected by, among other things, willingness to pay for the services that we provide, the quality and reliability of our products and services, changes in technology and competition from current competitors and new market entrants;
•our ability to engage suppliers of equipment components and network services on a timely basis and on commercially reasonable terms;
•changes in laws, regulations and interpretations affecting telecommunications services, including those affecting our ability to maintain our licenses for ATG spectrum in the United States, obtain sufficient rights to use additional ATG spectrum and/or other sources of broadband connectivity to deliver our services, expand our service offerings and manage our network; and
•changes in laws, regulations and policies affecting our business or the business of our customers and suppliers, including changes that impact the design of our equipment and our ability to obtain required certifications for our equipment.
Key Business Metrics
Our management regularly reviews financial and operating metrics, including the following key operating metrics, to evaluate the performance of our business and our success in executing our business plan, make decisions regarding resource allocation and corporate strategies, and evaluate forward-looking projections.
•ATG aircraft online. We define ATG aircraft online as the total number of business aircraft for which we provide ATG services as of the last day of each period presented. This number excludes aircraft receiving ATG service as part of the ATG Network Sharing Agreement with Intelsat.
•Satellite aircraft online. We define satellite aircraft online as the total number of business aircraft for which we provide satellite services as of the last day of each period presented.
•Average monthly connectivity service revenue per ATG aircraft online. We define average monthly connectivity service revenue per ATG aircraft online as the aggregate ATG connectivity service revenue for the period divided by the number of months in the period, divided by the number of ATG aircraft online during the period (expressed as an average of the month end figures for each month in such period). Revenue share earned from the ATG Network Sharing Agreement with Intelsat is excluded from this calculation.
•Average monthly service revenue per satellite aircraft online. We define average monthly service revenue per satellite aircraft online as the aggregate satellite service revenue for the period divided by the number of months in the period, divided by the number of satellite aircraft online during the period (expressed as an average of the month end figures for each month in such period).
•Units sold. We define units sold as the number of ATG or satellite units for which we recognized revenue during the period.
•Average equipment revenue per ATG unit sold. We define average equipment revenue per ATG unit sold as the aggregate equipment revenue from all ATG units sold during the period, divided by the number of ATG units sold.
•Average equipment revenue per satellite unit sold. We define average equipment revenue per satellite unit sold as the aggregate equipment revenue earned from all satellite units sold during the period, divided by the number of satellite units sold.
Key Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
As a result of the Transaction, all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been conformed to present the CA business as a discontinued operation. We report the financial results of discontinued operations separately from continuing operations to distinguish the financial impact of disposal transactions from ongoing operations. The results of operations and cash flows of a discontinued operation are restated for all comparative periods presented. Refer to Note 2, "Discontinued Operations," to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
The following briefly describes certain key components of revenue and expenses as presented in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue:
We generate two types of revenue: service revenue and equipment revenue.
Service revenue primarily consists of monthly subscription and usage fees paid by aircraft owners and operators for telecommunication, data, and in-flight entertainment services. Service revenue is recognized as the services are provided to the customer. Beginning December 2020, service revenue includes revenue earned from the ATG Network Sharing Agreement with Intelsat.
Equipment revenue primarily consists of proceeds from the sale of ATG and satellite connectivity equipment and entertainment equipment. Equipment revenue is generally recognized when the equipment is shipped to OEMs and dealers.
Cost of Revenue:
Cost of service revenue consists of ATG network costs, satellite provider service costs, transaction costs and costs related to network operations.
Before closing the Transaction, we operated two divisions - business aviation (“BA”) and commercial aviation (“CA”). In January 2019, BA assumed responsibility for operating and maintaining our ATG network and was allocated the majority of the ATG network costs incurred in fiscal year 2019. In January 2020, we adopted a new allocation methodology for the ATG network costs utilizing pricing and usage for each of CA and BA. This
allocation methodology has been applied retrospectively to prior periods presented as the CA business is reported in discontinued operations. Upon the completion of the Transaction, we ceased allocating ATG network costs to the divested CA business.
Cost of equipment revenue primarily consists of the costs of purchasing component parts used in the manufacture of our equipment and the production, installation, technical support and quality assurance costs associated with the equipment sales.
Engineering, Design and Development Expenses:
Engineering, design and development expenses include the costs incurred to design and develop our technologies and products and to obtain and maintain FAA and other regulatory certifications. This includes the design, development and integration of our ATG ground networks and airborne line replaceable units, the design and development of products and enhancements thereto, and program management activities. Engineering, design and development expenses also include costs associated with enhancements to existing products.
Sales and Marketing Expenses:
Sales and marketing expenses consist of costs associated with activities related to customer sales (including sales commissions), digital marketing and lead generation, advertising and promotions, product management, trade shows and customer service support for end users.
General and Administrative Expenses:
General and administrative expenses include personnel and related operating costs of the business support functions, including finance and accounting, legal, human resources, administrative, information technology, facilities and executive groups.
Depreciation and Amortization:
Depreciation expense includes expense associated with the depreciation of our network equipment, office equipment, furniture, fixtures and leasehold improvements, which is recorded over their estimated useful lives. Amortization expense includes the amortization of our finite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which range from three to ten years depending on the assets being amortized.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related exposures. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In some instances, we could reasonably use different accounting estimates, and in some instances actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with the valuation allowance related to our deferred income tax assets have the greatest potential impact on and are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and that they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates. For a discussion of our significant accounting policies to which many of these critical estimates relate, see Note 3, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our consolidated financial statements.
Note that these critical accounting estimates relate solely to our continuing operations. The accounting policies related to our discontinued operations are discussed in Note 2, "Discontinued Operations," to our consolidated financial statements.
Deferred Income Taxes - Valuation Allowance:
We account for the valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740").
On a recurring basis, we assess the need for a valuation allowance related to our deferred income tax assets, which includes consideration of both positive and negative evidence to determine, based on the weight of the available evidence, whether it is more likely than not that some or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. In our assessment, we consider recent financial operating results, the scheduled expiration of our net operating losses, potential sources of taxable income, the reversal of existing taxable differences, taxable income in prior carryback years (if permitted under tax law) and tax planning strategies. We have a recent history of financial reporting losses, resulting in cumulative pre-tax losses in the three-year period ending with the current quarter which is objectively verifiable negative evidence regarding future profitability. Cumulative pre-tax losses from continuing operations adjusted for the reduction in interest expense resulting from the Refinancing (as defined below) result in positive normalized income over the same three-year period. This is objectively verifiable positive evidence of our ability to generate positive earnings in the future.
When there is a recent history of operating losses and a return to operating profitability has not yet been demonstrated, we cannot rely on projections of future earnings for purposes of assessing recoverability of our deferred tax assets and instead must use our historical earnings for this assessment. In such cases, we use systematic and logical methods to estimate when deferred tax assets will reverse and generate tax deductions. The selection of methodologies and assessment of when temporary differences will result in deductible amounts involves significant management judgment and is inherently complex and subjective. Our determination that we are more likely than not to realize a portion of our deferred tax assets represents our best estimate and considers both positive and negative factors. We considered positive factors including the sale of our CA business, the reduction in interest expense resulting from the Refinancing, strong demand for our products and services and pre-tax income from continuing operations in the third and fourth fiscal quarters of 2021. The negative factors included cumulative pre-tax losses from continuing operations in the three-year period ending with the current quarter and our relatively short history of pre-tax income from continuing operations. It is possible that there will be changes in our business, our performance, our industry or otherwise that cause actual results to differ materially from this estimate. If those changes result in significant and sustained reductions in our pre-tax income or utilization of existing tax carryforwards in future periods, additional valuation allowances may have to be recorded with corresponding adverse impacts on earnings and/or other comprehensive income. Such adverse impacts may be material.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our determination that we are more likely than not to realize a portion of our deferred tax assets resulted in a release of approximately $195.8 million of our valuation allowance. The remaining valuation allowance is still required for deferred tax assets related to certain state and foreign NOLs, capital losses, and the Section 163(j) interest limitation carryforward, as we determined that it was more likely than not that, as of December 31, 2021, these deferred tax assets will not be realized.
See Note 16, "Income Tax," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods presented, certain data from our consolidated statements of operations. The information contained in the table below should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
(in thousands)
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue:
Revenue and percent change for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands, except for percent change):
Revenue increased to $335.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $269.7 million for the prior year, due to increases in service and equipment revenue.
Service revenue increased to $259.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $212.0 million for the prior year, primarily due to an increase in ATG aircraft online, an increase in average monthly service revenue per aircraft online and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenue share from the ATG Network
Sharing Agreement with Intelsat, which went into effect in the fourth quarter of the prior year. Average monthly service revenue per ATG unit online increased to $3,238 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $2,951 for the prior year.
Equipment revenue increased to $76.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $57.7 million for the prior year, primarily due to increases in the number of ATG units sold, with 869 ATG units sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with 667 units for the prior year.
We expect service revenue to increase in the future as additional ATG aircraft come online and average monthly connectivity service revenue per ATG aircraft online increases. We expect equipment revenue to increase in the future as additional ATG units are sold, but expect a portion of such increase to be offset by a decrease in the average selling price.
Cost of Revenue:
Cost of service revenue and percent change for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands, except for percent change):
Cost of service revenue increased to $56.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $45.1 million for the prior year, primarily due to an increase in ATG network costs as these costs are no longer shared with the divested CA business and an increase in network and data center operating costs related to the separation from the CA business, partially offset by a credit for regulatory surcharges from which we are now exempt.
We expect cost of service revenue to increase over time, primarily due to service revenue growth and increasing ATG network costs associated with Gogo 5G.
Cost of equipment revenue increased to $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $39.3 million for the prior year, primarily due to an increase in ATG units sold.
We expect that our cost of equipment revenue will increase over time with growth in ATG units sold and, in the near term, an increase in cost per ATG unit.
Engineering, Design and Development Expenses:
Engineering, design and development expenses decreased to $24.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $25.2 million for the prior year, due to lower expensed Gogo 5G development costs, partially offset by an increase in personnel costs driven by COVID-related cost controls implemented in the prior year.
We expect engineering, design and development expenses as a percentage of total revenue to increase slightly in the near term, driven by Gogo 5G development costs, and decrease over the long term as the level of Gogo 5G investment decreases and revenue increases.
Sales and Marketing Expenses:
Sales and marketing expenses increased to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $15.1 million for the prior year, primarily due to an increase in personnel costs driven by COVID-related cost controls implemented in the prior-year and an increase in marketing and promotional costs.
We expect sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of total revenue to remain relatively unchanged in the long term but increase slightly in the near term driven by Gogo 5G marketing spend.
General and Administrative Expenses:
General and administrative expenses decreased to $51.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $54.5 million for the prior year, primarily due to corporate cost savings, partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation in the current period and an increase in personnel costs driven by COVID-related cost controls implemented in the prior year.
We expect general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenue to decrease over time as the business grows given the fixed cost nature of this category and as we realize the full run rate of completed cost savings initiatives.
Depreciation and Amortization:
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $14.2 million for the prior year, primarily due to the amortization of capitalized software.
We expect that our depreciation and amortization expense will increase in the future as we launch our Gogo 5G network.
Other (Income) Expense:
Other (income) expense and percent change for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands, except for percent change):
Total other expense increased to $151.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $125.1 million for the prior year, primarily due to the loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes, partially offset by a decrease in interest expense.
We expect our interest expense to decrease in the future as a result of the Refinancing, the conversions and exchanges of the 2022 Convertible Notes that have occurred to date and the maturity or earlier conversion of the remaining 2022 Convertible Notes in 2022. See Note 10, "Long-Term Debt and Other Liabilities," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Taxes:
The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 611.0%, as compared with 0.3% for the prior year. The income tax benefit of $187.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a result of a partial release of the valuation allowance related to our deferred income tax assets during the year. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was not significant primarily due to the full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. See Note 16, "Income Tax," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We expect our income tax provision to increase in future periods as we generate positive pre-tax income.
Discontinued Operations:
Loss from discontinued operations decreased to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with a loss of $201.5 million for the prior year, primarily due to the closing of the Transaction on December 1, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, loss from discontinued operations was primarily related to stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by the recognition of a gain on sale of discontinued operations that was recorded as a deferred gain on sale at December 31, 2020.
See Note 2, "Discontinued Operations," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
"Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2021, includes a discussion of changes in our results of operations from fiscal year 2019 to fiscal year 2020.
Non-GAAP Measures
In our discussion below, we discuss Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow, as defined below, which are non-GAAP financial measurements. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow for business planning purposes, including managing our business against internally projected results of operations and measuring our performance and liquidity. These supplemental performance measures also provide another basis for comparing period-to-period results by excluding potential differences caused by non-operational and unusual or non-recurring items. These supplemental performance measures may vary from and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are not recognized measurements under GAAP; when analyzing our performance with Adjusted EBITDA or liquidity with Free Cash Flow, as applicable, investors should (i) evaluate each adjustment in our reconciliation to the corresponding GAAP measure, and the explanatory footnotes regarding those adjustments, (ii) use Adjusted EBITDA in addition to, and not as an alternative to, net income (loss) attributable to common stock as a measure of operating results and (iii) use Free Cash Flow in addition to, and not as an alternative to, consolidated net cash provided by (used in) operating activities when evaluating our liquidity.
Definition and Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA represents net income (loss) attributable to common stock before interest expense, interest income, income taxes and depreciation and amortization expense.
Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA adjusted for (i) stock-based compensation expense included in the results of continuing operations, (ii) the results of discontinued operations, including stock-based compensation expense and the gain on the sale of CA, (iii) loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes and (iv) separation costs related to the sale of CA. Our management believes that the use of Adjusted EBITDA eliminates items that management believes have less bearing on our operating performance, thereby highlighting trends in our core business which may not otherwise be apparent. It also provides an assessment of controllable expenses, which are indicators management uses to determine whether current spending decisions need to be adjusted in order to meet financial goals and achieve optimal financial performance.
We believe that the exclusion of stock-based compensation expense from Adjusted EBITDA is appropriate given the significant variation in expense that can result from using the Black-Scholes model to determine the fair value of such compensation. The fair value of our stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes model and varies based on fluctuations in the assumptions used in this model, including inputs that are not necessarily directly related to the performance of our business, such as the expected volatility, the risk-free interest rate and the expected term of the options. Therefore, we believe that the exclusion of this cost provides a clearer view of the operating performance of our business. Further, stock option grants made at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily
reflect how our business is performing at any particular time. While we believe that investors should have information about any dilutive effect of outstanding options and the cost of that compensation, we also believe that stockholders should have the ability to consider our performance using a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes these costs and that management uses to evaluate our business.
We believe it is useful for an understanding of our operating performance to exclude the results of our discontinued operations from Adjusted EBITDA because they are not part of our ongoing operations.
We believe it is useful for an understanding of our operating performance to exclude the loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes from Adjusted EBITDA because these activities are not related to our operating performance.
We believe it is useful for an understanding of our operating performance to exclude separation costs related to the sale of CA from Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 because of the non-recurring nature of this activity.
We also present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental performance measure because we believe that this measure provides investors, securities analysts and other users of our consolidated financial statements with important supplemental information with which to evaluate our performance and to enable them to assess our performance on the same basis as management.
Free Cash Flow represents net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, less purchases of property and equipment and the acquisition of intangible assets. We believe that Free Cash Flow provides meaningful information regarding our liquidity.
Gogo Inc. and Subsidiaries
Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
(unaudited)
Material limitations of Non-GAAP measures
Although EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are measurements frequently used by investors and securities analysts in their evaluations of companies, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow each
have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for, or more meaningful than, amounts determined in accordance with GAAP.
Some of these limitations include:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect interest income or expense;
·EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash requirements for our income taxes;
·EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect depreciation and amortization, which are significant and unavoidable operating costs given the level of capital expenditures needed to maintain our business;
·Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect non-cash components of employee compensation;
·Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the results of discontinued operations;
·Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 does not reflect the separation costs related to the sale of CA;
·Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes;
·Free Cash Flow does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for the period; and
·since other companies in our industry or related industries may calculate these measures differently from the way we do, their usefulness as comparative measures may be limited.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our growth and cash needs primarily through the issuance of common stock, non-convertible debt, senior convertible preferred stock, convertible debt, term facilities and cash from operating activities. We continually evaluate our ongoing capital needs in light of increasing demand for our services, capacity requirements, evolving user expectations regarding the in-flight connectivity experience, evolving technologies in our industry and related strategic, operational and technological opportunities. We actively consider opportunities to raise additional capital in the public and private markets utilizing one or more of the types of capital raising transactions through which we have historically financed our growth and cash needs, as well as other means of capital raising not previously used by us.
See the disclosure below under the heading “Debt Instruments” for the definitions of the debt and convertible debt instruments to which we refer in this section, as well as the indentures and other agreements that govern them.
Based on our current plans, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents and cash flows provided by operating activities will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements for at least the next twelve months, including capital expenditure requirements and the principal amount of any 2022 Convertible Notes that remain outstanding at maturity. Over the long term, we believe that cash flows provided by operating activities and our expected access to capital markets will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements.
As detailed in Note 10, "Long-Term Debt and Other Liabilities," on April 30, 2021, GIH entered into the 2021 Credit Agreement with Gogo, the lenders and issuing banks party thereto and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent, which provides for the Term Loan Facility in an aggregate principal amount of $725.0 million, issued with a discount of 0.5%, and the Revolving Facility, which includes a letter of credit sub-facility. The Term Loan Facility amortizes in nominal quarterly installments equal to 1% of the aggregate initial principal amount thereof per annum, with the remaining balance payable upon final maturity on April 30, 2028. There are no amortization payments under the Revolving Facility, and all borrowings under the Revolving Facility mature on April 30, 2026. Our intent is to continue to access the capital markets to refinance our future debt obligations on an as-needed basis.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains covenants that limit the ability of GIH and its subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness. Further, market conditions and/or our financial performance may limit our access to
additional sources of equity or debt financing, or our ability to pursue potential strategic alternatives. As a result, we may be unable to finance the growth of our business to the extent that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and cash generated through operating activities prove insufficient or we are unable to raise additional financing through the issuance of equity, permitted incurrences of debt (by us or by GIH and its subsidiaries), or the pursuit of potential strategic alternatives.
The proceeds of the Term Loan Facility were used, together with cash on hand, (i) to redeem in full and pay the outstanding principal amount of the 2024 Senior Secured Notes together with accrued and unpaid interest and redemption premiums and to pay fees associated with the termination of the ABL Credit Agreement (together with the redemption of the 2024 Senior Secured Notes, the “Refinancing”), and (ii) to pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Refinancing and the Facilities (the “Transaction Costs”). The Revolving Facility is available for working capital and general corporate purposes of Gogo and its subsidiaries and was undrawn as of December 31, 2021.
The 2022 Convertible Notes mature on May 15, 2022, unless earlier converted into shares of our common stock. In November 2021, we informed the trustee under the indenture governing the 2022 Convertible Notes that we intend to settle any conversions of the 2022 Convertible Notes occurring after November 15, 2021 in shares of our common stock. To the extent any 2022 Convertible Notes remain outstanding at maturity, we currently expect to pay such principal amount through cash on hand.
In May 2021, we purchased interest rate caps with an aggregate notional amount of $650.0 million for $8.6 million. We receive payments in the amounts calculated pursuant to the caps for any period in which the three-month USD LIBOR rate increases beyond the applicable strike rate. The termination date of the cap agreements is July 31, 2027. The notional amounts of the interest rate caps periodically decrease over the life of the caps. While the interest rate caps are intended to limit our interest rate exposure under our variable rate indebtedness, which includes the Facilities, if our variable rate indebtedness does not decrease in proportion to the periodic decreases in the notional amount hedged under the interest rate caps, then the portion of such indebtedness that will be effectively hedged against possible increases in interest rates will decrease. In addition, the strike prices periodically increase over the life of the caps. As a result, the extent to which the interest rate caps will limit our interest rate exposure will decrease in the future.
For additional information on the interest rate caps, see Note 11, "Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities," to our consolidated financial statements.
Consistent with our capital allocation strategy, and given our cash position and the upcoming maturity of the 2022 Convertible Notes, we are evaluating the return of capital to our stockholders, which may take the form of stock repurchases. The implementation of any capital allocation policy, including any declaration of stock repurchases or other distributions, will be at the discretion of, and subject to the approval by, our Board of Directors and will depend on our financial condition, earnings, liquidity and capital requirements, level of indebtedness, contractual restrictions, restrictions imposed by Delaware law, general business conditions and any other factors that our Board of Directors deems relevant in making any such determination. Therefore, there can be no assurance that we will make any stock repurchases or make other distributions or returns on our common stock, or as to the amount of any such stock repurchases, distributions or returns of capital.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations, comprised of our material future cash requirements and deferred revenue arrangements, as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands).
(1)As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding purchase obligations represented obligations to vendors incurred in order to meet operational requirements in the normal course of business and related primarily to the build out of Gogo 5G, information technology, research and development, sales and marketing and production related activities.
(2)See Note 10, "Long-Term Debt and Other Liabilities," to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
(3)Amounts represent obligations to provide services for which we have already received cash from our customers.
(4)Other long-term obligations consist of estimated payments (undiscounted) for our asset retirement obligations, network transmission services and monthly payments of C$0.1 million (using the December 31, 2021 exchange rate) to the licensor of our Canadian ATG spectrum license over the estimated 25-year term of the agreement. Other long-term obligations exclude tax liability payments due to the uncertainty of their timing.
Contractual Commitments: We have agreements with various vendors under which we have remaining commitments to purchase hardware components and development services. Such commitments will become payable as we receive the hardware components or as development services are provided.
Leases and Cell Site Contracts: We have lease agreements relating to certain facilities and equipment, which are considered operating leases. See Note 17, "Leases," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Indemnifications and Guarantees: In accordance with Delaware law, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is, or was, serving at our request in such capacity. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under this indemnification is uncertain and may be unlimited, depending upon circumstances. However, our Directors’ and Officers’ insurance does provide coverage for certain of these losses.
In the ordinary course of business, we may occasionally enter into agreements pursuant to which we may be obligated to pay for the failure of performance of others, such as the use of corporate credit cards issued to employees. Based on historical experience, we believe that the risk of sustaining any material loss related to such guarantees is remote.
We have entered into a number of agreements pursuant to which we indemnify the other party for losses and expenses suffered or incurred in connection with any patent, copyright, or trademark infringement or misappropriation claim asserted by a third party with respect to our equipment or services. The maximum potential
amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is uncertain and is typically not limited by the terms of the agreements.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow activity for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Following is a discussion of the year-over-year changes in cash flow activities.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities from continuing operations:
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows from operating activities from continuing operations for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $66.7 million, as compared with cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations of $4.5 million for the prior year. The principal contributors to the increase in operating cash flows were:
•A $93.4 million improvement in net income (loss) and non-cash charges and credits, as noted above under “-Results of Operations.”
•A $31.3 million decrease in cash flows related to operating assets and liabilities resulting from:
oA decrease in cash flows primarily due to the following:
▪Changes in inventories due to increased equipment purchases;
▪Changes in accrued interest primarily due to the timing of payments as compared to the prior year and the reduced interest resulting from the Refinancing; and
▪Changes in prepaid expenses, accounts payable and accrued liabilities due primarily to the timing of payments.
oPartially offset by an increase in cash flows due to changes in contract assets as compared to the prior year.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $4.5 million, as compared with cash used in operating activities from continuing operations of $12.9 million for the prior year. The principal contributors to the increase in operating cash flows were:
•A $38.7 million increase in cash flows related to operating assets and liabilities resulting from:
oAn increase in cash flows primarily due to the following:
▪Changes in accrued interest due to changes in the timing of payments as compared to the prior year;
▪Changes in accounts receivable due primarily to the timing of collections and a decrease in revenue as a result of COVID-19; and
▪Changes in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due primarily to the timing of payments.
oPartial offsets to the above due to a decrease in cash flows resulting from changes in contract assets primarily due to additional promotional sales programs in the current year as compared to the prior year.
•Partially offset by a $21.3 million change in net loss and non-cash charges and credits, as noted above under “-Results of Operations.”
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities from continuing operations:
Cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $16.3 million and $9.0 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, while cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations was $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Investing activities are comprised of capital expenditures related to software development, data center upgrades and cell site construction. Additionally, cash used in investing activities from continuing operations includes the purchase of interest rate caps for $8.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and net changes in our short-term investments consisting of a cash inflow of $39.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities from continuing operations:
Cash used in financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $331.0 million, primarily due to the redemption of all of our outstanding 2024 Senior Secured Notes (including the make-whole premium payable under the indenture governing the 2024 Senior Secured Notes) for a redemption price totaling $1,023.1 million and the payment of $20.3 million of deferred financing fees associated with the issuance of the Facilities, offset in part by $721.4 million of gross proceeds from the Term Loan Facility.
Cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.5 million, primarily due to the $51.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of additional 2024 Senior Secured Notes, offset by the repurchase of convertible notes, payments on finance leases and stock-based compensation activity.
Cash used in financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.8 million, primarily due to the redemption of our outstanding 2022 Senior Secured Notes (including the make-whole premium payable under the indenture governing the 2022 Senior Secured Notes) for a redemption price totaling $741.4 million, the repurchase of $159.5 million of outstanding 2020 Convertible Notes and the payment of $23.0 million of deferred financing costs associated with the issuance of additional 2024 Senior Secured Notes, offset in part by $920.7 million of gross proceeds from the issuance of 2024 Senior Secured Notes.
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operations:
Cash used in discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $9.0 million, primarily due to $7.8 million used in investing activities for a payment to Intelsat in settlement of working capital adjustments relating to the Transaction and $1.2 million used in operating activities primarily to pay the employer portion of taxes related to the vesting of equity awards and the exercise of stock options.
Cash provided by discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $220.1 million as compared to cash used by discontinued operations of $30.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $250.4 million change was primarily due to a $464.0 million increase in cash provided by investing activities offset by a $214.1 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was due to the $386.3 million of proceeds received in the Transaction and a $79.9 million decrease in capital expenditures due to the impact of COVID-19 on the installation of CA equipment on airline partners’ aircraft. The decrease in cash flows from operating activities was due to a $133.1 million increase in net loss and non-cash charges and credits, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, and an $81.0 million decrease in cash flows related to operating assets and liabilities primarily due to changes in accounts receivable, inventory, deferred lease proceeds and accrued liabilities, offset in part by changes in accounts payable and contract assets.
Capital Expenditures
Our business requires significant capital expenditures, primarily for technology development, equipment and capacity expansion. Capital spending for continuing operations for the periods presented in this report is associated with the expansion of our ATG network and data centers. We capitalized software development costs related to network technology solutions and new product/service offerings. We also capitalized costs related to the build-out of our office locations. For the periods presented in this report, capital expenditures for our former CA business, presented as discontinued operations, included the significant purchase of airborne equipment related to the roll out and/or upgrade of service to our former airline partners’ fleets.
Capital expenditures for continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $8.7 million , $9.0 million and $6.5 million, respectively. The decrease in capital expenditures in 2021 as compared with 2020 was primarily due a decrease in capitalized software, partially offset by an increase in network-related equipment, and the increase in 2020 as compared with 2019 was primarily due to an increase in capitalized software.
We expect that our capital expenditures will increase in the near term as we build out Gogo 5G and further invest in capitalized software, and decrease significantly after the Gogo 5G build out is substantially completed in 2022.
Debt Instruments
Following is a discussion of the debt instruments we had in place as of December 31, 2021 as well as those we utilized during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
2021 Credit Agreement
On April 30, 2021, Gogo Intermediate Holdings LLC (a wholly owned subsidiary of Gogo Inc.) ("GIH") entered into a credit agreement (the "2021 Credit Agreement") among Gogo, GIH, the lenders and issuing banks party thereto and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent, which provides for (i) a term loan credit facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of $725.0 million, issued with a discount of 0.5%, and (ii) a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility” and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Facilities”) of up to $100.0 million, which includes a letter of credit sub-facility. The Term Loan Facility amortizes in nominal quarterly installments equal to 1% of the aggregate initial principal amount thereof per annum, with the remaining balance payable upon final maturity on April 30, 2028. There are no amortization payments under the Revolving Facility, and all borrowings under the Revolving Facility mature on April 30, 2026.
The Term Loan Facility bears annual interest at a floating rate measured by reference to, at GIH’s option, either (i) an adjusted London inter-bank offered rate (subject to a floor of 0.75%) plus an applicable margin of 3.75% or (ii) an alternate base rate plus an applicable margin of 2.75%.
Loans outstanding under the Revolving Facility bear annual interest at a floating rate measured by reference to, at GIH’s option, either (i) an adjusted London inter-bank offered rate (subject to a floor of 0.00%) plus an applicable margin ranging from 3.25% to 3.75% per annum depending on GIH’s senior secured first lien net leverage ratio or (ii) an alternate base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.25% to 2.75% per annum depending on GIH’s senior secured first lien net leverage ratio. Additionally, unused commitments under the Revolving Facility are subject to a fee ranging from 0.25% to 0.50% per annum depending on GIH’s senior secured first lien net leverage ratio. As of December 31, 2021, the fee for unused commitments under the Revolving Facility was 0.25%.
The Facilities may be prepaid at GIH’s option at any time without premium or penalty (other than customary breakage costs), subject to minimum principal payment amount requirements. Subject to certain exceptions and de minimis thresholds, the Term Loan Facility is subject to mandatory prepayments in an amount equal to: (i) 100% of the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales, insurance recovery and condemnation events, subject to reduction to 50% and 0% if specified senior secured first lien net leverage ratio targets are met; (ii) 100% of the net cash proceeds of certain debt offerings; and (iii) 50% of annual excess cash flow (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), subject to reduction to 25% and 0% if specified senior secured first lien net leverage ratio targets are met.
The Revolving Facility includes a financial covenant set at a maximum senior secured first lien net leverage ratio of 7.50:1.00, which will apply if the outstanding amount of loans and unreimbursed letter of credit drawings thereunder at the end of any fiscal quarter exceeds 35% of the aggregate of all commitments thereunder.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains customary events of default, which, if any of them occurred, would permit or require the principal, premium, if any, and interest on all of the then outstanding obligations under the Facilities to be due and payable immediately and the commitments under the Revolving Facility to be terminated.
2022 Convertible Notes
On November 21, 2018, we issued $215.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Convertible Notes”) in private offerings to qualified institutional buyers, including pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, and in concurrent private placements. We granted an option to the initial purchasers to purchase up to an additional $32.3 million aggregate principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes to cover over-allotments, of which $22.8 million was subsequently exercised during December 2018, resulting in a total issuance of $237.8 million aggregate principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes. The 2022 Convertible Notes mature on May 15, 2022, unless earlier converted into shares of our common stock. In November 2021, we informed the trustee under the indenture governing the 2022 Convertible Notes that we intend to settle any conversions of the 2022 Convertible Notes occurring after November 15, 2021 in shares of our common stock. We pay interest on the 2022 Convertible Notes semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on May 15, 2019.
The 2022 Convertible Notes had an initial conversion rate of 166.6667 common shares per $1,000 principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $6.00 per share of our common stock. The shares of common stock subject to conversion are considered in the diluted earnings per share calculations under the if-converted method.
Holders may convert the 2022 Convertible Notes, at their option, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount at any time prior to January 15, 2022, but only in the following circumstances:
•during any fiscal quarter beginning after the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2018, if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during the last 30 consecutive trading days of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price of the 2022 Convertible Notes on each applicable trading day (the “Stock Price Condition”);
•during the five-business day period following any five consecutive trading day period in which the trading price for the 2022 Convertible Notes is less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate for the 2022 Convertible Notes on each such trading day (the “Notes Price Condition”); or
•upon the occurrence of specified corporate events.
The Stock Price Condition was triggered for the period from October 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, January 1, 2021 through March 31, 2021, April 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021, July 1, 2021 through September 30, 2021 and October 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. Regardless of whether any of the foregoing circumstances occurs, a holder may convert its 2022 Convertible Notes, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount, at any time on or after January 15, 2022 until the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding May 15, 2022.
In addition, if we undergo a fundamental change (as defined in the indenture governing the 2022 Convertible Notes), holders may, subject to certain conditions, require us to repurchase their 2022 Convertible Notes for cash at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2022 Convertible Notes to be purchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, following a make-whole fundamental change, we will increase the conversion rate in certain circumstances for a holder who elects to convert its 2022 Convertible Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change.
In January 2021, $1.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes was converted by holders and settled through the issuance of 166,666 shares of common stock.
On March 17, 2021, Gogo entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements (the “March 2021 Exchange Agreements”) with certain holders of 2022 Convertible Notes. Pursuant to the March 2021 Exchange Agreements, such holders exchanged a total of $28,235,000 aggregate principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes for 5,121,811 shares of our common stock on March 24, 2021. The negotiated exchange rate under the March 2021 Exchange Agreements was 181.40 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2022 Convertible Notes, which resulted in a loss on settlement of $4.4 million, which is included in Loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
On April 1, 2021, Gogo entered into a privately negotiated exchange agreement (the “GTCR Exchange Agreement”) with an affiliate of funds managed by GTCR. Pursuant to the GTCR Exchange Agreement, GTCR exchanged $105,726,000 aggregate principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes for 19,064,529 shares of our common stock on April 9, 2021. The negotiated exchange rate under the GTCR Exchange Agreement was 180.32 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2022 Convertible Notes, which resulted in a loss on settlement of $14.6 million, which is included in Loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
2024 Senior Secured Notes
On April 25, 2019 (the “Issue Date”), GIH and Gogo Finance Co. Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of GIH) (“Gogo Finance” and, together with GIH, the “Issuers”) issued $905.0 million aggregate principal amount of 9.875% senior secured notes due 2024 (the “2024 Senior Secured Notes”), at a price equal to 99.512% of their face value, under an indenture, dated as of April 25, 2019, among the Issuers, Gogo, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee.
The Issuers issued an additional $20.0 million of 2024 Senior Secured Notes on May 7, 2019, which were issued at a price equal to 100.5% of their face value, and $50.0 million of 2024 Senior Secured Notes on November 13, 2020, which were issued at a price equal to 103.5% of their face value.
The 2024 Senior Secured Notes were guaranteed on a senior secured basis by Gogo and all of GIH’s existing and future restricted subsidiaries (other than Gogo Finance), subject to certain exceptions. The 2024 Senior Secured Notes and the related guarantees were secured by certain liens on the Company’s collateral, certain of which were released upon the closing of the Transaction and the remainder on the Redemption Date as defined below.
The 2024 Senior Secured Notes were redeemed on May 1, 2021 (the “Redemption Date”) at a redemption price equal to 104.938% of the principal amount of the 2024 Senior Secured Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to (but not including) the Redemption Date. The make-whole premium paid in connection with the redemption was $48.1 million and we wrote off the remaining unamortized deferred financing costs of $15.2 million and the remaining debt discount of $1.3 million, which together are included in Loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
ABL Credit Facility
On August 26, 2019, Gogo Inc., GIH and Gogo Finance entered into a credit agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”) with the other loan parties party thereto, the lenders party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as syndication agent, which provides for an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”) of up to $30.0 million, subject to borrowing base availability, and includes letter of credit and swingline sub-facilities. The obligations under the ABL Credit Agreement were guaranteed by Gogo and all of its existing and future subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions and secured by certain collateral of the Company. On April 30, 2021, the ABL Credit Agreement and all commitments thereunder were terminated. As a result of the termination, the remaining unamortized deferred financing costs of $0.3 million were written off as of May 1, 2021 and included in Loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
2022 Senior Secured Notes
On June 14, 2016, the Issuers issued $525.0 million aggregate principal amount of 12.500% senior secured notes due 2022 (the “2022 Senior Secured Notes”) under an indenture, dated as of June 14, 2016, among the Issuers, Gogo, the subsidiary guarantors, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee and as collateral agent. On January 3, 2017, the Issuers issued $65.0 million aggregate principal amount of additional 2022 Senior Secured Notes at a price equal to 108% of their face value resulting in gross proceeds of $70.2 million. On September 20, 2017, the Issuers issued $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of additional 2022 Senior Secured Notes at a price equal to 113% of their face value resulting in gross proceeds of $113.0 million. Additionally, we received approximately $2.9 million for interest that accrued from July 1, 2017 through September 24, 2017, which was paid in our January 2018 interest payment.
The 2022 Senior Secured Notes were redeemed on May 15, 2019. The make-whole premium paid in connection with the redemption was $51.4 million and we wrote off the remaining unamortized deferred financing costs of $9.1 million and the remaining debt premium of $11.7 million relating to the 2022 Senior Secured Notes in connection with the redemption thereof, which together are included in the Loss on extinguishment of debt and settlement of convertible notes in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
2020 Convertible Notes
On March 3, 2015, we issued $340.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2020 (the “2020 Convertible Notes”) in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers, pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act. We granted an option to the initial purchasers to purchase up to an additional $60.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes to cover over-allotments, of which $21.9 million was subsequently exercised during March 2015, resulting in a total issuance of $361.9 million aggregate principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes. We paid interest on the 2020 Convertible Notes semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year. Interest payments began on September 1, 2015. In November 2018, in connection with the issuance of the 2022 Convertible Notes, we repurchased $199.9 million outstanding principal amount of the 2020 Convertible Notes at par value.
On April 18, 2019, we commenced a cash tender offer (the “Tender Offer”) to purchase any and all of the outstanding 2020 Convertible Notes for an amount equal to $1,000 per $1,000 principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest from the last interest payment date on the 2020 Convertible Notes to, but not including, the date of payment for the 2020 Convertible Notes accepted in the Tender Offer. The Tender Offer expired on May 15, 2019, resulting in the purchase of $159.0 million of outstanding 2020 Convertible Notes. As a result of the Tender Offer, the carrying value of the 2020 Convertible Notes was adjusted by $8.5 million to
face value and unamortized deferred financing costs of $0.6 million were expensed. These two items are included in the loss on extinguishment of debt in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019. During September 2019, we purchased an additional $0.5 million of outstanding 2020 Convertible Notes. The 2020 Convertible Notes matured on March 1, 2020.
The 2020 Convertible Notes had an initial conversion rate of 41.9274 common shares per $1,000 principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes, which was equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $23.85 per share of our common stock. We had the option to elect to deliver cash in lieu of all or a portion of such shares. The shares of common stock subject to conversion were excluded from diluted earnings per share calculations under the if-converted method as their impact is anti-dilutive.
Forward Transactions
In connection with the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes, we paid approximately $140.0 million to enter into prepaid forward stock repurchase transactions (the “Forward Transactions”) with certain financial institutions (the “Forward Counterparties”), pursuant to which we purchased approximately 7.2 million shares of common stock for settlement on or around the March 1, 2020 maturity date for the 2020 Convertible Notes, subject to the ability of each Forward Counterparty to elect to settle all or a portion of its Forward Transactions early.
On December 11, 2019, we entered into an amendment to one of the Forward Transactions (the “Amended and Restated Forward Transaction”) to extend the expected settlement date with respect to approximately 2.1 million shares of common stock held by one of the Forward Counterparties, JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (the “2022 Forward Counterparty”), to correspond with the May 15, 2022 maturity date for the 2022 Convertible Notes. In the future, we may request that the 2022 Forward Counterparty modify the settlement terms of the Amended and Restated Forward Transaction to provide that, in lieu of the delivery of the applicable number of shares of our common stock to us to settle a portion of the Amended and Restated Forward Transaction in accordance with its terms, the 2022 Forward Counterparty would pay to us the net proceeds from the sale by the 2022 Forward Counterparty (or its affiliate) of a corresponding number of shares of our common stock in a registered offering (which may include block sales, sales on the NASDAQ Global Select Market, sales in the over-the-counter market, sales pursuant to negotiated transactions or otherwise, at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at negotiated prices). Any such sales could potentially decrease (or reduce the size of any increase in) the market price of our common stock. The 2022 Forward Counterparty is not required to effect any such settlement in cash in lieu of delivery of shares of our common stock and, if we request that the 2022 Forward Counterparty effect any such settlement, it will be entered into in the discretion of the 2022 Forward Counterparty on such terms as may be mutually agreed upon at the time. As a result of the Forward Transactions, total shareholders’ equity within our consolidated balance sheets was reduced by approximately $140.0 million. In March 2020, approximately 5.1 million shares of common stock were delivered to us in connection with the Forward Transactions. In April 2021, approximately 1.5 million shares of common stock were delivered to us in connection with the Amended and Restated Forward Transaction. The approximately 0.6 million shares of common stock remaining under the Amended and Restated Forward Transactions are treated as retired shares for basic and diluted EPS purposes although they remain legally outstanding.
Restricted Cash
Our restricted cash balances were $0.4 million and $0.5 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The balance as of December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of a letter of credit issued for the benefit of the landlord of our new office location in Chicago, IL. The balance as of December 31, 2020 consisted of a letter of credit issued for the benefit of the landlord of our current office location in Broomfield, CO.
For additional information on the 2021 Credit Agreement, the 2022 Convertible Notes, the 2024 Senior Secured Notes, the ABL Credit Facility, the 2022 Senior Secured Notes and the 2020 Convertible Notes, see Note 10, "Long-Term Debt and Other Liabilities," to our consolidated financial statements.