ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Except for the historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. We caution you not to put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. See “Forward-Looking Statements” above. Our actual future results or actions may differ materially from these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including but not limited to the risks described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report and other reports filed by us with the SEC. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we currently expect.
Introduction
We are a mining company that pursues gold and silver projects that are expected to achieve both low operating costs and high returns on capital. DDGM holds six properties and includes mineral production primarily from the Arista underground mine. During 2021, we temporarily suspended operations voluntarily in late August in response to a spike in COVID-19. We produce gold and silver doré and metal concentrates which contain precious metals of gold and silver and base metals of copper, lead, and zinc. We are also currently preparing a definitive feasibility study at our Back Forty Project with the goal of commencing commercial production in 2025.
The following discussion summarizes our results of operations for the two fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and our financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, with a particular emphasis on the year ended December 31, 2021. For discussion regarding the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as well as discussion regarding the financial condition as of December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, please refer to the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in the our annual report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021. On December 31, 2020, we spun-off our wholly-owned subsidiary, Fortitude Gold Corporation, which held a Nevada Mining Unit. We presented the operating results and cash flows of the Nevada Mining Unit reportable segment within discontinued operations in the prior periods. See Note 21, Discontinued Operations, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
The discussion also presents certain non-GAAP financial measures that are important to management in its evaluation of our operating results and which are used by management to compare our performance with what we perceive to be peer group mining companies and are relied on as part of management’s decision-making process. Management believes these measures may also be important to investors in evaluating our performance. For a detailed description of each of the non-GAAP financial measures, please see the discussion under “Non-GAAP Measures”.
In our financial statements, we report the sale of precious and base metals as revenue, and we periodically review our revenue streams to ensure that this treatment remains appropriate. We consider precious metals to be the long-term primary driver of our economic decisions and believe that base metals are secondary products for non-GAAP financial measures.
Precious metal gold equivalent is determined by taking gold ounces produced or sold, plus silver ounces produced or sold, converted to precious metal gold equivalent ounces using the gold to silver average realized price ratio for the period.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to protect the health and safety of our employees, contractors, and communities, by taking precautionary measures, including specialized training, social distancing, screening workers before they enter facilities, a work from home mandate where possible, and close monitoring of national and regional COVID-19 impacts and governmental guidelines. Since our non-mining workforce is able to work remotely with the benefit of technology, we are able to maintain our operations and internal controls over financial reporting and disclosures.
On August 18, 2021, we announced the temporary suspension of activities at the Don David Gold Mine in response to a spike in COVID-19 cases at our mine and surrounding communities. The suspension lasted twelve days and by September 7, 2021, we had significantly ramped back up operations under further enhanced COVID-19 protocols. We incurred incremental COVID-19 specific costs of $0.2 million during 2021 for activities such as additional health and safety procedures, increased transportation, and community contributions. We are working with local authorities to improve the availability of vaccines to our employees and host communities.
As of the date of the issuance of these audited Consolidated Financial Statements, there have been no other significant impacts, including impairments, to our operations and financial statements. However, the long-term impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of COVID-19 on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. We are not able to estimate the duration of the pandemic and potential impact on its business if disruptions or delays in business developments and shipments of product occur. In addition, a severe prolonged economic downturn could result in a variety of risks to the business, including a decreased ability to raise additional capital when and if needed on acceptable terms, if at all. As the situation continues to evolve, we will continue to closely monitor market conditions and respond accordingly. We have completed various scenario planning analyses to consider the potential impacts of COVID-19 on its business, including volatility in commodity prices, temporary disruptions, and curtailments of operating activities (voluntary or involuntary). We believe that current working capital balances will be sufficient for the foreseeable future, although there is no assurance that will be the case.
Results of Operations
Don David Gold Mine
Mine activities during 2021 included development and ore extraction from the Arista mine. The following table summarizes certain production statistics about our Don David Gold Mine for the periods indicated:
(1) Based on actual days the mill operated during the period.
(2) The difference between what we report as "ounces/tonnes produced" and "payable ounces/tonnes sold" is attributable to the difference between the quantities of metals contained in the concentrates we produce versus the portion of those metals actually paid for according to the terms of our sales contracts. Differences can also arise from inventory changes incidental to shipping schedules, or variances in ore grades and recoveries, which impact the amount of metals contained in concentrates produced and sold.
2021 compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Oaxaca operations produced 26,438 gold ounces and 1,200,291 silver ounces. These production results reflect an increase of 29% and 1%, respectively, from the same period in 2020. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, production totaled 6,853 gold ounces and 330,873 silver ounces. While gold production was the same period over period, silver production increased by 19% from the same period in 2020. Production increases are directly related to the increase in gold and silver grades in 2021.
Production Volumes
During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we processed ore at a rate of 1,559 and 1,512 ore tonnes per day, respectively, as compared to 1,702 and 1,829 ore tonnes per day for the same periods in 2020. Tonnes milled were 10% and 11% lower for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, respectively, as compared to the same periods in 2020. The lower production rates were a result of ground support challenges throughout the year and a twelve-day voluntary suspension of the operations in the third quarter of 2021 due to a spike in COVID-19 cases. The operations team has responded to ground support challenges through mine sequencing and taken measures to ensure the safety of our employees.
Grades & Recoveries
During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we processed ore with an average gold grade of 1.93 g/t and 2.01 g/t, respectively, as compared to 1.81 g/t and 1.47 g/t for the same periods in 2020. Likewise, during both the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we processed ore with an average silver grade of 82 g/t, as compared to 66 g/t and 74 g/t, respectively, for the same periods in 2020. Full-year average gold grade was approximately 37% higher than the prior year, and the full-year average silver grade was 11% higher than the prior year, as a result of mining more ore from the Arista high-grade narrow veins. Additionally, overall recoveries for gold in 2021 improved by 5% due to process improvement initiatives.
Our base metals average grades during the three months ended December 31, 2021 were 0.38% for copper, 2.17% for lead, and 4.77% for zinc, compared to 0.40% for copper, 1.93% for lead, and 4.93% for zinc, for the same period in 2020. The average grades for our base metals for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were 0.39% for copper, 1.93% for lead, and 4.36% for zinc, compared to 0.39% for copper, 1.92% for lead, and 4.87% for zinc in 2020. Overall copper and lead grades and recoveries during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, were in line with the same period in 2021. While zinc grades were 3% and 10% lower during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the zinc recoveries were slightly higher (approximately 2%) than the same period in 2021.
The following table summarizes certain financial data of the Company for the periods indicated:
Sales
DDGM net sales of $125.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $34.5 million, or 38%, when compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 sales is the result of increased gold sales volumes, higher silver and base metal prices, and lower treatment charges. Gold ounces sold in 2021 increased over 2020 by 5,177 ounces or 30%. Silver and base metal volumes decreased as follows: silver by 5%, copper by 5%, lead by 9%, and zinc by 14%. These decreases were offset by higher average realized prices as follows: silver 19%, copper 51%, lead 26%, and zinc 37%. Concentrate treatment charges, which are net against concentrate sales, deceased by 46%.
Treatment Charges
Treatment charges for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $11.5 million, or $548 per tonne of base metal produced and sold, as compared to $21.1 million, or $885 per produced and sold base metal tonne for the same period in 2020. This 38% decrease in the per base metal tonne sold was expected as a result of the negotiations of new treatment charge agreements for 2021. The decrease is largely dependent on the spot treatment charge market for zinc, which can be volatile.
Operating Costs
Total Mine Cost of Sales of $88.4 million increased $10.2 million or 13%, compared to 2020. The primary driver is related to the $11.6 million, or 19%, increase in production costs from $60.6 million in 2020 to $72.2 million in 2021, offset by a $1.4 million, or 8%, decrease in depreciation expense. The increase in production costs is mostly related to a $8.7 million increase in consumable goods caused by a 14% price increase in materials used in the operations, a $2.9 million increase in energy costs due to higher consumption, a $2.8 million increased spend on contractors, a $2.8 million impact related to the Mexico Labor Reform for long-term employee obligations ($0.9 million) and profit sharing ($1.9 million), offset by a $6.3 million decrease due to lower tonnes processed through the mill.
Mine Gross Profit
For the year ended December 31, 2021, mine gross profit and mine gross profit percent totaled $36.7 million and 29%, as compared to $12.5 million and 14% for the same period in 2020. The increase in mine gross profit and mine gross profit percent during 2021 primarily resulted from higher sales, offset by higher operating costs discussed above.
Net income (loss) from continuing operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded net income from continuing operations of $8.0 million, as compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $6.3 million during the same period in 2020. The change was attributable to the factors noted above.
Net income from discontinued operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income from discontinued operations was nil. We recorded net income from discontinued operations of $10.7 million during the same period in 2020.
Net income.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded net income of $8.0 million, as compared to net income of $4.4 million during the same period in 2020. The change was attributable to the factors noted above.
The following table summarizes certain sales statistics about the Don David Gold Mine operations for the periods indicated:
(1) Average metal prices realized vary from the market metal prices due to final settlement adjustments from our provisional invoices when they are settled. Our average metal prices realized will therefore differ from the market average metal prices in most cases.
Other Costs and Expenses, Including Taxes
As noted above, we have reflected the results of operations of the Nevada Mining Unit as discontinued operations for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and therefore, have not included such operations in the discussion below.
General and administrative expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses totaled $6.9 million compared to $8.4 million for the same period of 2020. The $1.5 million decrease in 2021, compared to 2020 is directly related to the lower administrative costs as a result of the spin-off of Fortitude Gold Corporation.
Exploration expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, property exploration expenses totaled $4.9 million as compared to $2.5 million for the same period of 2020, which demonstrated GRC’s commitment to expand the DDGM operations and invest in Mexico.
Restructuring expenses. Restructuring expenses of $2.4 million were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 for employee severance compensation related to the spin-off of Fortitude Gold Corporation in the first quarter of 2021, and change of control payments related to the Aquila Transaction in December 2021.
Stock-based compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2021, stock-based compensation expense totaled $0.9 as compared to $2.2 million for the same period of 2020. The higher 2020 costs are the result of additional expense recognized related to the spin-off of Fortitude Gold Corporation.
Other expense, net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded other expense of $4.0 million compared to other income of $1.2 million during the same period of 2020. The $5.2 million change from 2020 was due to the $3.0 million realized and unrealized losses on the zinc zero cost collars, $0.9 million related to long-term employee obligations as a result of the Mexico Employment Reform, and $0.4 million foreign currency losses due to volatility in the Mexican Peso. Please see Note 17 in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information.
Provision for income taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, income tax expense increased to $9.4 million from $5.6 million from the same period in 2020. The 2021 income tax expense is primarily driven by the increase in net income at DDGM. Please see Note 6 in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information.
2021 Capital and Exploration Investment Summary
Gold Regrind Project: Metallurgical testing, full-scale design, and engineering of the zinc tailings regrind circuit was completed through the second quarter of 2021. In the third quarter of 2021, work began to repurpose the existing ball mill and refurbish flotation cells. New flotation cells are expected to be delivered later in the first quarter of 2022. Regrinding of the zinc tailings has already resulted in an increase in gold recoveries in the fourth quarter of 2021 and is expected to increase gold recovery by 6% to 10% overall. The reground material will be leached to produce doré bars. Completion and commissioning are expected in the first quarter of 2022. As of December 31, 2021, $1.0 million has been invested in this project with another $1.2 million expected before completion.
Dry Stack Tailings Project: Construction and commissioning of the filtration plant and dry stack tailings project is complete. The dry stacked tailings will accelerate reclamation of certain areas of the open pit mine, extend the life of the existing tailings and storage facilities, and significantly reduce water consumption as approximately 80% of the process water will be available for reuse. As of December 31, 2021, $14 million has been invested in this project.
Dry Stack Tailings Filtration Plant and Dry Stack Area
Underground and Exploration Development: Mine development during the quarter included ramps and accesses to various areas of the Arista and Switchback vein systems and exploration development drifts. A total of 2,501 meters of underground development and exploration development, at a cost of $4.9 million, was completed during the year, including access to new exploration drill stations on level 17.
Non-GAAP Measures
Throughout this report, we have provided information prepared or calculated according to U.S. GAAP and have referenced some non-GAAP performance measures which we believe will assist with understanding the performance of our business. These measures are based on precious metal gold equivalent ounces sold and include cash cost before co-product credits per ounce, total cash cost after co-product credits per ounce, and total all-in sustaining cost per ounce (“AISC”). Because the non-GAAP performance measures do not have any standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP, they may not be comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. Accordingly, these measures should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for, measures of performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These non-GAAP measures are not necessarily indicative of operating profit or cash flow from operations as determined under GAAP.
For financial reporting purposes, we report the sale of base metals as part of our revenue. Revenue generated from the sale of base metals in our concentrates is considered a co-product of our gold and silver production for the purpose of our total cash cost after co-product credits for our Don David Gold Mine. We periodically review our revenues to ensure that our reporting of primary products and co-products remains appropriate. Because we consider copper, lead, and zinc to be co-products of our precious metal production, the value of these metals continues to be applied as a reduction to total cash costs in our calculation of total cash cost after co-product credits per precious metal gold equivalent ounce sold. Likewise, we believe the identification of copper, lead, and zinc as co-product credits is appropriate because of their lower individual economic value compared to gold and silver and due to the fact that gold and silver are the primary products we intend to produce.
Total cash cost, after co-product credits, is a measure developed by the Gold Institute in an effort to provide a uniform standard for comparison purposes. AISC is calculated based on the current guidance from the World Gold Council.
Total cash cost before co-product credits includes all direct and indirect production costs related to our production of metals (including mining, milling and other plant facility costs, royalties, and site general and administrative costs) less stock-based compensation allocated to production costs plus treatment and refining costs.
Total cash cost after co-product credits includes total cash cost before co-product credits, less co-product credits (revenues earned from base metals).
AISC includes total cash cost after co-product credits plus other costs related to sustaining production, including sustaining allocated general and administrative expenses and sustaining capital expenditures. We determined sustaining capital expenditures as those capital expenditures that are necessary to maintain current production and execute the current mine plan.
Cash cost before co-product credits per ounce, total cash cost after co-product credits per ounce, and AISC are calculated by dividing the relevant costs, as determined using the cost elements noted above, by precious metal gold equivalent ounces sold for the periods presented.
Reconciliations to U.S. GAAP
The following table summarizes Don David Gold Mine’s total all-in cost after co-product credits per precious metal gold equivalent ounce sold:
(1) Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data: Consolidated Statements of Operations
(2) Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data: Note 3.
(3) Sum of, refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data: Consolidated Statements of Cash Flow
Trending Highlights
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our working capital was $29.3 million, a decrease of $1.5 million from $30.8 million at December 31, 2020. Our working capital balance at December 31, 2021 reflects an increase in cash, offset by liabilities related to the zinc zero cost collar, Mexico employee profit sharing. Our working capital balance fluctuates as we use cash to fund our operations, financing and investing activities, including exploration, mine development, income taxes, and shareholder dividends. We believe that as a result of our cash balances, the performance of our current and expected operations, and current metals prices, we will be able to meet our obligations and other potential cash requirements during the next 12 months from the date of this report.
Long-term liabilities assumed with the Aquila acquisition, capital requirements to develop the Back Forty Project, and potential project financing may have an impact on liquidity in the long term. These long-term liabilities are contingent upon the Back Forty Project securing project financing and achieving commercial production. We are currently preparing a definitive feasibility study at our Back Forty Project with the goal of commencing commercial production in 2025. Depending on the capital requirements, project financing is currently expected for 2023 or 2024.
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 increased to $33.7 million from $25.4 million as of December 31, 2020, a net increase in cash of $8.3 million. The increase is primarily due to cash from operations which was offset by cash spent on capital and exploration expenditures at DDGM.
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $34.8 million and $21.2 million, respectively. The increase is mainly attributable to the increase in net income from continuing operations.
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $23.0 million compared to $8.0 million during the same period in 2020. The increase in investing activities is primarily attributable to more mine development in 2021 at our Don David Gold Mine and the investment in Aquila acquisition.
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a net outflow of $3.1 million compared to a net outflow of $5.2 million in 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have off-balance sheet arrangements related to equipment purchase obligations of $0.4 million.
Accounting Developments
Recent accounting pronouncements issued have been evaluated and do not presently impact our financial statements and supplemental data.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, and contingencies at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. As a result, management is required to routinely make judgments and estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different conditions or assumptions. The following discussion pertains to accounting estimates management believes are most critical to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations that require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments.
Future Metals Prices
Metals prices are key components in estimates that determine the valuation of some of our significant assets and liabilities, including properties, plant and equipment, deferred tax assets, and certain accounts receivable. Metals prices are also an important component in the estimation of reserves. As shown above in Item 1. - Business, metals prices have historically been volatile. Gold demand arises primarily from investment and consumer demand. Silver demand arises from investment demand, particularly in exchange-traded funds, industrial demand, and consumer demand. Investment demand for gold and silver can be influenced by several factors, including: the value of the U.S. dollar and other currencies, changing U.S. budget deficits, widening availability of exchange-traded funds, interest rate levels, the health of credit markets, and inflationary expectations. The investments in the construction industry, rising electrical and electronics production, and demand for industrial equipment are some of the major factors driving the demand for base metals and their prices.
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves
Critical estimates are inherent in the process of determining our Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves. Our Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves are affected largely by our assessment of future metals prices, as well as by engineering and geological estimates of ore grade, accessibility, and production cost. Metals prices are estimated based on a five-year street consensus as provided by the Bank of Montreal. Our assessment of Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves occurs at least annually. Mineral Reserves are a key component in the valuation of our property, equipment and mine development and related depreciation rates.
Mineral Reserve estimates are used in determining appropriate rates of units-of-production depreciation, with net book value of many assets depreciated over remaining estimated reserves. Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves are also key components in forecasts of estimated future cash flows, which we compare to current asset values in an effort to ensure that carrying values are reported appropriately, as well as assessment of the recoverability of deferred tax assets related to expectations of future taxable income. Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves are a culmination of many estimates and are not guarantees that we will recover the indicated quantities of metals or that we will do so at a profitable level.
Revenue
Concentrate sales are initially recorded based on 100% of the provisional sales prices, net of treatment and refining charges, at the time of delivery to the customer, at which point the performance obligations are satisfied and control of the product is transferred to the customer. Adjustments to the provisional sales prices are made to take into account the mark-to-market changes based on the forward prices of metals until final settlement occurs. The changes in price between the provisional sales price and final sales price are considered an embedded derivative that is required to be separated from the host contract for accounting purposes. The host contract is the receivable from the sale of the concentrates at the quoted metal prices at the time of delivery. The embedded derivative, which does not qualify for hedge accounting, is adjusted to market through revenue each period prior to final settlement. Market changes in the prices of metals between the delivery and final settlement dates will result in adjustments to revenues related to previously recorded sales of concentrate. Sales are recorded net of charges for treatment, refining, smelting losses, and other charges negotiated with the buyer. These charges are estimated upon delivery of concentrates based on contractual terms and adjusted to reflect actual charges at final settlement. Historically, actual charges have not varied materially from the Company’s initial estimates.
Doré sales are recognized upon the satisfaction of performance obligations, which occurs when price and quantity are agreed upon with the customer. Doré sales are recorded using quoted metal prices, net of refining charges.
Depreciation and Amortization
Capitalized costs are depreciated or amortized using the straight-line method or unit-of-production (“UOP”) method at rates sufficient to depreciate such costs over the shorter of estimated productive lives of such assets or the useful life of the individual assets. Significant judgment is involved in the determination of the estimated life of the assets. The Company’s estimates for Mineral Reserves is used in determining our UOP rates. The Company’s estimates of proven and probable ore reserves may change, possibly in the near term, resulting in changes to depreciation, depletion, and amortization rates in future reporting periods. Productive lives of the assets range from 1 to 10 years, but do not exceed the useful life of the individual asset.
Please see Note 1 in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for depreciation rates of major asset categories.
Carrying Value of Stockpiles
Stockpiles represent ore that has been extracted from the mine and is available for further processing. Mine sequencing may result in mining material at a faster rate than can be processed. We generally process the highest ore grade material first to maximize metal production; however, a blend of gold ore stockpiles may be processed to balance hardness and/or metallurgy in order to maximize throughput and recovery. Processing of lower grade stockpiled ore may continue after mining operations are completed. Stockpiles are measured by estimating the number of tonnes added and removed from the stockpile, the number of contained ounces (based on assay data), and the estimated metallurgical recovery rates. Stockpile ore tonnages are verified by periodic surveys. Costs are added to stockpiles based on current mining costs, including applicable overhead and depreciation and amortization relating to mining operations and removed at each stockpile’s average cost per recoverable unit as material is processed.
We record stockpiles at the lower of average cost or net realizable value, and carrying values are evaluated at least quarterly. Net realizable value represents the estimated future sales price based on short-term and long-term metals price assumptions that are applied to expected short-term (12 months or less) and long-term sales from stockpiles, less estimated costs to complete production and bring the product to sale. The primary factors that influence the need to record write-downs of stockpiles include declines in short-term or long-term metals prices, increases in costs for production inputs such as labor, fuel and energy, materials and supplies, as well as realized ore grades and recovery rates.
Other assumptions include future operating and capital costs, metal recoveries, production levels, commodity prices, Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserve quantities, engineering data, and other factors unique to each operation based on the life of mine plans. If short-term and long-term commodity prices decrease, estimated future processing costs increase, or other negative factors occur, it may be necessary to record a write-down of ore on stockpiles. A high degree of judgment is involved in determining such assumptions and estimates and no assurance can be given that actual results will not differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets to be held and used using a fair-value based approach when events and circumstances indicate that the related carrying amount of our assets may not be recoverable. The economic environment and commodity prices may be considered as impairment indicators for the purposes of these impairment assessments. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the carrying value of a long-lived asset or asset group is considered impaired when the anticipated undiscounted cash flows from such asset or asset group is less than its carrying value. In that event, a loss will be recorded in our Consolidated Statements of Operations based on the difference between book value and the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group computed using discounted estimated future cash flows, or the application of an expected fair value technique in the absence of an observable market price. Future cash flows include estimates of recoverable quantities to be produced from estimated Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, commodity prices
(considering current and historical prices, price trends, and related factors), production quantities, production costs, and capital expenditures, all based on life-of-mine plans and projections. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist that are largely independent of cash flows from other asset groups. It is possible that actual future cash flows will be significantly different than the estimates, as actual future quantities of recoverable minerals, gold and other commodity prices, production levels and costs, and capital are each subject to significant risks and uncertainties.
Asset Retirement Obligation/Reclamation and Remediation Costs
Our mining and exploration activities are subject to various laws and regulations, including legal and contractual obligations to reclaim, remediate, or otherwise restore properties at the time the property is removed from service. Accounting for reclamation and remediation obligations requires management to make estimates of the future costs that we will incur to complete the work required to comply with existing laws and regulations. Actual costs may differ from the amounts estimated. Reclamation costs are allocated to expense over the life of the related assets and are periodically adjusted to reflect changes in the estimated present value resulting from the passage of time and revisions to the estimates of either the timing or amount of the reclamation and remediation costs. Also, future changes to environmental laws and regulations could increase the extent of reclamation and remediation work required.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based employee compensation plans under the fair value recognition and measurement provisions in accordance with applicable accounting standards, which require all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), and deferred share units (“DSUs”) to be measured based on the grant date fair value of the awards. The resulting expense generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period during which the employee is required to perform service in exchange for the award.
Stock-based compensation expense is recorded net of estimated forfeitures in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and as such is recorded for only those stock-based awards that we expect to vest. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on historical forfeitures of equity awards and adjust the rate to reflect changes in facts and circumstances, if any. We will revise our estimated forfeiture rate if actual forfeitures differ from our initial estimates.
Income Taxes
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we estimate the actual amount of taxes currently payable or receivable, as well as deferred tax assets and liabilities attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which these temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities generally have a direct impact on earnings in the period of the changes. Mining taxes represent federal and state taxes levied on mining operations. As the mining taxes are calculated as a percentage of mining profits, we classify them as income taxes. Where applicable tax laws and regulations are either unclear or subject to varying interpretations, it is possible that changes in these estimates could occur that materially affect the amounts of deferred income tax assets and liabilities recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
Each period, we evaluate the likelihood of whether some portion or all of each deferred tax asset will be realized and provide a valuation allowance for those deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that the related benefits will not be realized. When evaluating our valuation allowance, we consider historic and future expected levels of taxable income, the pattern and timing of reversals of taxable temporary timing differences that give rise to deferred tax liabilities, and tax planning initiatives. Levels of future taxable income are affected by, among other things, market gold and silver prices, production costs, quantities of Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserves, interest rates, federal and local legislation,
and foreign currency exchange rates. If we determine that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance will be recorded with a charge to income tax expense. Conversely, if we determine that we will ultimately be able to realize all or a portion of the related benefits for which a valuation allowance has been provided, all or a portion of the related valuation allowance will be reduced with a credit to income tax expense.
In addition, the calculation of income tax expense involves significant management estimation and judgment involving a number of assumptions. In determining these amounts, management interprets tax legislation in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate and makes estimates of the expected timing of the reversal of future tax assets and liabilities. We also make assumptions about future earnings, tax planning strategies, and the extent to which potential future tax benefits will be used. We are also subject to assessments by various taxation authorities which may interpret tax legislation differently, which could affect the final amount or the timing of tax payments.