ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes beginning on page. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties because they are based on current expectations and relate to future events and our future financial performance. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements because of many important factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview and Recent Developments
GeoVax is a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing immunotherapies and vaccines against infectious diseases and cancers using novel vector vaccine platforms. GeoVax’s product pipeline includes ongoing human clinical trials in COVID-19 and head and neck cancer. Additional research and development programs include preventive vaccines against Zika Virus, hemorrhagic fever viruses (Ebola, Sudan, Marburg, and Lassa) and malaria, as well as immunotherapies for solid tumors. Certain of our vaccine development activities have been, and continue to be, financially supported by the U.S. Government. This support has been both in the form of research grants and contracts awarded directly to us, as well as indirect support for the conduct of preclinical animal studies and human clinical trials.
GEO-CM04S1 License - In November 2021, GeoVax entered into a license agreement with City of Hope (the “COH License”), granting GeoVax exclusive rights to further develop and commercialize GEO-CM04S1 (formerly referred to as COH04S1). GEO-CM04S1, a synthetic, attenuated modified vaccinia Ankara (sMVA) vector expressing Spike and Nucleocapsid antigens of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, was initially developed at COH for immunocompromised patients.
GEO-CM04S1 is being studied in an ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate its safety and immunogenicity, compared to the Pfizer mRNA-based vaccine, in patients who have previously received either an allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant, an autologous hematopoietic cell transplant or chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy. GEO-CM04S1 is the only COVID-19 vaccine that includes both SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleocapsid proteins to advance to a Phase 2 trial in cancer patients. Such vaccines also tend to produce an immune response quickly - in less than 14 days - with only mild side effects. The trial is also the first to compare an investigational multi-antigenic COVID-19 vaccine to the current Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved mRNA vaccine from Pfizer/BioNTech in people who are immunocompromised. Such patients have often shown a weak antibody response after receiving currently available COVID-19 vaccines.
In December 2021, patient enrollment began for the Phase 2 portion of a Phase 1/2 trial of GEO-CM04S1, to study its use as a universal booster vaccine to current FDA-approved vaccines. GeoVax believes that the GEO-CM04S1 vaccine, when administered as a heterologous booster, will provide additional recognition elements to the immune system over a homologous boost from mRNA vaccines such as those developed by Moderna or Pfizer, which are directed only toward SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein. The COH04S1 vaccine’s MVA backbone may be more effective at inducing COVID-19 immunity since MVA strongly induces T cell responses even in a background of immunosuppression. In addition, GEO-CM04S1 targeting of both Spike and Nucleocapsid antigens, may offer greater protection against the significant sequence variation observed with the Spike antigen.
Gedeptin® License - In September 2021, GeoVax entered into an Assignment and License Agreement with PNP Therapeutics, Inc. (the “Gedeptin License), whereby GeoVax expanded its immuno-oncology pipeline and added a new technology platform through the acquisition of exclusive rights to Gedeptin®, a novel patented product for the treatment of solid tumors through a gene therapy strategy known as GDEPT (Gene-Directed Enzyme Prodrug Therapy). In GDEPT, a vector is used to selectively transduce tumor cells with a nonhuman gene, which expresses an enzyme that can convert a nontoxic prodrug into a potent antitumor compound. A Phase 1/2 clinical trial is currently enrolling to evaluate the safety and efficacy of repeat cycles of Gedeptin therapy in patients with recurrent head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), with tumors accessible for injection and no curable treatment options. The FDA has granted Gedeptin Orphan Drug status for the treatment of HNSCC and the initial stage of the ongoing clinical trial is being funded by the FDA pursuant to its Orphan Products Clinical Trials Grants Program. GeoVax’s license to Gedeptin includes rights to expand its use to all human diseases and/or conditions including, but not limited to, cancers.
Our corporate strategy is to advance, protect and exploit our differentiated vaccine/immunotherapy technologies leading to the successful development of preventive and therapeutic vaccines and immunotherapies against infectious diseases and various cancers. Our goal is to advance products through to human clinical testing, and to seek partnership or licensing arrangements for achieving regulatory approval and commercialization. We also leverage third party resources through collaborations and partnerships for preclinical and clinical testing with multiple government, academic and corporate entities.
We have not generated any revenues from the sale of the products we are developing, and we do not expect to generate any such revenues for at least the next several years. Our product candidates will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing. All product candidates that we advance to clinical testing will require regulatory approval prior to commercial use and will require significant costs for commercialization. We may not be successful in our research and development efforts, and we may never generate sufficient product revenue to be profitable.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Grant and Collaboration Revenues
Our grant and collaboration revenues relate to grants and contracts from agencies of the U.S. government and collaborative arrangements with other third parties in support of our vaccine development activities. We record revenue associated with these grants as the related costs and expenses are incurred. The following table summarizes our grant and collaboration revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Grant and collaboration revenues decreased by $1,438,157 (79%) for the year ended December 30, 2021 compared to 2020, attributable to the differing mix of active grants and collaborations as shown in the table above, as well as the timing of expenditures related to such grants and collaborations. As of December 31, 2021, there was $81,526 of approved grant funds remaining and available for use during 2022.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses can fluctuate considerably on a period-to-period basis, depending on the timing of expenditures related to our government grants and other research projects, and other factors. We do not disclose our research and development expenses by project, since our employees’ time is spread across multiple programs and our laboratory facility is used for multiple product candidates. We track the direct cost of research and development expenses related to government grant revenue by the percentage of assigned employees’ time spent on each grant and other direct costs associated with each grant. Indirect costs associated with grants are not tracked separately but are applied based on a contracted overhead rate negotiated with the granting agency. Therefore, the recorded revenues associated with government grants approximate the costs incurred.
Our research and development expenses were $15,554,171 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $2,444,459 for 2020, representing an increase of $13,109,712 (536%). Of this increase, $10,000,000 relates to upfront license fees pursuant to the COH License ($5,000,000 paid during 2021 and $5,000,000 payable in future years), $1,864,300 relates to clinical trial expense and patent cost reimbursements pursuant to the COH License, and $459,825 relates to upfront license fees (inclusive of $209,825 of stock-based expense) associated with the Gedeptin License. Research and development expense for 2021 and 2020 includes stock-based compensation expense of $96,814 and $7,156, respectively associated with employee stock options, reflecting a $89,658 increase (see discussion under “Stock-Based Compensation Expense” below). The remaining $695,929 increase in research and development expense from 2020 to 2021 relates primarily due to expenditures related to our COVID-19 vaccine program, manufacturing process development, and a generally higher level of activity, offset in part by lower external expenditures related to our government grants.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses were $3,577,153 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $2,196,014 for 2020, representing an increase of $1,381,139 (63%). General and administrative expense for these periods includes stock-based compensation expense of $273,173 and $57,307, respectively (see discussion under “Stock-Based Compensation Expense” below). Excluding stock-based compensation expense, general and administrative expenses were $3,303,979 and $2,138,707 for 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing an increase of $1,165,272 (54%). Approximately $360,000 of this increase is attributable to higher Delaware franchise taxes (which we expect will be no more than $200,000 in future years) with the remainder primarily due to higher legal, accounting and patent costs; insurance costs; consulting fees; and investor relations costs.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The table below shows the components of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. In general, stock-based compensation expense is allocated to research and development expense or general and administrative expense according to the classification of cash compensation paid to the employee, consultant or director to whom the stock compensation was granted.
As a result of the reverse stock splits enacted in April 2019 and in January 2020, we made adjustments and retroactive restatements to all of our outstanding stock options such that the balances in January 2020 were negligible. We therefore recorded no stock-based compensation expense related to our stock option plan for the majority of 2020. We re-initiated employee stock option grants in December 2020 and recorded a proportionate amount of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense was allocated as follows:
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income was $4,736 and $2,271 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The variances between years are primarily attributable to the cash available for investment and to interest rate fluctuations.
Interest expense was $1,286 and $143,524 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest expense for 2021 relates to the GRA Note and PPP Loan, and for 2020 relates to the GRA Note, PPP loan, financing costs associated with insurance premiums, and convertible debentures which were retired during 2020.
During 2021, we recorded a $172,056 gain on debt extinguishment associated with the forgiveness of the PPP loan principal and accrued interest.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and adjusts them as necessary. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, which are included in this Form 10-K. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASU 2014-09), which created a new Topic, Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606. The standard is principle-based and provides a five-step model to determine when and how revenue is recognized. The core principle is that an entity should recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Grant revenue - We receive payments from government entities under non-refundable grants in support of our vaccine development programs. We record revenue associated with these grants when the reimbursable costs are incurred and we have complied with all conditions necessary to receive the grant funds.
Research collaborations - From time to time, we may enter into collaborative research and development agreements for specific vaccine development approaches and/or disease indications whereby we receive third-party funding for preclinical research under certain of these arrangements. Each agreement is evaluated in accordance with the process defined by ASU 2014-09 and revenue is recognized accordingly.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based transactions in which the Company receives services from employees, directors or others in exchange for equity instruments based on the fair value of the award at the grant date. Stock-based compensation cost for awards of common stock is estimated based on the price of the underlying common stock on the date of issuance. Stock-based compensation cost for stock options or warrants is estimated at the grant date based on each instrument’s fair value as calculated by using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We recognize stock-based compensation cost as expense ratably on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the award. See Note 7 to our financial statements for additional stock-based compensation information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have accumulated net losses of approximately $64.4 million and we expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. We have funded our operations to date primarily from sales of our equity securities and from government grants and clinical trial assistance.
The following tables summarize our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and our cash flows for the years then ended:
Operating Activities - Net cash used in operating activities of $11,196,420 for 2021 was primarily due to our net loss of $18,570,317, offset by non-cash items such as depreciation expense, stock-based compensation expense and the gain recognized on extinguishment of our PPP loan, and by changes in our working capital accounts. Net cash used in operating activities of $2,750,570 for 2020 was primarily due to our net loss of $2,958,068, offset by non-cash charges such as depreciation and stock-based compensation expense, and by changes in our working capital accounts.
Investing Activities - Net cash used in investing activities was $47,718 and $156,791 for 2021 and 2020, respectively, and relates to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities - Net cash provided by financing activities was $12,784,212 for 2021, consisting of (i) net proceeds of $9,408,920 from a public offering of our common stock, (ii) $3,404,156 of net proceeds from the exercise of warrants, (iii) $1,000 expended for the repurchase of outstanding convertible preferred stock, and (iv) $27,864 in principal repayments toward a note payable to the Georgia Research Alliance, Inc. (the “GRA Note”); the GRA Note was fully repaid during 2021. Additionally, during May 2021 our PPP loan of $170,200, together with $1,856 of accrued interest, was forgiven by the lender and extinguished.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12,507,816 for 2020, consisting of (i) net proceeds of $11,158,496 from a public offering of our common stock and warrants, (ii) net proceeds of $300,000 from the sale of our convertible preferred stock, (iii) $170,200 of PPP loan proceeds, (iv) $888,500 of net proceeds from issuance of a note payable, (v) $2,500 in proceeds from warrant exercises, and (vi) $11,880 in principal repayments toward the GRA Note.
Funding Requirements and Sources of Capital
Our primary uses of capital are for salaries and related expenses for personnel, costs of conducting clinical trials, manufacturing costs for preclinical and clinical materials, third-party research services, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, and general overhead costs. We expect these costs will continue to be the primary operating capital requirements for the near future.
We expect our research and development costs to increase as we continue development of our various programs and as we move toward later stages of development, especially with regard to clinical trials. We have entered into license agreements with City of Hope, PNP Therapeutics, Inc., University of Alabama at Birmingham, Southern Research Institute, Emory University, and with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), as represented by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), an institute of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), for various technologies and patent rights associated with our product development activities. These agreements may contain provisions for upfront payments, milestone fees due upon the achievement of selected development and regulatory events, minimum annual royalties or other fees, and royalties based on future net sales. Aggregate unrecorded future minimum payments under these agreements (excluding milestone and royalty payments due upon contingent future events, and assuming neither party terminates the agreements) are approximately $174,000 in 2022, $128,000 in 2023, $128,000 in 2024, $28,000 in 2025 and $28,000 in 2026.
Our research and development expenditures during 2022 and beyond will increase significantly as a result of the Gedeptin and COH04S1 clinical programs. We do not provide forward-looking estimates of costs and time to complete our research programs due to the many uncertainties associated with biotechnology research and development. Due to these uncertainties, our future expenditures are likely to be highly volatile in future periods depending on the outcomes of the trials and studies. As we obtain data from pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, we may elect to discontinue or delay certain development programs to focus our resources on more promising product candidates. Completion of preclinical studies and human clinical trials may take several years or more, but the length of time can vary substantially depending upon several factors. The duration and the cost of future clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of the project because of differences arising during development of the human clinical trial protocols, including the length of time required to enroll suitable patient subjects, the number of patients that ultimately participate in the clinical trial, the duration of patient follow-up, and the number of clinical sites included in the clinical trials.
We expect that our general and administrative costs will increase during 2022 and beyond in support of expanded research and development activities and other general corporate activities.
We are currently seeking sources of capital through additional government and quasi-government grant programs and clinical trial support, although there can be no assurance any such funds will be obtained. Gedeptin is in a Phase 1/2 trial, being conducted at Stanford University in collaboration with Emory University; the initial stage of the study (10 patients) is being funded by the FDA pursuant to its Orphan Products Clinical Trials Grants Program.
During January 2022, we closed a private placement of our common stock and warrants for net proceeds of approximately $9.2 million.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of 2023. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties and is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong; actual results could vary materially. We may need to obtain additional funds sooner than planned or in greater amounts than we currently anticipate. The actual amount of funds we will need to operate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond our control. These factors include the progress of our research activities; the number and scope of our research programs; the progress and success of our pre-clinical and clinical development activities; the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we have entered into research and development agreements; the costs of manufacturing our product candidates, and the progress of efforts with parties with whom we may enter into commercial manufacturing agreements; our ability to maintain current research and development programs and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements; the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements; the impact of any natural disasters or public health crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic; the costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire; and the costs and timing of regulatory approvals.
We will need to continue to raise additional capital to support our future operating activities, including progression of our development programs, preparation for commercialization, and other operating costs. Financing strategies we may pursue include, but are not limited to, the public or private sale of equity, debt financings or funds from other capital sources, such as government funding, collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties. There can be no assurances additional capital will be available to secure additional financing, or if available, that it will be sufficient to meet our needs on favorable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development of one or more of our product candidates.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
At December 31, 2021, we had consolidated net operating loss carryforwards for income tax purposes of $75.2 million, of which approximately $48.9 million will expire in 2022 through 2037 if not utilized. We also have research and development tax credits of approximately $1.6 million available to reduce income taxes, if any, which will expire in 2022 through 2041 if not utilized. Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code contains provisions that may limit our utilization of net operating loss and research tax credit carryforwards in any given year as a result of significant changes in ownership interests that have occurred in past periods or may occur in future periods.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that are likely or reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations, other than the operating lease for our office and laboratory space.