ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL AND CONDITION RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Statements
This Form 10-K contains financial projections and other “forward-looking statements,” as that term is used in federal securities laws, about Grapefruit’s financial condition, results of operations and business. These statements include, among others, statements concerning the potential for revenues and expenses and other matters that are not historical facts. These statements may be made expressly in this Form 10-K. You can find many of these statements by looking for words such as “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” or similar expressions used in this Form 10-K. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results to be materially different from any future results expressed or implied by us in those statements. The most important facts that could prevent us from achieving our stated goals include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) volatility or decline of our stock price;
(b) potential fluctuation in quarterly results;
(c) our failure to earn revenues or profits;
(d) inadequate capital to continue the business and barriers to raising the additional capital or to obtaining the financing needed to implement our business plans;
(e) failure to make sales;
(f) changes in demand for our products and services;
(g) rapid and significant changes in markets;
(h) litigation with or legal claims and allegations by outside parties, causing us to incur substantial losses and expenses;
(i) insufficient revenues to cover operating costs;
(j) dilution in the ownership of the Company through the issuance by us of additional securities and the conversion of outstanding warrants, notes and other securities;
We cannot assure that we will be profitable. We may not be able to develop, manage or market our products and services successfully. We may not be able to attract or retain qualified executives and technology personnel. We may not be able to obtain customers for our products or services. Our products and services may become obsolete. Government regulation may hinder our business. Additional dilution in outstanding stock ownership will be incurred due to the issuance or exercise of more shares, warrants and other convertible securities.
Because the statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. We caution you not to place undue reliance on the statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K. The cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section should be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we or persons acting on our behalf may make. We do not undertake any obligation to review or confirm analysts’ expectations or estimates or to release publicly any revisions to any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this Form 10-K or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes to those statements. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and other parts of this annual report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We monitor our estimates on an on-going basis for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations.
Basis of Consolidation - Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Company. Control exists when the Company either has a controlling voting interest or is the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity. The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
In August 2021, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement acquiring the majority ownership and control of Summit Boys, Inc., a very well-known and established cannabis extraction brand with product lines in retail stores throughout the State of California. The Company plans on continuing the business without interruption and plans on licensing the Summit Boys brand in the State of Oklahoma under that State’s newly enacted legalized statutory scheme for cannabis products. This non-significant and non-operating subsidiary has been consolidated with Grapefruit’s financial statements. As consideration, the Company issued 4,545,455 shares of common stock for 51% ownership if Summit Boys, Inc. Summit Boys holds intellectual property and is non-operational. Due to the fact that there is minimal to no activity at this point, we determined that a breakout of Summit Boys’ financials was inconsequential and immaterial.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented.
We make our estimate of the ultimate outcome for these items based on historical trends and other information available when our financial statements are prepared. We recognize changes in estimates in accordance with the accounting rules for the estimate, which is typically in the period when new information becomes available. We believe that our significant estimates, assumptions and judgments are reasonable, based upon information available at the time they were made. Our actual results could differ from these estimates, making it possible that a change in these estimates could occur in the near term. The company’s most significant estimates related to useful life for depreciation, the value of long-lived assets and related impairment, and provision for income taxes of property and equipment.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - We value our financial assets and liabilities using fair value measurements. Fair value is based on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value are categorized based on whether the inputs are observable in the market and the degree that the inputs are observable. The categorization of financial instruments within the valuation hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The hierarchy is prioritized into three levels (with Level 3 being the lowest) defined as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the entity has the ability to access.
Level 2: Observable inputs other than prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated with observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities. This includes certain pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, and similar techniques that use significant unobservable inputs.
The carrying amount of our cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value because of the short-term nature of the instruments. The carrying amount of our notes payable at December 31, 2020, approximates their fair values based on comparable borrowing rates available to the company. The Company evaluated the fair market value of LVCA using Level 3 inputs. From that measurement, the Company recorded an impairment of LVCA.
There have been no changes in Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 categorizations and no changes in valuation techniques for these assets or liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Inventory - Inventory is comprised of raw material, work in process and finished goods. The following sets forth selected items from our inventory for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We periodically review the value of our inventory and provide a write-down of inventory based on our assessment of the market conditions. Any write-down is charged to cost of goods sold.
Property, Plant and Equipment, net - Our property and equipment are recorded at cost. Assets held under capital leases are capitalized at the commencement of the lease at the lower of the present value of minimum lease payments at the inception of the lease or fair value. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives of four to seven years, and amortization is computed using the straight-line method over the life of the applicable lease. At the time of retirement or other disposition of property and equipment, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from our accounts and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in our consolidated statements of operations.
Land Improvements - Our land improvements are recorded at cost provided by our property association. These costs will continue to be capitalized until construction has been completed. Land improvements will not be depreciated after the construction has been completed by the property association.
Long-Lived Assets Impairment Assessment - Our long-lived assets are subject to an impairment test if there is an indicator of impairment. The carrying value and ultimate realization of these assets is dependent upon our estimates of future earnings and benefits that we expect to generate from their use. If our expectations of future results and cash flows are significantly diminished, other long-lived assets may be impaired and the resulting charge to operations may be material. When we determine that the carrying value of intangibles or other long-lived assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more indicators of impairment, we use the projected undiscounted cash flow method or realizable value to determine whether an impairment exists, and then measure the impairment using discounted cash flows.
Revenue Recognition -
The Company derives revenues from the sale of product in accordance to ASC Topic 606. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring those goods or services.
Revenue is recognized based on the following five step model:
- Identification of the contract with a customer
- Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
- Determination of the transaction price
- Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
- Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation
Performance Obligations
Sales of products are recognized when all the following criteria are satisfied: (i) a contract with an end user exists which has commercial substance; (ii) it is probable the Company will collect the amount charged to the end user; and (iii) the Company has completed its performance obligation whereby the end user has obtained control of the product. A contract with commercial substance exists once the Company receives and accepts a purchase order or once it enters into a contract with an end user. If collectability is not probable, the sale is deferred and not recognized until collection is probable or payment is received. Control of products typically transfers when title and risk of ownership of the product has transferred to the customer. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation. The Company uses an observable price to determine the stand-alone selling price for separate performance obligations or a cost-plus margin approach when one is not available. Historically the Company’s contracts have not had multiple performance obligations. The large majority of the Company’s performance obligations are recognized at a point in time related to the sale of products.
Cost of Goods Sold -Our cost of goods sold includes the costs directly attributable to revenue recognized and includes expenses related to the production, packaging and labelling of cannabis products; personnel-related costs, fees for third-party services, such as testing and transportation costs related to our distribution services.
Research and Development Expenses - Research and development (“R&D”) costs are charged to expense as incurred. Our R&D expenses include, but are not limited to, consulting service fees and materials and supplies used in the development of our proprietary products and services.
General and Administrative Expenses - General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, fees for professional and consulting services, travel costs, rent, bad debt expense, general corporate costs, and other costs of administration such as human resources, finance and administrative roles.
Income Taxes - Income tax assets and liabilities are recorded using the asset and liability method. Under the asset and liability method, tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryovers. Future tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply when the asset is realized, or the liability settled. The effect on future tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that enactment occurs. To the extent that we do not consider it more likely than not that a future tax asset will be recovered, we will provide a valuation allowance against the excess.
We follow the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes. Because of ASC 740, we make a comprehensive review of our portfolio of tax positions in accordance with recognition standards established by ASC 740.
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in our consolidated financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination.
We have created our tax provision leveraging known tax court cases involving various marijuana dispensaries and other cannabis related businesses, including the section of the IRS Tax code of 280E. The U.S. Tax Code Section 280E is the federal statute that states that a business engaging in the trafficking of a Schedule I or II controlled substance, which includes cannabis and cannabis related products, are barred from taking the tax deductions or credits in their federal tax returns which are not considered as part of the business’ cost of goods sold. Given the guidance offered by the Tax code 280E we have prepared our tax provision according to this tax code.
Interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax benefits, if any, are classified as interest expense and penalties and are included in selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was enacted. U.S. tax reform introduced many changes, including lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to 21 percent, changes in incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base erosion and significant changes in the taxation of international income, including provisions which allow for the repatriation of foreign earnings without U.S. tax. The enactment of U.S. tax reform had no significant impact on our income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Commitments and Contingencies - Certain conditions may exist as of the date our financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against us or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, we evaluate the perceived merits of the legal proceedings or unasserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, the estimated liability would be accrued in our consolidated financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable, but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the nature of the guarantee would be disclosed.
Net Loss Per Share - We compute net loss per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share. Under the provisions of ASC 260, basic net loss per share includes no dilution and is computed by dividing the net loss available to common stockholders for the period by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted net loss per share takes into consideration shares of common stock outstanding (computed under basic net loss per share) and potentially dilutive securities that are not anti-dilutive.
Cash and Cash Equivalents - The Company considers all highly liquid investment securities with remaining maturities at the date of purchase of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents may be invested in money market funds, certificates of deposit or other interest-bearing accounts.
Concentration of Credit Risk - Financial instruments that potentially subject us to credit risk consist of cash. We maintain our cash with high credit quality financial institutions; at times, such balances with any one financial institution may not be insured by the FDIC.
Accounts Receivable and Revenue - The accounts receivable balance was $278,422 as of December 31, 2021 and $39,480 as of December 31, 2021. In 2021, 62% of accounts receivable consisted of two customers. In 2021, the was not one customer that had over 20% of the sales. In 2020, 99% of accounts receivable consisted of one customer. In 2020, 63% of the net revenues generated with two customers.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements - From time to time, the FASB or other standards setting bodies issue new accounting pronouncements. Updates to the FASB ASCs are communicated through issuance of an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”). Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted in the future, is not expected to have a material impact on our condensed consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU No. 2020-06”). ASU No. 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. ASU No 2020-06 is part of the FASB’s simplification initiative, which aims to reduce unnecessary complexity in U.S. GAAP. ASU No 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU No. 2020-06 to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers. This update requires that an acquirer recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance with Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This standard will be effective for the Company in the first quarter of 2023 and will be applied prospectively to business combinations occurring on or after the effective date of the standard. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in an interim period. The Company is currently evaluating the guidance and the impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
On January 1, 2021, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-01, Investments - Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) (“ASU No. 2020-01”). ASU No. 2020-01 clarifies the interaction of accounting for the transition into and out of the equity method as well as measuring certain purchased options and forward contracts to acquire investments. The adoption of ASU No. 2020-01 did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On January 1, 2021, the Company adopted ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU No. 2019-12”). ASU No. 2019-12 eliminates certain exceptions and simplifies the application of U.S. GAAP-related changes in enacted tax laws or rates and employee stock option plans. The adoption of ASU No. 2019-12 did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and historic credit losses have been within management’s expectations. The Company has a revenue receivables policy for service and warranty contracts. Equipment sales usually have a one-year warranty of parts and service. After a one-year period, the Company contacts the buyer to initiate the sale of a new warranty contract for one year. Warranty revenues are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract or as services are performed.
Other Accounting Factors
The effects of inflation have not had a material impact on our operation, nor are they expected to in the immediate future.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
The following sets forth selected items from our statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $588,957 compared to $3,672,383 for the corresponding year in 2020, a decrease of $3,083,396, or 84%. The decrease was primarily due to the decline of our distribution business from a combination of decreased demand for and an over-supply of cannabis flowers in California. As a result of these market forces beyond our control we have severely limited our distribution operations and commenced the process of transitioning into a canna-biotech firm focusing on further developing and marketing of cannabis products based on our patented Hourglass Technology. We have received approval of our NNCP from Health Canada which authorizes us to manufacture and sell our Hourglass™ products throughout Canada.
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,119,125 as compared to $3,391,888 for the corresponding year in 2020, a decrease of $2,272,763, or 67%. Included in cost of goods sold for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are plant operation and other direct overhead expenses incurred to maintain our production facilities. These fixed carrying costs affect our gross margin more significantly at lower revenues than at our anticipated full operating activity levels.
Our resulting gross (loss) profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $(530,168) compared with $280,465 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $553,036, or 289%. The loss is mainly do to a reduction in the inventory value due to the salability of the product and changes in the market. In addition, the company continue to incur fixed costs regardless of the revenue.
Our sales expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7,660 compared to $169,350 for the corresponding period in 2020. As management focused on the transition to the cannabiotech industry and Hourglass initiative, sales significantly decreased along with sales expense.
In 2021, Grapefruit compensated vendors and board members with stock. Stock based compensation was $265,024 and stock option expense was $98,631 for the year ended December 31, 2021. No such expenses we incurred in 2020.
Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,514,052 compared to $1,317,327 for 2020, an increase of $196,725, or 15%. The increase in costs is primarily due to expenses associated with the development and marketing of Hourglass-based products.
Our resulting net loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,415,535 and $1,206,212, respectively, a decrease of $1,209,323, or 100%.
As part of the reverse merger in July 201, the Company acquired derivative liabilities substantially in the form of convertible notes and related warrants with variable conversion features. On April 15, 2021, the company renegotiated the debt agreement with the lender modifying the convertible notes conversion price from a variable rate to a fixed rate conversion price for $4,502,750 of convertible notes, with an effective date of December 31, 2020. As a result of the agreement, the Company recorded a noncash expense for the change in the value of derivative instruments of $40,372,883, which was simultaneously offset by a noncash gain of $39,640,477 from the extinguishment of debt, resulting a net loss of $753,699 from the renegotiation of the debt. (See Note 14 to financial statements.)
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a loss on the change in the value of derivatives of $8,751 compared to the $40,394,176 loss in 2020. Future gains or losses related to the change in the value of derivatives will be minimal after renegotiating the terms of the convertible notes.
During the year 2021, Grapefruit acquired a majority of Summit Boys, a non-operating subsidiary with minimal expenses. The loss attributable to noncontrolling interest was $353 (see 2021 Business Highlights).
The net loss attributable to Grapefruit USA, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5,504,670 compared to the $4,056,996 loss in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash position decreased to $9,095 as of December 31, 2021 from $299,895 as of December 31, 2020. Our total current assets decreased to $714,199 as of December 31, 2021, from $948,862 as of December 31, 2020.
Our total current liabilities increased to $7,703,573 as of December 31, 2021 from $4,379,581 as of December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to the fact that the convertible notes maturity will be reached within the next twelve months.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $1,203,388 of net cash for operating activities, as compared to cash used by operations of $1,625,908 used during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $62,250, as compared to $30,926 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $974,838, as compared to $1,690,122 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect our working capital requirements in the next year to be met primarily by the proceeds of issuance of debt, equity and other securities to our existing creditor, shareholders, and other investors, as well as from cash flow from operations. We expect to require additional working capital from outside sources to cover our anticipated operating expenses. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to raise sufficient additional capital or financing to continue in business or to effectively execute its business plan.
Going Concern Qualification
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes we will be able to realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $5,504,670, had a working capital deficit of $6,989,374 and had an accumulated deficit of $16,826,517 at December 31, 2021. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profitable operations in the future and, or, obtaining the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities arising from normal business operations as they come due. There is no assurance that these events will be satisfactorily completed. As a result, there is doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for one year from the issuance date of these financial statements.
Management’s plan regarding this matter is to, amongst other things, seek additional equity financing by selling our equity securities and obtaining funds through the issuance of debt. We cannot be certain that funds from these sources will be available when needed or, if available, will be on terms favorable to us or to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds or settle liabilities by issuing equity securities, the percentage ownership of our stockholders may be reduced, stockholders may experience additional dilution, or such equity securities may provide for rights, preferences and/or privileges senior to those of the holders of our common stock. Our ability to execute our business plan and continue as a going concern may be adversely affected if we are unable to raise additional capital or operate profitably.
COVID-19 Impact
During the nine months ended September 30, 2021, the company experienced severe restrictions on consumers and the retail locations at which consumers purchase our products. As a result of these restrictions, we believe demand for our products was subdued during the period. During the comparable nine months in 2020, and as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw an increase in demand for our cannabis products driven by consumer pantry-loading and increased consumption of our products due to concerns about future availability of products and or concerns about whether retail locations that sell our products would remain open. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been able to keep up with fluctuating consumer demand for our products and have continued to introduce new products in the market.
The full extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, including our operations and the market for our securities and our financial condition, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. These include the duration, severity and scope of the pandemic, the development and availability of effective treatments and vaccines, and further action taken by the government and other third parties in response to the pandemic. In particular, COVID-19 and government efforts to curtail COVID-19 could impede our production facilities, increase operating expenses, result in loss of sales, affect our supply chains, impact performance of contractual obligations and require additional expenditures to be incurred.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.