ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations is intended to provide investors with an understanding of the Company’s past performance, financial condition and prospects. The following will be discussed and analyzed:
•Overview of Business
•Overview of 2021 Results
•Results of Operations
•Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies
•New Accounting Standards
•Business Outlook
A detailed discussion of the fiscal 2021 year-over-year changes can be found below and a detailed discussion of fiscal 2020 year-over-year changes can be found in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
The Company’s objective is to strengthen its position as a leading provider of sustainable fiber-based consumer packaging solutions. To achieve this objective, the Company offers customers its paperboard, cartons, cups, lids, foodservice containers and packaging machines, either as an integrated solution or separately. Cartons, carriers and containers are designed to protect and hold products. Product offerings include a variety of laminated, coated and printed packaging structures that are produced from the Company’s coated recycled paperboard ("CRB"), coated unbleached kraft paperboard ("CUK") and solid bleached sulfate paperboard ("SBS"). Innovative designs and combinations of paperboard, films, foils, metallization, holographics and embossing are customized to the individual needs of the customers.
The Company is implementing strategies (i) to expand market share in its current markets and to identify and penetrate new markets; (ii) to capitalize on the Company’s customer relationships, business competencies, and mills and folding carton assets; (iii) to develop and market innovative, sustainable products and applications that benefit from consumer-led sustainability trends; and (iv) to continue to reduce costs by focusing on operational improvements. The Company’s ability to fully implement its strategies and achieve its objectives may be influenced by a variety of factors, many of which are beyond its control, such as inflation of raw material and other costs, which the Company cannot always pass through to its customers, and the effect of overcapacity in the worldwide paperboard packaging industry.
Significant Factors That Impact the Company’s Business and Results of Operations
Impact of Inflation/Deflation. The Company’s cost of sales consists primarily of energy (including natural gas, fuel oil and electricity), pine and hardwood fiber, chemicals, secondary fibers, purchased paperboard, aluminum foil, ink, plastic films and resins, depreciation expense and labor. Costs increased year over year by $386 million in 2021. The higher costs in 2021 were due to higher commodity inflation costs ($330 million), labor and benefits ($47 million), and other costs, net ($9 million). Commodity inflation was primarily due to chemicals ($91 million), freight ($75 million), secondary fiber ($51 million), energy ($38 million), external board ($34 million), wood ($28 million), and other costs ($13 million).
Because the price of natural gas experiences significant volatility, the Company has entered into contracts designed to manage risks associated with future variability in cash flows caused by changes in the price of natural gas. The Company has entered into natural gas swap contracts to hedge prices for a portion of its expected usage for 2022. Since negotiated sales contracts and the market largely determine the pricing for its products, the Company is at times limited in its ability to raise prices and pass through to its customers any inflationary or other cost increases that the Company may incur.
Commitment to Cost Reduction. In light of continuing margin pressure throughout the packaging industry, the Company has programs in place that are designed to reduce costs, improve productivity and increase profitability. The Company utilizes a global continuous improvement initiative that uses statistical process control to help design and manage many types of activities, including production and maintenance. This includes a Six Sigma process focused on reducing variable and fixed manufacturing and administrative costs and the use of Lean Sigma principles in manufacturing and supply chain processes.
The Company’s ability to continue to successfully implement its business strategies and to realize anticipated savings and operating efficiencies is subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. If the Company cannot successfully implement the strategic cost reductions or other cost savings plans it may not be able to continue to compete successfully against other manufacturers. In addition, any failure to generate the anticipated efficiencies and savings could adversely affect the Company’s financial results.
Competition and Market Factors. As some products can be packaged in different types of materials, the Company’s sales are affected by competition from other manufacturers’ CRB, CUK, SBS, folding box board, and recycled clay-coated news. Additional substitute products also include plastic, shrink film and corrugated containers. In addition, while the Company has long-term relationships with many of its customers, the underlying contracts may be re-bid or renegotiated from time to time, and the Company may not be successful in renewing on favorable terms or at all. The Company works to maintain market share through efficiency, product innovation, service and strategic sourcing to its customers; however, pricing and other competitive pressures may occasionally result in the loss of a customer relationship.
In addition, the Company’s sales are driven by consumer buying habits in the markets its customers serve. Recently, the Company has seen net organic sales growth driven by the consumers' desire for sustainable packaging solutions and increased at home consumption. Changes in consumer dietary habits and preferences, increases in the costs of living, unemployment rates, access to credit markets, as well as other macroeconomic factors, may negatively affect consumer spending behavior. New product introductions and promotional activity by the Company’s customers and the Company’s introduction of new packaging products also impact its sales.
Debt Obligations. The Company had an aggregate principal amount of $5,831 million of outstanding debt obligations as of December 31, 2021. This debt has consequences for the Company, as it requires a portion of cash flow from operations to be used for the payment of principal and interest, exposes the Company to the risk of increased interest rates and may restrict the Company’s ability to obtain additional financing. Covenants in the Company’s Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended, the “Current Credit Agreement”) and the indentures governing the 4.875% Senior Notes due 2022, 0.821% Senior Notes due 2024, 4.125% Senior Notes due 2024, 1.512% Senior Notes due 2026, 4.75% Senior Notes due 2027, 3.50% Senior Notes due 2028, 3.50% Senior Notes due 2029, 2.625% Senior Notes due 2029 and 3.75% Senior Notes due 2030 (the “Indentures”) may, among other things, restrict the ability of the Company to dispose of assets, incur guarantee obligations, prepay other indebtedness, repurchase stock, pay dividends, make other restricted payments and make acquisitions or other investments. The Current Credit Agreement also requires compliance with a maximum consolidated leverage ratio and a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio. The Company’s ability to comply in future periods with the financial covenants will depend on its ongoing financial and operating performance, which in turn will be subject to many other factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. See "Covenant Restrictions" in “Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information regarding the Company’s debt obligations.
The debt and the restrictions under the Current Credit Agreement Indentures could limit the Company’s flexibility to respond to changing market conditions and competitive pressures. The outstanding debt obligations and the restrictions may also leave the Company more vulnerable to a downturn in general economic conditions or its business, or unable to carry out capital expenditures that are necessary or important to its growth strategy and productivity improvement programs.
OVERVIEW OF RESULTS
This management’s discussion and analysis contains an analysis of Net Sales, Income from Operations and other information relevant to an understanding of the Company's results of operations. On a consolidated basis:
• Net Sales in 2021 increased by $596 million or 9%, to $7,156 million from $6,560 million in 2020 due to organic sales growth, the AR Packaging, Americraft, Greif, and Quad acquisitions, higher selling prices, and favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by lower open market volume of our paperboard.
• Income from Operations in 2021 decreased by $117 million or 22%, to $407 million from $524 million in 2020. Transactions recorded in Business Combinations, Shutdown and Other Special Charges and Exit Activities, Net increased $77 million driven by higher charges related to acquisitions. In addition, Income from Operations was negatively impacted in 2021 as compared to 2020 by inflation (primarily commodity and labor and benefits), $21 million of Winter Storm Uri related downtime and mitigation costs in 2021 net of insurance recoveries, lower volumes of our open market sales, and higher depreciation and amortization. Income from Operations was positively impacted in 2021 as compared to 2020 by higher pricing, higher volumes from organic sales growth and acquisitions, cost savings from continuous improvement and other programs, product mix, lower levels of planned maintenance and higher levels of market downtime at the uncoated SBS cupstock paper machine in 2020.
Acquisitions, Closures, and Dispositions
•On August 1, 2019, the Company acquired substantially all the assets of Artistic, a diversified producer of folding cartons and CRB. The acquisition included two converting plants located in Auburn, Indiana and Elgin, Illinois (included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment) and one CRB mill located in White Pigeon, Michigan (included in the Paperboard Mills reportable segment).
•On January 31, 2020, the Company acquired a folding carton facility from Quad, a commercial printing company. The converting facility is located in Omaha, Nebraska and is included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
•On April 1, 2020, the Company acquired the Consumer Packaging Group business from Greif, a leader in industrial packaging products and services. The acquisition included seven converting plants across the United States, which are included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
•On July 1, 2021, the Company acquired substantially all the assets of Americraft, the largest independent folding carton converter in North America. The acquisition included seven converting plants across the United States and is reported within the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
•On November 1, 2021, the Company acquired all the shares of AR Packaging, Europe's second largest producer of fiber-based consumer packaging. The acquisition included 30 converting plants in 13 countries and is reported within the Europe Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
•During 2021, GPHC did not repurchase any shares of its outstanding common stock. GPHC had approximately $147 million available for additional repurchases under the 2019 share repurchase program.
•During 2021, GPHC declared cash dividends of $90 million and paid cash dividends of $87 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2021 COMPARED WITH 2020
Net Sales
The components of the change in Net Sales are as follows:
The Company's Net Sales in 2021 increased by $596 million or 9%, to $7,156 million from $6,560 million for the same period in 2020, due to Net Sales of $344 million from the AR Packaging, Americraft, Greif, and Quad acquisitions, higher pricing, organic sales growth including new product introductions and conversions to our paperboard packaging solutions, and favorable foreign exchange partially offset by lower open market volume of our paperboard. Favorable foreign currency exchange rates were primarily due to the British Pound, Canadian Dollar, Euro, and Australian Dollar. Core converting volumes were up, primarily in global beverage and foodservice packaging, including cups, offset by declines in dry foods and cereal.
Income from Operations
The components of the change in Income from Operations are as follows:
(a) Includes the Company's cost reduction initiatives, planned mill maintenance costs, mill market downtime costs, expenses related to acquisitions and integration activities, exit activities, and shutdown and other special charges.
The Company's Income from Operations for 2021 decreased $117 million or 22%, to $407 million from $524 million for the same period in 2020. Transactions recorded in Business Combinations, Shutdown and Other Special Charges and Exit Activities, Net increased $77 million driven by higher charges for acquisitions partially offset by higher charges for exit activities in 2020, including those related to our announced closures of White Pigeon, Michigan, CRB mill and West Monroe, Louisiana, PM1 containerboard machine. In addition, Income from Operations was negatively impacted in 2021 as compared to 2020 by inflation (primarily commodity and labor and benefits), $21 million of Winter Storm Uri related downtime and mitigation costs in 2021 net of insurance recoveries, lower volumes of our open market sales, and higher depreciation and amortization. Income from Operations was positively impacted in 2021 as compared to 2020 by higher pricing, higher volumes from organic sales growth and acquisitions, cost savings from continuous improvement and other programs, product mix, lower levels of planned maintenance and higher levels of market downtime at the uncoated SBS cupstock paper machine in 2020.
Inflation in 2021 increased due to higher commodity inflation costs ($330 million), labor and benefits ($47 million), and other costs, net ($9 million). Commodity inflation was primarily due to chemicals ($91 million), freight ($75 million), secondary fiber ($51 million), energy ($38 million), external board ($34 million), wood ($28 million), and other costs ($13 million).
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit was income of $5 million in 2021 versus an expense of $151 million in 2020. The decrease in expense was due to a settlement charge of $153 million incurred during the first quarter of 2020 associated with the Company's purchase of a group annuity contract that transferred the remaining pension benefit obligation under the largest U.S. Plan of approximately $713 million to an insurance company.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest Expense, Net decreased by $6 million to $123 million in 2021 from $129 million in 2020. Interest Expense, Net decreased due to lower interest rates, partially offset by higher debt balances as compared to prior year. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 31% of the Company’s total debt was subject to floating interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
During 2021, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $74 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $289 million. During 2020, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $42 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $244 million.
The effective tax rate for 2021 is different from the statutory rate due to the tax effect of income attributable to noncontrolling interests as well as the mix of earnings between foreign and domestic jurisdictions. In addition, during 2021, the Company recorded discrete tax expense to recognize tax rate increases in the United Kingdom and to recognize the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act on executive compensation as a result of IP’s exit from the partnership. The effective tax rate in 2021 is higher than the effective tax rate in 2020 primarily due to these discrete tax items as compared to 2020.
The Company utilized its remaining U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards during 2020. However, as a result of deductions associated with the step up in tax basis of certain assets as a result of International Paper’s exit from the partnership, the Company generated a taxable loss of $574 million during 2021 that can be carried forward for U.S. federal income tax purposes indefinitely. As such, based on the net operating loss generated in 2021 as well as future tax benefits associated with planned capital projects and tax credit carryforwards which are available to offset future U.S. federal income tax, the Company does not expect to be a meaningful U.S. federal cash taxpayer until 2024.
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity was $1 million in 2021 and $1 million in 2020 and is related to the Company’s equity investment through its GPIL subsidiary, in the Rengo Riverwood Packaging, Ltd. joint venture.
Segment Reporting
The Company has three reportable segments as follows:
Paperboard Mills includes the eight North American paperboard mills that produce primarily CRB, CUK, and SBS, which is consumed internally to produce paperboard packaging for the Americas and Europe Packaging segments. The remaining paperboard is sold externally to a wide variety of paperboard packaging converters and brokers. The Paperboard Mills segment Net Sales represents the sale of paperboard only to external customers. The effect of intercompany transfers to the paperboard packaging segments has been eliminated from the Paperboard Mills segment to reflect the economics of the integration of these segments.
Americas Paperboard Packaging includes paperboard packaging, primarily folding cartons, sold primarily to Consumer Packaged Goods ("CPG") companies, and cups, lids and food containers sold primarily to foodservice companies and Quick-Service Restaurants ("QSR") serving the food, beverage, and consumer product markets in the Americas.
Europe Paperboard Packaging includes paperboard packaging, primarily folding cartons, sold primarily to CPG companies serving the food, beverage and consumer product markets including healthcare and beauty primarily in Europe.
The Company allocates certain mill and corporate costs to the reportable segments to appropriately represent the economics of these segments. The Corporate and Other caption includes the Pacific Rim and Australia operating segments and unallocated corporate and one-time costs.
These segments are evaluated by the chief operating decision maker based primarily on Income from Operations, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those described in "Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(a) Includes revenue from contracts with customers for the Australia and Pacific Rim operating segments.
(b) Includes accelerated depreciation related to exit activities in 2021, 2020, and 2019.
(c) Includes expenses related to business combinations, shutdown and other special charges, and exit activities.
2021 COMPARED WITH 2020
Paperboard Mills
Net Sales increased from prior year due to higher selling prices and mix partially offset by lower open market volume. Lower open market volume was primarily due to the closure of the White Pigeon, Michigan CRB mill and shut down of the PM1 containerboard machine in West Monroe, Louisiana, both in 2020, and one fewer production and selling day due to leap year. The Company also internalized more paperboard tons.
Loss from Operations decreased due to the impacts of productivity improvements, including benefits from capital projects, and higher prices offset by commodity and other inflation, increased downtime and mitigation costs related to Winter Storm Uri, and lower open market volume. The commodity inflation was primarily due to higher prices for secondary fiber, chemicals, energy, and freight.
Americas Paperboard Packaging
Net Sales increased due to acquisitions including Americraft in Q3 2021 and Greif in Q2 2020, higher pricing, organic sales growth including conversions to our paperboard packaging solutions, new product introductions, and favorable foreign currency exchange rates. Higher volumes primarily in foodservice packaging including cups, beverage markets, dairy products and bakery were offset by lower volumes in dry foods, cereal, tissue, and frozen pizza. In beverage, volumes increased in all categories including craft and specialty, big beer, and soft drinks.
Income from Operations decreased due to commodity inflation, other inflation (primarily labor and benefits), downtime and mitigation costs related to Winter Storm Uri, and one fewer selling day due to leap year offset by higher selling prices, cost savings from continuous improvement and other programs, the timing of annual outages, and higher volumes including from organic sales growth and acquisitions. The commodity inflation was primarily due to higher prices for freight, chemicals, secondary fiber, and external board.
Europe Paperboard Packaging
Net Sales increased due to the acquisition of AR Packaging on November 1, 2021 as well as higher prices, increased volumes led by beverage and convenience, and favorable foreign currency exchange rates offset by unfavorable mix.
Income from Operations increased due to cost savings through continuous improvement and other programs, increased volumes, and pricing offset by commodity inflation, higher labor and benefits costs, and due to the acquisition of AR Packaging on November 1, 2021 including the amortization of purchased intangibles.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company broadly defines liquidity as its ability to generate sufficient funds from both internal and external sources to meet its obligations and commitments. In addition, liquidity includes the ability to obtain appropriate debt and equity financing and to convert into cash those assets that are no longer required to meet existing strategic and financial objectives. Therefore, liquidity cannot be considered separately from capital resources that consist of current or potentially available funds for use in achieving long-range business objectives and meeting debt service commitments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's liquidity needs arise primarily from the funding of its capital expenditures, debt service on its indebtedness, ongoing operating costs, working capital, share repurchases and dividend payments. Principal and interest payments under the term loan facilities and the revolving credit facilities, together with principal and interest payments on the Company's 4.875% Senior Notes due 2022, 0.821% Senior Notes due 2024, 4.125% Senior Notes due 2024, 1.512% Senior Notes due 2026, 4.75% Senior Notes due 2027, 3.50% Senior Notes due 2028, 3.50% Senior Notes due 2029, 2.625% Senior Notes due 2029 and 3.75% Senior Notes due 2030 (the “Notes”), represent liquidity requirements for the Company. Based upon current levels of operations, anticipated cost savings and expectations as to future growth, the Company believes that cash generated from operations, together with amounts available under its revolving credit facilities and other available financing sources, will be adequate to permit the Company to meet its debt service obligations, necessary capital expenditure program requirements and ongoing operating costs and working capital needs, although no assurance can be given in this regard. The Company's future financial and operating performance, ability to service or refinance its debt and ability to comply with the covenants and restrictions contained in its debt agreements (see “Covenant Restrictions” below) will be subject to future economic conditions, including conditions in the credit markets, and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond the Company's control, and will be substantially dependent on the selling prices and demand for the Company's products, raw material and energy costs, and the Company's ability to successfully implement its overall business and profitability strategies.
Accounts receivable are stated at the amount owed by the customer, net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible accounts, returns and allowances, and cash discounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based on historical experience, current economic conditions and the creditworthiness of customers. Receivables are charged to the allowance when determined to be no longer collectible.
The Company has entered into agreements to sell, on a revolving basis, certain trade accounts receivable to third party financial institutions. Transfers under these agreements meet the requirements to be accounted for as sales in accordance with the Transfers and Servicing topic of the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification (the "Codification"). The loss on sale is not material and is included in Other Expense, Net line item on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The following table summarizes the activity under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
(a) Included in Other Current Assets on the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet and represents a beneficial interest in the receivables sold to the financial institutions, which is a Level 3 fair value measure.
The Company participates in supply chain financing arrangements offered by certain customers and has entered into various factoring arrangements that also qualify for sale accounting in accordance with the Transfers and Servicing topic of the FASB Codification. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company sold receivables of approximately $693 million and $368 million, respectively, related to these factoring arrangements.
Receivables sold under all programs subject to continuing involvement, which consist principally of collection services, were approximately $613 million and $621 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 totaled $609 million, compared to $825 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to higher inventory balances due to inflation and lower other accrued liabilities balances. Pension contributions in 2021 and 2020 were $33 million and $19 million, respectively. In the first quarter of 2021, the Company made a $14 million contribution to its remaining U.S. defined benefit plan by effectively utilizing a portion of the excess balance related to the terminated U.S. defined benefit plan.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 totaled $2,392 million, compared to $648 million in 2020. Capital spending was $802 million and $646 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, the Company paid $292 million and $1,412 million, net of cash acquired, for the Americraft and AR Packaging acquisitions, respectively. In the prior year, the Company paid $121 million, net of cash acquired, for the 2020 Acquisitions. Net cash receipts related to the accounts receivable securitization and sale programs were $119 million and $127 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 totaled $1,778 million, compared to $152 million used in financing activities in 2020. Current year activities include a debt drawing of $425 million Incremental Term A-2 Facility and the use of the proceeds, together with cash on hand, to redeem the 4.75% Senior Notes due in 2021, and a debt drawing of $250 million Incremental Term A-3 Facility. Other current year activities include an offering of $400 million aggregate principal amount of 0.821% Senior Notes due 2024, an offering of $400 million aggregate principal amount of 1.512% Senior Notes due 2026. The net proceeds of $800 million were used by the Company to repay a portion of the outstanding borrowings under GPIL's term loan credit facilities, which are under its senior secured credit facility. Additionally, the Company had an offering of $100 million aggregate principal amount of tax-exempt green bonds, with the net proceeds of $111 million used to reimburse GPIL for a portion of its CRB platform optimization project. Other current year activities include a debt drawing of $400 million Incremental Term A-4 Facility and a debt drawing of €210 million Incremental Euro Term Loan Facility under the Senior Secured Credit Facility due 2026. Additionally, the Company completed the offering of $400 million Senior Notes due in 2030 and used the proceeds to repay the Incremental Term A-4 Facility and €290 million aggregate principal amount of its 2.625% senior unsecured notes due 2029 and used the proceeds to repay revolver borrowings outstanding under its senior secured credit facility. The Company also paid $150 million toward the redemption of IP's ownership interest in GPIP, and $109 million Tax Receivable Agreement (TRA) payment related to IP exit. Additionally, the Company made borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily for capital spending, redemption of IP's ownership interest and payments on debt of $16 million. The Company also paid dividends and distributions of $92 million and withheld $15 million of restricted stock units to satisfy tax withholding obligations related to the payout of restricted stock units. In the prior year, the Company had a debt offering of $450 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% Senior Notes due 2028, and a debt offering of $350 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% Senior Notes due 2029. The Company also paid $500 million toward the redemption of IP's ownership interest in GPIP. The Company also made borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily for capital spending, repurchase of stock of $316 million and payments on debt of $37 million. The Company also paid dividends and distributions of $103 million and withheld $9 million of restricted stock units to satisfy tax withholding payments related to the payout of restricted stock units.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
As discussed in “Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8., Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” on May 21, 2021, IP exchanged its remaining 22.8 million partnership units for an equivalent number of shares of GPHC common stock. As required by the parties' agreement, these shares were immediately sold by IP. As a result, IP has no ownership interest remaining in GPIP as of May 21, 2021, and GPIL is no longer subject to separate SEC filing requirements. As such, the Company has included Supplemental Guarantor disclosures that were previously included in the GPIL SEC filings effective June 30, 2021.
As further discussed in “Note 5 - Debt” in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8., Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” the Senior Notes issued by GPIL (the “Issuer”) are guaranteed by certain domestic subsidiaries (the “Subsidiary Guarantors”), which consist of all material 100% owned subsidiaries of GPIL, other than its foreign subsidiary holding companies, domestic subsidiaries and in certain instances by the Company (a Parent guarantee) (collectively "the Guarantors"). GPIL's remaining subsidiaries (the “Nonguarantor Subsidiaries”) include all of GPIL’s foreign subsidiary holding companies, foreign subsidiaries and immaterial domestic subsidiaries. The Subsidiary Guarantors are jointly and severally, fully and unconditionally liable under the guarantees.
Other than tax related items, the results of operations, assets, and liabilities for GPHC and GPIL are substantially the same. Therefore, the summarized financial information below is presented on a combined basis, consisting of GPIL and Subsidiary Guarantors (collectively, the “Obligor Group”), and is presented after the elimination of: (i) intercompany transactions and balances among GPIL and Subsidiary Guarantors, and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in the Nonguarantor Subsidiaries.
(a) Includes Net Sales to Nonguarantor Subsidiaries of $509 million.
Covenant Restrictions
Covenants contained in the Current Credit Agreement and the Indentures may, among other things, limit the ability to incur additional indebtedness, restrict the ability of the Company to dispose of assets, incur guarantee obligations, prepay other indebtedness, repurchase shares, pay dividends and make other restricted payments, create liens, make equity or debt investments, make acquisitions, modify terms of the indentures under which the Notes are issued, engage in mergers or consolidations, change the business conducted by the Company and its subsidiaries, and engage in certain transactions with affiliates. Such restrictions, together with disruptions in the credit markets, could limit the Company's ability to respond to changing market conditions, fund its capital spending program, provide for unexpected capital investments or take advantage of business opportunities.
Under the terms of the Current Credit Agreement, the Company must comply with a maximum Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio covenant and a minimum Consolidated Interest Expense Ratio covenant. The Current Credit Agreement, which contains the definitions of these covenants, was filed as an exhibit to the Company's Form 8-K filed on April 1, 2021.
Due to the completion of a material acquisition, the Current Credit Agreement requires that the Company maintain a maximum Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio of less than 5.00 to 1.00. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with such covenant and the ratio was 4.39 to 1.00.
The Company must also comply with a minimum Consolidated Interest Expense Ratio of 3.00 to 1.00. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with such covenant and the ratio was 10.85 to 1.00.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company's credit was rated BB+ by Standard & Poor's and Ba1 by Moody's Investor Services. Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investor Services' ratings on the Company included a stable outlook.
Capital Investment
The Company’s capital investments in 2021 were $899 million ($802 million was paid), compared to $651 million ($646 million was paid) in 2020. During 2021, the Company had capital spending of $855 million for improving process capabilities, $17 million for capital spares and $27 million for manufacturing packaging machinery.
Environmental Matters
Some of the Company’s current and former facilities are the subject of environmental investigations and remediations resulting from historical operations and the release of hazardous substances or other constituents. Some current and former facilities have a history of industrial usage for which investigation and remediation obligations may be imposed in the future or for which indemnification claims may be asserted against the Company. Also, closures or sales of facilities may necessitate further investigation and may result in remediation at those facilities. The Company has established reserves for those facilities or issues where liability is probable and the costs are reasonably estimable.
For further discussion of the Company’s environmental matters, see "Note 14 - Environmental and Legal Matters" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8., Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
A summary of our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 is as follows:
(a) Purchase obligations primarily consist of commitments for the purchase of fiber and chip processing along with commitments associated with building the new CRB paper machine in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
(b) Certain amounts included in this table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the obligations the Company will actually pay in the future periods may vary from those reflected in the table.
International Operations
For 2021, before intercompany eliminations, net sales from operations outside of the U.S. represented approximately 23% of the Company’s net sales. The Company’s revenues from export sales fluctuate with changes in foreign currency exchange rates. At December 31, 2021, approximately 30% of the Company’s total assets were denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The Company has significant operations in countries that use the euro, British pound sterling, Swedish krona, Polish zloty, the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Mexican peso or the Japanese yen as their functional currencies. The effect of changes in the U.S. dollar exchange rate against these currencies produced a net currency translation adjustment loss of $28 million, which was recorded in Other Comprehensive (Loss) Income for the year ended December 31, 2021. The magnitude and direction of this adjustment in the future depends on the relationship of the U.S. dollar to other currencies. The Company pursues a currency hedging program in order to reduce the impact of foreign currency exchange fluctuations on financial results. See “Financial Instruments” below.
Financial Instruments
The Company pursues a currency hedging program which utilizes derivatives to reduce the impact of foreign currency exchange fluctuations on its consolidated financial results. Under this program, the Company has entered into forward exchange contracts in the normal course of business to hedge certain foreign currency denominated transactions. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on these forward contracts are included in the measurement of the basis of the related foreign currency transaction when recorded. The Company also pursues a hedging program that utilizes derivatives designed to manage risks associated with future variability in cash flows and price risk related to future energy cost increases. Under this program, the Company has entered into natural gas swap contracts to hedge a portion of its forecasted natural gas usage for 2022. Realized gains and losses on these contracts are included in the financial results concurrently with the recognition of the commodity consumed. In addition, the Company uses interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risks on future interest payments caused by interest rate changes on its variable rate term loan facility. The Company does not hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes. See “