Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
The following discussion and analysis includes information management believes is relevant to understand and assess our financial condition and results of operations. This section should be read together with our consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and risk factors contained in this report.
‎
Overview
We are a master limited partnership formed by our parent to be its principle provider of fuel storage and transportation services. On July 1, 2015, we completed our IPO, and, in addition to the interests of BlendStar, obtained the assets and liabilities of the ethanol storage and leased railcar assets contributed by our parent in a transfer between entities under common control. We also entered into long-term, fee-based commercial agreements for storage and transportation services with Green Plains Trade, which are supported by minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments.
Our profitability is dependent on the volume of ethanol and other fuels handled at our facilities and the amount of railcar volumetric capacity we are able to provide. Our long-term, fee-based commercial agreements generate stable, predictable cash flows supported by minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments.
Information about our business, properties and strategy can be found under Item 1 - Business and a description of our risk factors can be found under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Industry Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
U.S. Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the EIA, domestic ethanol production averaged 0.99 million barrels per day in 2021, which was 9% higher than the 0.91 million barrels per day in 2020. Refiner and blender input volume increased 10% to 875 thousand barrels per day for 2021, compared with 798 thousand barrels per day in 2020. Gasoline demand increased 0.8 million barrels per day, or 10%, in 2021 compared to the prior year. U.S. domestic ethanol ending stocks decreased by approximately 2.1 million barrels compared to the prior year, or 9%, to 21.4 million barrels as of December 31, 2021. According to Prime the Pump, as of December 31, 2021, there were approximately 2,555 retail stations selling E15 in 30 states, up from 2,300 at the beginning of the year, an approximately 267 pipeline terminal locations now offering E15 to wholesale customers.
Global Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service, domestic ethanol exports through November 30, 2021 were approximately 1,126 mmg, down 6% from 1,199 mmg for the same period of 2020. Canada was the largest export destination for U.S. ethanol, accounting for 30% of domestic ethanol export volume. India, South Korea, China and Brazil accounted for 12%, 12%, 9% and 6%, respectively, of U.S. ethanol exports. We currently estimate that net ethanol exports will range from 1.2 to 1.4 billion gallons in 2022, based on historical demand from a variety of countries and certain countries who seek to improve their air quality and eliminate MTBE from their own fuel supplies.
In January 2020, China and the United States struck a “Phase I” trade agreement, which included commitments on agricultural commodity purchases. Ethanol, corn and distillers grains were included as potential purchases in the agreement. China has been purchasing large quantities of corn, which has raised domestic prices of this feedstock for our parent’s ethanol production process. In addition, in October 2020 it was announced that China had purchased a shipment of U.S. ethanol for the first time since March 2018. Total ethanol exports to China in 2020 were 32 million gallons, and through November 2021 were 100 million gallons, according to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service.
Legislation and Regulation
We are sensitive to government programs and policies that affect the supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels, which in turn may impact the volume of ethanol and other fuels we handle. Over the years, various bills and amendments have been proposed in the House and Senate which would eliminate the RFS entirely, eliminate the corn based ethanol portion of the mandate, and make it more difficult to sell fuel blends with higher levels of ethanol. We believe it is unlikely that any of these bills will become law in the current Congress. In addition, the manner in which the EPA administers the RFS and related regulations can have a significant impact on the actual amount of ethanol blended into the domestic fuel supply.
Federal mandates and state-level clean fuel programs supporting the use of renewable fuels are a significant driver of ethanol demand in the U.S. Ethanol policies are influenced by concerns for the environment, diversifying our fuel supply, and reducing the country’s dependence on foreign oil. Consumer acceptance of flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs) and higher ethanol blends in non-FFVs may be necessary before ethanol can achieve further growth in U.S. market share. In addition, expansion of clean fuel programs in other states, or a national low carbon fuel standard could increase the demand for ethanol, depending on how it is structured.
The RFS sets a floor for ethanol usage in the United States. When the RFS was established in 2010, the required volume of “conventional” or corn-based ethanol to be blended with gasoline was to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015, which left the EPA to address existing limitations in both supply and demand. As of this filing, the EPA proposed reducing the conventional ethanol RVOs for 2020 and 2021 to reflect lower fuel demand during the pandemic, and proposed the statutory 15 billion gallons for 2022.
According to the RFS, if mandatory renewable fuel volumes are reduced by at least 20% for two consecutive years, the EPA is required to modify, or reset, statutory volumes through 2022 - the year through which the statutorily prescribed volumes run. While conventional ethanol maintained 15 billion gallons, 2019 was the second consecutive year that the total RVO was more than 20% below the statutory volume levels. Thus, the EPA was expected to initiate a reset rulemaking, and modify statutory volumes through 2022, and do so based on the same factors they are to use in setting the RVOs post-2022. These factors include environmental impact, domestic energy security, expected production, infrastructure impact, consumer costs, job creation, price of agricultural commodities, food prices, and rural economic development. However, in late 2019, the EPA announced it would not be moving forward with a reset rulemaking in 2020. It is unclear when or if the current EPA will propose a reset rulemaking, though they have stated an intention to propose a post 2022 set rulemaking by the end of 2021.
Under the RFS, RINs and SREs are important tools impacting supply and demand. The EPA assigns individual refiners, blenders, and importers the volume of renewable fuels they are obligated to use in each annual RVO based on their percentage of total domestic transportation fuel sales. Obligated parties use RINs to show compliance with the RFS mandated volumes. Ethanol producers assign RINs to renewable fuels and the RINs are detached when the renewable fuel is blended with transportation fuel domestically. Market participants can trade the detached RINs in the open market. The market price of detached RINs can affect the price of ethanol in certain markets and can influence purchasing decisions by obligated parties. As it relates to SREs, a small refinery is defined as one that processes fewer than 75,000 barrels of petroleum per day. Small refineries can petition the EPA for a SRE which, if approved, waives their portion of the annual RVO requirements. The EPA, through consultation with the DOE and the USDA, can grant them a full or partial waiver or deny it outright within 90 days of submittal. The EPA granted significantly more of these waivers for 2016, 2017 and 2018 than they had in the past, totaling 790 mmg of waived requirements for the 2016 compliance year, 1.82 billion gallons for 2017 and 1.43 billion gallons for 2018. In doing so, the EPA effectively reduced the RFS mandated volumes for those compliance years by those amounts respectively, and as a result, RIN values declined significantly. In the waning days of the Trump administration, the EPA approved three additional SREs, reversing one denial from 2018 and granting two from 2019. A total of 88 SREs were granted under the Trump Administration, totaling 4.3 billion gallons of potential blending demand erased. The EPA, under the current administration, reversed the three SREs issued in the final weeks of the previous administration, and in the RVO rulemaking they proposed denying all pending SREs. There are multiple legal challenges to how the EPA has handled SREs and RFS rulemakings.
The One-Pound Waiver that was extended in May 2019 to allow E15 to be sold year-round to all vehicles model year 2001 and newer was challenged in an action filed in Federal District Court for the D.C. Circuit. On July 2, 2021, the Circuit Court vacated the EPA’s rule so the future of summertime, defined as June 1 to September 15, sales of E15 to non-FFVs is uncertain. The Supreme Court declined to hear a challenge to this ruling. As of this filing E15 is sold year-round in approximately 30 states.
In October 2019, the White House directed the USDA and EPA to move forward with rulemaking to expand access to higher blends of biofuels. This includes funding for infrastructure, labeling changes and allowing E15 to be sold through E10 infrastructure. The USDA rolled out the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program in the summer of 2020, providing competitive grants to fuel terminals and retailers for installing equipment for dispensing higher blends of ethanol and biodiesel. In December 2021, the USDA announced they would administer another infrastructure grant program. Congress is considering legislation that would provide for an additional $1 billion in USDA grants for biofuel infrastructure from 2022 to 2031.
To respond to the COVID-19 health crisis and attempt to offset the subsequent economic damage, Congress passed multiple relief measures, most notably the CARES Act in March 2020, which created and funded multiple programs that have impacted our industry. The USDA was given additional resources for the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) and they are using those funds to provide direct payments to farmers, including corn farmers from whom our parent purchases most of its feedstock for ethanol production. Similar to the trade aid payments made by the USDA over the past two years, this cash injection for farmers could cause them to delay marketing decisions and increase the price our parent pays to purchase corn. The CARES Act also allowed for certain net operating loss carrybacks, which has allowed our parent to receive certain tax refunds. In December 2020, Congress passed, and the former President signed into law, an annual spending package coupled with another COVID relief bill which included additional funds for the Secretary of Agriculture to
distribute to those impacted by the pandemic. The language of the bill specifically includes biofuels producers as eligible for some of this aid.
Government actions abroad can significantly impact the demand for U.S. ethanol. In September 2017, China’s National Development and Reform Commission, the National Energy Agency and 15 other state departments issued a joint plan to expand the use and production of biofuels containing up to 10% ethanol by 2020. China, the number three importer of U.S. ethanol in 2016, imported negligible volumes during 2018 and 2019 due to a 30% tariff on U.S. ethanol, which increased to 70% in early 2018. There is no assurance that China’s joint plan to expand blending to 10% will be carried to fruition, nor that it will lead to increased imports of U.S. ethanol in the near term. Ethanol is included as an agricultural commodity under the “Phase I” agreement with China, wherein they were to purchase upwards of $40 billion in agricultural commodities from the U.S. in both 2020 and 2021. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service, China purchased 32 mmg of U.S. ethanol in 2020 and through November 2021 had imported 100 mmg.
In Brazil, the Secretary of Foreign Trade had issued a tariff rate quota which expired in December of 2020. Exports to Brazil were 186 mmg in 2020 and 63 mmg through November 2021. All U.S. ethanol imports now face a 20% tariff into Brazil. Our parent’s exports also face tariffs, rate quotas, countervailing duties, and other hurdles in the European Union, India, Peru, Colombia and elsewhere, which limits the ability to compete in some markets. We believe some countries are using the COVID-19 crisis as justification for raising duties on imports of U.S. ethanol, or blocking imports entirely.
In June 2017, the Energy Regulatory Commission of Mexico (CRE) approved the use of 10% ethanol blends, which was challenged by multiple lawsuits, of which several were dismissed. An injunction was granted in October 2017, preventing the blending and selling of E10, but was overturned by a higher court in June 2018 making it legal to blend and sell E10 by PEMEX (Petroleos Mexicanos, or Mexican Petroleum) throughout Mexico except for its three largest metropolitan areas. On January 15, 2020, the Mexican Supreme Court ruled that the expedited process for the CRE regulation was unconstitutional, and that after a 180-day period the maximum ethanol blend allowed in the country would revert to 5.8%. There was an effort to go through the full regulatory process to allow for 10% blends countrywide, including in the three major metropolitan areas. The 180-day window was extended multiple times due to COVID-19, but eventually lapsed in June 2021, decreasing the maximum ethanol blend back to 5.8%.
In January 2020, the updated North American Free Trade Agreement, known as the United States Mexico Canada Agreement or USMCA was signed. The USMCA went into effect on July 1, 2020 and maintains the duty free access of U.S. agricultural commodities, including ethanol, into Canada and Mexico. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, exports to Canada were 334 mmg and exports to Mexico were 41 mmg through November 30, 2021.
Environmental and Other Regulation
Our operations are subject to environmental regulations, including those that govern the handling and release of ethanol, crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbon materials. Compliance with existing and anticipated environmental laws and regulations may increase our overall cost of doing business, including capital costs to construct, maintain, operate, and upgrade equipment and facilities. Our business may also be impacted by government policies, such as tariffs, duties, subsidies, import and export restrictions and outright embargos. Our parent employs maintenance and operations personnel at each of its facilities, which are regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The U.S. ethanol industry relies heavily on tank cars to deliver its product to market. In 2015, the DOT finalized the Enhanced Tank Car Standard and Operational Controls for High-Hazard and Flammable Trains, or DOT specification 117, which established a schedule to retrofit or replace older tank cars that carry crude oil and ethanol, braking standards intended to reduce the severity of accidents and new operational protocols. The deadline for compliance with DOT specification 117 is May 1, 2023. The rule may increase our lease costs for railcars over the long term, which will in turn result in an increase in the fees we charge for railcar capacity. Additionally, existing railcars may be out of service for a period of time while upgrades are made, tightening supply in an industry that is highly dependent on railcars to transport product. We intend to strategically manage our leased railcar fleet to comply with the new regulations and have commenced transition of our fleet to DOT 117 compliant railcars. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 55% of our railcar fleet was DOT 117 compliant. We anticipate that an additional 30% of our railcar fleet will be DOT 117 compliant by the end of 2022, and that our entire fleet will be fully compliant by the 2023 deadline.
Our Parent’s Production Levels
Our parent’s operating margins are sensitive to commodity price fluctuations, particularly for corn, ethanol, corn oil, distillers grains and natural gas, which are impacted by factors that are outside of its control, including weather conditions, corn yield, changes in domestic and global ethanol supply and demand, government programs and policies and the price of crude oil, gasoline and substitute fuels. Our parent uses various financial instruments to manage and reduce its exposure to price variability.
Our parent’s operating margins influence its production levels, which in turn affects the volume of ethanol we store, throughput and transport. During periods of commodity price variability or compressed margins, our parent may slow down or temporarily idle operations at certain ethanol plants. Slowing production increases the ethanol yield per bushel of corn, optimizing cash flow in lower margin environments. In 2021, our parent’s ethanol facilities maintained an average utilization rate of approximately 77% of capacity, compared with 71% of capacity for the prior year.
Our parent’s quarterly actual production, daily average production capacity and utilization are highlighted in the following chart:
Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Our Parent
Our parent guarantees Green Plains Trade’s obligations under our storage and throughput agreement and rail transportation service agreements, which account for a substantial portion of our revenues. Any change in our parent’s business or financial strategy, or event that negatively impacts its financial condition, results of operations or cash flows may materially and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. For additional information, please refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Availability of Railcars
The long-term growth of our business depends on the availability of railcars, which we currently lease, to transport ethanol and other fuels on reasonable terms. Railcars may become unavailable due to increased demand, maintenance or other logistical constraints. Railcar shortages caused by increased demand for rail transportation or changes in regulatory standards that apply to railcars could negatively impact our business and our ability to grow.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Our management uses a variety of GAAP and non-GAAP financial and operating metrics, including among others, throughput volume and capacity, operations and maintenance expense, adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow. Management views each of these metrics as important factors to evaluate our operating results and measure profitability.
Throughput Volume and Capacity
Our revenues are dependent on the volume of ethanol and other fuels we store, throughput, or transport at our ethanol storage and fuel terminal facilities, and the volumetric capacity that is used to transport ethanol and other fuels by railcars. These volumes are affected by our parent’s operating margins at its ethanol production plants as well as the overall supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels in markets served directly or indirectly by our assets.
Green Plains Trade is obligated to meet minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments under our commercial agreements. Our results of operations may be impacted by our parent’s use of our assets in excess of its minimum volume commitments, and our ability to capture incremental volumes or capacity from Green Plains Trade or third parties, retain Green Plains Trade as a customer, enter into contracts with new customers and increase volume commitments.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses
Our management seeks to maximize the profitability of our operations by effectively managing operations and maintenance expenses. Our expenses are relatively stable across a broad range of storage, throughput and transportation volumes and usage, but can fluctuate from period to period depending on maintenance activities and growth. We manage our expenses by scheduling maintenance activities over time to avoid significant variability in our cash flows.
Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization excluding the amortization of right-of-use assets and debt issuance costs, plus adjustments for transaction costs related to acquisitions or financing transactions, unit-based compensation expense, net gains or losses on asset sales, and our proportional share of EBITDA adjustments of our equity method investee.
Distributable cash flow is defined as adjusted EBITDA less interest paid or payable, income taxes paid or payable, maintenance capital expenditures, which are defined under our partnership agreement as cash expenditures (including expenditures for the construction or development of new capital assets or the replacement, improvement or expansion of existing capital assets) made to maintain our operating capacity or operating income, and our proportional share of distributable cash flow adjustments of our equity method investee.
We believe the presentation of adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow are supplemental financial measures that we use to assess our financial performance. However, these presentations are not made in accordance with GAAP. The GAAP measure most directly comparable with adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow is net income. Since adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow may not be comparable with similarly titled measures of other companies, diminishing its utility. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP to analyze our results.
‎
(1) Includes $1.0 million in unamortized debt issuance costs written off upon extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(2) Represents our proportional share of depreciation and amortization of our equity method investee.
(3) Distributable cash flow does not include adjustments for the principal payments on the term loan of $50.0 million and $30.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(4) Distributions declared for the applicable period and paid in the subsequent quarter.
Components of Revenues and Expenses
Revenues. Our revenues consist primarily of fee-based commercial agreements for receiving, storing, transferring and transporting ethanol and other fuels.
For more information about these charges and the services covered by these agreements, please refer to Note 15 - Related Party Transactions to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses. Our operations and maintenance expenses consist primarily of lease expenses related to our transportation assets, labor expenses, outside contractor expenses, insurance premiums, repairs and maintenance expenses and utility costs. These expenses also include fees for certain management, maintenance and operational services to support our facilities, trucks and leased railcar fleet allocated by our parent under our operational services and secondment agreement.
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of allocated employee salaries, incentives and benefits, office expenses, professional fees for accounting, legal, and consulting services, and other costs allocated by our parent. Our general and administrative expenses include direct monthly charges for the management of our assets and certain expenses allocated by our parent under our omnibus agreement for general corporate services, such as treasury, accounting, human resources and legal services. These expenses are charged or allocated to us based on the nature of the expense and our proportionate share of employee time or capital expenditures.
For more information about fees we reimburse our parent for services received, please read Note 15 - Related Party Transactions to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Other Income (Expense). Other income (expense) includes interest earned, interest expense and other non-operating items.
Income from Equity Method Investee. Income from equity method investee consists of the income or loss associated with our 50% ownership in the NLR joint venture.
For the commercial agreements, operational services and secondment agreement and the omnibus agreement in their entirety and any subsequent amendments required to be filed, please refer to Item 15 - Exhibits, Financial Statement
Schedules.
Results of Operations
Comparability of our Financial Results
The following summarizes certain events that affect the comparability of our operating results over the course of the past three years:
On March 22, 2021, our parent closed on the sale of its ethanol plant located in Ord, Nebraska to GreenAmerica Biofuels Ord LLC. Correspondingly, the partnership’s storage assets located adjacent to the Ord plant were sold to Green Plains for $27.5 million, along with the transfer of associated railcar operating leases.
On December 28, 2020, our parent closed on the sale of its ethanol plant located in Hereford, Texas to Hereford Ethanol Partners, L.P. Correspondingly, the storage assets located adjacent to the Hereford plant were sold to our parent for $10.0 million, along with the transfer of associated railcar operating leases.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 16, 2021.
Selected Financial Information and Operating Data
The following table reflects selected financial information (in thousands):
The following table reflects selected operating data (in mmg, except railcar capacity billed):
Year Ended December 31, 2021, Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Consolidated revenues decreased $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with the year ended
December 31, 2020. Railcar transportation services revenue decreased $2.3 million primarily due to a decrease in average volumetric capacity available for use associated with the sale of the Ord assets. Storage and throughput services revenue decreased $1.7 million primarily due to a decrease in throughput associated with the sale of the Ord assets. Trucking and other revenue decreased $0.6 million primarily due to a decrease in volumes transported for Green Plains Trade. Terminal services revenue decreased $0.3 million primarily as a result of a reduced throughput by Green Plains Trade.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses
Operations and maintenance expenses decreased $3.1 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to decreases in railcar lease expense of $2.0 million, accretion expense of $0.4 million, and repair and maintenance expense of $0.4 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.2 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to an increase in expenses charged by our parent under the secondment agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity include cash generated from operating activities and borrowings under our credit facility. We expect operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs. We consider opportunities to repay or refinance our debt, depending on market conditions, as part of our normal course of doing business. Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements depends on our future operating performance, which is subject to general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. We plan to utilize a combination of operating cash, refinancing and other strategic actions, to repay debt obligations as they come due.
Distributions to Unitholders
Quarterly distributions are made from available cash within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, assuming we have available cash. Available cash generally means all cash and cash equivalents on hand at the end of that quarter less cash reserves established by our general partner plus all or any portion of the cash on hand resulting from working capital borrowings made subsequent to the end of that quarter. For more information, see Note 11 - Partners’ Equity (Deficit) to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
The table below summarizes the quarterly cash distributions for the periods presented:
Cash Flows
On December 31, 2021, we had $17.6 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $47.8 million in both 2021 and 2020. Cash flows from operating activities in 2021 benefitted from a $1.5 million distribution from NLR. Net cash provided by investing activities increased $17.0 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily as a result of the Ord disposition in the first quarter of 2021. Net cash used in financing activities was $59.4 million in 2021, compared with $55.4 million in 2020. The increase was due to principal payments on our term loan.
Capital Resources
We incurred capital expenditures of $0.7 million in 2021 primarily due to upgrades at our Wood River storage facility.
We received distributions from our NLR joint venture in the amount of $1.5 million and $1.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We did not make any equity method investee contributions in 2021 and we do not anticipate making significant equity contributions to NLR in 2022. We expect to receive future distributions from NLR as excess cash becomes available.
Term Loan Facility
On July 20, 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“Amended Credit Facility”) to our existing credit facility with funds and accounts managed by BlackRock and TMI Trust Company as administrative agent. The Amended Credit Facility reduced the total amount available to $60.0 million, extended the maturity from December 31, 2021 to July 20, 2026, and converted the balance to a term loan. The term loan does not require any principal payments; however, we have the option to prepay $1.5 million per quarter beginning July 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the term loan had a balance of $60.0 million and an interest rate of 8.22%.
Under the terms of the Amended Credit Facility, BlackRock purchased the outstanding balance of the existing notes from the previous lenders. Interest on the term loan is based on three-month LIBOR plus 8.00%, with a 0% LIBOR floor, and is payable on the 15th day of each March, June, September and December, during the term, with the first interest payment having occurred September 15, 2021. Financial covenants of the Amended Credit Facility include a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 2.5x and a minimum consolidated debt service coverage ratio of 1.10x. The Amended Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of the assets of the partnership.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, prior to the amendment, principal payments of $50.0 million were made on the credit facility, including $19.5 million of scheduled repayments, $27.5 million related to the sale of the storage assets located adjacent to the Ord, Nebraska ethanol plant and a $3.0 million prepayment made with excess cash.
On February 11, 2022, the Amended Credit Facility was modified to allow Green Plains Partners and its affiliates to repurchase outstanding notes. At that time, we purchased $1.0 million of the outstanding notes from accounts and funds managed by BlackRock and subsequently retired the notes, reducing the term loan balance to $59.0 million.
The administrator of LIBOR ceased publication of the one-week and two-month LIBOR settings immediately following the LIBOR publication on December 31, 2021, and announced that the remaining USD LIBOR settings, including the three-month LIBOR, will cease immediately following the LIBOR publication on June 30, 2023. We use three-month LIBOR as a reference rate for our term loan. It is unclear if LIBOR will cease to exist or if new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established by the applicable phase out dates. We may need to amend our credit facility to determine the interest rate to replace LIBOR with the new standard that is established. The potential effect of any such event on interest expense cannot yet be determined.
For more information related to our debt, see Note 8 - Debt to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Effects of Inflation
While inflation has increased modestly relative to recent years, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our future results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires that we use estimates that affect the reported assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures for contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on experience and assumptions we believe are proper and reasonable. While we regularly evaluate the appropriateness of these estimates, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. The following accounting policies, in particular, may be impacted by judgments, assumptions and estimates used to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
‎
Impairment of Goodwill
Our goodwill consists of amounts related to our predecessor’s acquisition of its fuel terminal and distribution business. We review goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment at least annually, as of October 1, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred.
We estimate the amount and timing of projected cash flows that will be generated by an asset over an extended period of time when we review our long-lived assets and goodwill. Circumstances that may indicate impairment include a decline in future projected cash flows, a decision to suspend plant operations for an extended period of time, sustained decline in our market capitalization or market prices for similar assets or businesses, or a significant adverse change in legal or regulatory matters or business climate. Significant management judgment is required to determine the fair value of our long-lived assets and goodwill and measure impairment, which includes projected cash flows. Fair value is determined by using various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, sales of comparable properties and third-party independent appraisals. Changes in estimated fair value could result in an impairment of the asset.
We performed an annual goodwill assessment as of October 1, 2021 using a qualitative assessment. Our assessment included consideration of the operating results and cash flows of the BlendStar reporting unit. We also considered current regulatory and business matters associated with BlendStar, as well as the market capitalization of the partnership. Our assessment resulted in no goodwill impairment for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the first half of 2020, a decline in our stock price resulted in a decrease in our market capitalization. As such, we determined a triggering event had occurred that required an interim impairment assessment for the BlendStar reporting unit as of both March 31, 2020 and June 30, 2020. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies for goodwill impairment testing were employed and include market capitalization, prospective financial information, growth rates, discount rates, inflationary factors, and cost of capital. Based on our quantitative evaluations, we determined that the fair value of the BlendStar reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value, and that the goodwill assigned to the BlendStar reporting unit was not impaired.
Please refer to Note 7 - Goodwill to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the amended guidance in ASC 842, Leases, and all related amendments, and applied it to all leases using the optional transition method which requires the amended guidance to be applied at the date of adoption. The standard does not require the guidance to be applied to the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements. As such, comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
We lease certain facilities, parcels of land, and railcars. Our leases are accounted for as operating leases, with lease expense recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The term of the lease may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise one of those options. For leases with initial terms greater than 12 months, we record operating lease right-of-use assets and corresponding operating lease liabilities. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
Operating lease right-of-use assets represent our right to control an underlying asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. These assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on information available at commencement date to determine the present value of future payments.
We record operating lease revenue as part of our operating lease agreements for storage and throughput services, rail transportation services, and certain terminal services. In addition, we may sublease certain of our railcars to third parties on a short-term basis. These subleases are classified as operating leases, with the associated sublease revenue recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Please refer to Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for further details on operating lease expense and revenue. Please refer to Note 3 - Revenue to the consolidated financial statements for further details on the operating lease agreements in which we are a lessor.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information related to recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In addition to debt, our material future obligations include certain lease agreements associated with our railcar fleet. Aggregate minimum lease payments under these operating lease agreements for future fiscal years as of December 31, 2021 totaled $42.8 million, with $13.1 million payable in the next twelve months. Refer to Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.