Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
The following discussion and analysis includes information management believes is relevant to understand and assess our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. This section should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and the risk factors contained in this report.
Overview
Green Plains is an Iowa corporation, founded in June 2004 as a producer of low carbon fuels and has grown to be one of the leading corn processors in the world. We continue the transition from a commodity-processing business to a value-add agricultural technology company focusing on creating diverse, non-cyclical, higher margin products. In addition, we are currently undergoing a number of project initiatives to improve margins. Through our Total Transformation Plan to a value-add agricultural technology company, we believe we can further increase margin per gallon by producing additional value-added ingredients such as Ultra-High Protein while expanding corn oil yields.
Our first FQT MSC™ Ultra-High Protein installation was completed at our Shenandoah plant during the first quarter of 2020. Our Wood River plant began operations in October 2021. Three additional locations are under construction and expect to be operational by the middle to last half of 2022. We anticipate that additional locations will be completed over the course of the next several years.
We have also upgraded our York facility to include USP grade alcohol capabilities. We began pilot scale batch operations at the CST production facility at our York Innovation Center in the second quarter of 2021, which may allow for the production of both food and industrial grade dextrose to target applications in food production, renewable chemicals and synthetic biology. We anticipate modifying one or more biorefineries to include CST production capabilities to meet anticipated future customer demands.
In December 2020, we completed the purchase of a majority interest in FQT. The acquisition capitalizes on the core strengths of each company to develop and implement proven, value-added agriculture, food and industrial biotechnology systems and rapidly expand installation and production of Ultra-High Protein across Green Plains facilities, as well as offer these technologies to partnering biofuel facilities.
Additionally, we have taken advantage of opportunities to divest certain assets in recent years. We are focused on generating stable operating margins through our business segments and risk management strategy. We own and operate assets throughout the ethanol value chain: upstream, with grain handling and storage; through our ethanol production facilities; and downstream, with marketing and distribution services to mitigate commodity price volatility. Our other businesses leverage our supply chain, production platform and expertise.
Our profitability is highly dependent on commodity prices, particularly for ethanol, distillers grains, Ultra-High Protein, corn oil, corn, and natural gas. Since market price fluctuations of these commodities are not always correlated, our operations may be unprofitable at times. We use a variety of risk management tools and hedging strategies to monitor price risk exposure at our ethanol plants and lock in favorable margins or reduce production when margins are compressed.
More information about our business, properties and strategy can be found under Item 1 - Business and a description of our risk factors can be found under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Industry Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
U.S. Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the EIA, domestic ethanol production averaged 0.99 million barrels per day in 2021, which was 9% higher than the 0.91 million barrels per day in 2020. Refiner and blender input volume increased 10% to 875 thousand barrels per day for 2021, compared with 798 thousand barrels per day in 2020. Gasoline demand increased 0.8 million barrels per day, or 10%, in 2021 compared to the prior year. U.S. domestic ethanol ending stocks decreased by approximately 2.1 million barrels compared to the prior year, or 9%, to 21.4 million barrels as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, according to Prime the Pump, there were approximately 2,555 retail stations selling E15 in 30 states, up from 2,300 at the beginning of the year, and approximately 267 pipeline terminal locations now offering E15 to wholesale customers.
‎
Global Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service, domestic ethanol exports through November 30, 2021, were approximately 1,126 mmg, down 6% from 1,199 mmg for the same period of 2020. Canada was the largest export destination for U.S. ethanol accounting for 30% of domestic ethanol export volume. India, South Korea, China, and Brazil accounted for 12%, 12%, 9% and 6%, respectively, of U.S. ethanol exports. We currently estimate that net ethanol exports will range from 1.2 to 1.4 billion gallons in 2022, based on historical demand from a variety of countries and certain countries that seek to improve their air quality and eliminate MTBE from their own fuel supplies.
In January 2020, China and the United States struck a “Phase I” trade agreement, which included commitments on agricultural commodity purchases. Ethanol, corn and distillers grains were included as potential purchases in the agreement. China has been purchasing large quantities of corn, which has raised domestic prices of this feedstock for our ethanol production process. In addition, in October 2020, it was announced that China had purchased a shipment of U.S. ethanol for the first time since March 2018. Total ethanol exports to China in 2020 were 32 million gallons, and through November 2021 were 100 million gallons, according to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service.
Year-to-date U.S. distillers grains exports through November 30, 2021, were 10.7 million metric tons, or 5% higher than the same period last year, according to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service. Mexico, Vietnam, South Korea, Indonesia and Turkey accounted for approximately 58% of total U.S. distillers grains export volumes.
Legislation and Regulation
We are sensitive to government programs and policies that affect the supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels, which in turn may impact the volume of ethanol and other fuels we handle. Over the years, various bills and amendments have been proposed in the House and Senate, which would eliminate the RFS entirely, eliminate the corn based ethanol portion of the mandate, and make it more difficult to sell fuel blends with higher levels of ethanol. We believe it is unlikely that any of these bills will become law in the current Congress. In addition, the manner in which the EPA administers the RFS and related regulations can have a significant impact on the actual amount of ethanol blended into the domestic fuel supply.
Federal mandates and state-level clean fuel programs supporting the use of renewable fuels are a significant driver of ethanol demand in the U.S. Ethanol policies are influenced by concerns for the environment, diversifying the fuel supply, and reducing the country’s dependence on foreign oil. Consumer acceptance of FFVs and higher ethanol blends in non-FFVs may be necessary before ethanol can achieve further growth in U.S. market share. In addition, expansion of clean fuel programs in other states, or a national low carbon fuel standard could increase the demand for ethanol, depending on how it is structured.
The RFS sets a floor for biofuels use in the United States. When the RFS was established in 2010, the required volume of “conventional”, or corn-based, ethanol to be blended with gasoline was to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015, which left the EPA to address existing limitations in both supply and demand. As of this filing, the EPA proposed reducing the conventional ethanol RVOs for 2020 and 2021 to reflect lower fuel demand during the pandemic, and proposed the statutory 15 billion gallons for 2022.
According to the RFS, if mandatory renewable fuel volumes are reduced by at least 20% for two consecutive years, the EPA is required to modify, or reset, statutory volumes through 2022 - the year through which the statutorily prescribed volumes run. While conventional ethanol maintained 15 billion gallons, 2019 was the second consecutive year that the total RVO was more than 20% below the statutory volumes levels. Thus, the EPA was expected to initiate a reset rulemaking, and modify statutory volumes through 2022, and do so based on the same factors they are to use in setting the RVOs post 2022. These factors include environmental impact, domestic energy security, expected production, infrastructure impact, consumer costs, job creation, price of agricultural commodities, food prices, and rural economic development. However, in late 2019, the EPA announced it would not be moving forward with a reset rulemaking in 2020. It is unclear when or if the current EPA will propose a reset rulemaking, though they have stated an intention to propose a post 2022 set rulemaking by the end of 2021.
Under the RFS, RINs and SREs are important tools impacting supply and demand. The EPA assigns individual refiners, blenders, and importers the volume of renewable fuels they are obligated to use in each annual RVO based on their percentage of total domestic transportation fuel sales. Obligated parties use RINs to show compliance with the RFS mandated volumes. Ethanol producers assign RINs to renewable fuels and the RINs are detached when the renewable fuel is blended with transportation fuel domestically. Market participants can trade the detached RINs in the open market. The market price of detached RINs can affect the price of ethanol in certain markets and can influence purchasing decisions by obligated parties. As it relates to SREs, a small refinery is defined as one that processes fewer than 75,000 barrels of petroleum per day. Small refineries can petition the EPA for a SRE which, if approved, waives their portion of the annual RVO requirements.
The EPA, through consultation with the DOE and the USDA, can grant them a full or partial waiver, or deny it outright within 90 days of submittal. The EPA granted significantly more of these waivers for 2016, 2017 and 2018 than they had in the past, totaling 790 mmg of waived requirements for the 2016 compliance year, 1.82 billion gallons for 2017 and 1.43 billion gallons for 2018. In doing so, the EPA effectively reduced the RFS mandated volumes for those compliance years by those amounts respectively, and as a result, RIN values declined significantly. In the waning days of the Trump administration, the EPA approved three additional SREs, reversing one denial from 2018 and granting two from 2019. A total of 88 SREs were granted under the Trump Administration, totaling 4.3 billion gallons of potential blending demand erased. The EPA, under the current administration, reversed the three SREs issued in the final weeks of the previous administration, and in the RVO rulemaking they proposed denying all pending SREs. There are multiple legal challenges to how the EPA has handled SREs and RFS rulemakings.
The One-Pound Waiver that was extended in May 2019 to allow E15 to be sold year-round to all vehicles model year 2001 and newer was challenged in an action filed in Federal District Court for the D.C. Circuit. On July 2, 2021, the Circuit Court vacated the EPA’s rule so the future of summertime, defined as June 1 to September 15, sales of E15 to non-FFVs is uncertain. The Supreme Court declined to hear a challenge to this ruling. As of this filing E15 is sold year-round in approximately 30 states.
In October 2019, the White House directed the USDA and EPA to move forward with rulemaking to expand access to higher blends of biofuels. This includes funding for infrastructure, labeling changes and allowing E15 to be sold through E10 infrastructure. The USDA rolled out the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program in the summer of 2020, providing competitive grants to fuel terminals and retailers for installing equipment for dispensing higher blends of ethanol and biodiesel. In December 2021, the USDA announced they would administer another infrastructure grant program. Congress is considering legislation that would provide for an additional $1 billion in USDA grants for biofuel infrastructure from 2022 to 2031.
To respond to the COVID-19 health crisis and attempt to offset the subsequent economic damage, Congress passed multiple relief measures, most notably the CARES Act in March 2020, which created and funded multiple programs that have impacted our industry. The USDA was given additional resources for the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) and they are using those funds to provide direct payments to farmers, including corn farmers from whom we purchase most of our feedstock for ethanol production. Similar to the trade aid payments made by the USDA over the past two years, this cash injection for farmers could cause them to delay marketing decisions and increase the price we have to pay to purchase corn. The CARES Act also allowed for certain net operating loss carrybacks, which has allowed us to receive certain tax refunds. In December 2020, Congress passed and then President Trump signed into law an annual spending package coupled with another COVID relief bill which included additional funds for the Secretary of Agriculture to distribute to those impacted by the pandemic. The language of the bill specifically includes biofuels producers as eligible for some of this aid, and in March of 2021, the USDA indicated that biofuels would be able to apply for a portion of these funds in a forthcoming rulemaking. On June 15, 2021, the USDA indicated that $700 million would be made available to biofuels producers, and in December 2021, they released details for the program, specifying that domestic biofuel producers must apply for market losses due to COVID by February 11, 2022, with payments announced by March 12, 2022. It is not possible to predict the amount we would receive, if any, from this program.
The CARES Act provided a tax exclusion on the shipment of undenatured ethanol for use in manufacturing hand sanitizer, a key ingredient of which is undenatured ethanol of specific grades. The FDA announced that it is ending, effective December 31, 2021, the expanded guidance, which allowed for more denaturants to be used in ethanol intended for hand sanitizer production, and expanded the grades of ethanol for the duration of the public health crisis.
The current administration has indicated a desire to dramatically expand electric vehicle (EV) charging stations, and initially proposed $174 billion for EV charging infrastructure, purchase rebates, and other incentives. The recently-enacted bipartisan infrastructure package includes $15 billion for EV charging infrastructure, and $5 billion for electric busses and ferries. Additionally, Congress is considering expanded EV incentives in a budget reconciliation package, with the goal of installing 500,000 EV charging stations and providing incentives to middle and lower income Americans to purchase EVs, in addition to manufacturing incentives for car makers. The package would offer consumers tax rebates of $7,500 to $12,500 for purchasing EVs, and would invest billions in charging infrastructure. These tax incentives could reduce the overall market for liquid fuels in the surface transportation sector and with it, that of ethanol.
The budget reconciliation package currently being considered by Congress also would extend the $1.00/gallon tax credits for renewable diesel and biodiesel, which use our distillers corn oil as one of their low-carbon feedstocks. The package would also create a $1.25 - $1.75/gallon tax incentive for the production of sustainable aviation fuel, which could possibly utilize our distillers corn oil or our ethanol as a feedstock. The package would also expand tax credits for carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) and extend the time frame for projects to qualify for this credit. The fermentation process by which we
produce ethanol releases a nearly pure stream of carbon dioxide which has the potential to be captured and sequestered. The package would also create a technology-neutral clean fuel production tax credit for 2027, but this would not be applicable for fuels that take advantage of the CCS tax credits. The package in its current form also expands the eligibility of Master Limited Partnership tax status to clean energy projects, including CCS and renewable fuels. There can be no assurance, however, these provisions make it into any final legislation.
Government actions abroad can significantly impact the demand for U.S. ethanol. In September 2017, China’s National Development and Reform Commission, the National Energy Agency and 15 other state departments issued a joint plan to expand the use and production of biofuels containing up to 10% ethanol by 2020. China, the number three importer of U.S. ethanol in 2016, imported negligible volumes during 2018 and 2019 due to a 30% tariff on U.S. ethanol, which increased to 70% in early 2018. There is no assurance that China’s joint plan to expand blending to 10% will be carried to fruition, nor that it will lead to increased imports of U.S. ethanol in the near term. Ethanol is included as an agricultural commodity under the “Phase I” agreement with China, wherein they are to purchase upwards of $40 billion in agricultural commodities from the U.S. in both 2020 and 2021. According to the USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, China purchased 32 mmg of U.S. ethanol in 2020 and through November 2021 had imported 100 mmg.
In Brazil, the Secretary of Foreign Trade had issued a tariff rate quota which expired in December of 2020. All U.S. ethanol gallons now face a 20% tariff into Brazil. Exports to Brazil were 186 mmg in 2020 and 63 mmg through November 2021. Our exports also face tariffs, rate quotas, countervailing duties, and other hurdles in the European Union, India, Peru, Colombia and elsewhere, which limits the ability to compete in some markets. We believe some countries are using the COVID-19 crisis as justification for raising duties on imports of U.S. ethanol, or blocking our imports entirely.
In June 2017, the Energy Regulatory Commission of Mexico (CRE) approved the use of 10% ethanol blends, which was challenged by multiple lawsuits, of which several were dismissed. An injunction was granted in October 2017, preventing the blending and selling of E10, but was overturned by a higher court in June 2018, making it legal to blend and sell E10 by PEMEX (Petroleos Mexicanos, or Mexican Petroleum) throughout Mexico except for its three largest metropolitan areas. On January 15, 2020, the Mexican Supreme Court ruled that the expedited process for the CRE regulation was unconstitutional, and that after a 180 day period the maximum ethanol blend allowed in the country would revert to 5.8%. There was an effort to go through the full regulatory process to allow for 10% blends countrywide, including in the three major metropolitan areas. The 180 day window was extended multiple times due to COVID-19, but eventually lapsed in June 2021, decreasing the maximum ethanol blend back to 5.8%.
In January 2020, the updated North American Free Trade Agreement, known as the United States Mexico Canada Agreement or USMCA was signed. The USMCA went into effect on July 1, 2020, and maintains the duty free access of U.S. agricultural commodities, including ethanol, into Canada and Mexico. According to the USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, exports to Canada were 334 mmg and exports to Mexico were 41 mmg through November 2021.
Environmental and Other Regulation
Our operations are subject to environmental regulations, including those that govern the handling and release of ethanol, crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbon materials. Compliance with existing and anticipated environmental laws and regulations may increase our overall cost of doing business, including capital costs to construct, maintain, operate, and upgrade equipment and facilities. Our business may also be impacted by government policies, such as tariffs, duties, subsidies, import and export restrictions and outright embargos. We employ maintenance and operations personnel at each of its facilities, which are regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The U.S. ethanol industry relies heavily on tank cars to deliver its product to market. In 2015, the DOT finalized the Enhanced Tank Car Standard and Operational Controls for High-Hazard and Flammable Trains, or DOT specification 117, which established a schedule to retrofit or replace older tank cars that carry crude oil and ethanol, braking standards intended to reduce the severity of accidents and new operational protocols. The deadline for compliance with DOT specification 117 is May 1, 2023. The rule may increase our lease costs for railcars over the long term, which will, in turn, result in an increase in fees the partnership charges for railcar capacity. Additionally, existing railcars may be out of service for a period of time while upgrades are made, tightening supply in an industry that is highly dependent on railcars to transport product. We intend to strategically manage our leased railcar fleet to comply with the new regulations and have commenced transition of our fleet to DOT 117 compliant railcars. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 55% of our railcar fleet was DOT 117 compliant. We anticipate that an additional 30% of our railcar fleet will be DOT 117 compliant by the end of 2022, and that our entire fleet will be fully compliant by 2023.
In September 2015, the FDA issued rules for Current Good Manufacturing Practice, Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based Preventative Controls for food for animals in response to FSMA. The rules require FDA-registered food facilities to address
safety concerns for sourcing, manufacturing and shipping food products and food for animals through food safety programs that include conducting hazard analyses, developing risk-based preventative controls and monitoring, and addressing intentional adulteration, recalls, sanitary transportation and supplier verification. We believe we have taken sufficient measures to comply with these regulations.
Variability of Commodity Prices
Our business is highly sensitive to commodity price fluctuations, particularly for corn, ethanol, corn oil, distillers grains and natural gas, which are impacted by factors that are outside of our control, including weather conditions, corn yield, changes in domestic and global ethanol supply and demand, government programs and policies and the price of crude oil, gasoline and substitute fuels. We use various financial instruments to manage and reduce our exposure to price variability. For more information about our commodity price risk, refer to