Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A)
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including but not limited to, those discussed in Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This MD&A is organized as follows:
•Overview. Discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting the Company in order to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
•Components of Our Results of Operations. Description of the items contained in each revenue, cost of revenue and operating expense caption in the consolidated statements of operations.
•Results of Operations. Analysis of our financial results comparing 2021 to 2020 is presented below. An analysis of our financial results comparing 2020 to 2019 can be found under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at https://investor.gopro.com.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. Analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows, and discussion of our financial condition and potential sources of liquidity.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
•Non-GAAP Financial Measures. A reconciliation and discussion of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures.
Overview
GoPro helps the world capture and share itself in immersive and exciting ways. We are committed to developing solutions that create an easy, seamless experience for consumers to capture, create, and share engaging personal content. When consumers use our products and services, they often generate and share content that organically increases awareness for GoPro, driving a virtuous cycle and a self-reinforcing demand for our products. We believe revenue growth may be driven by the introduction of new cameras, accessories, lifestyle gear, and software and subscription offerings. We believe new camera features drive a replacement cycle among existing users and attract new users, expanding our total addressable market. Our investments in image stabilization, mobile app editing and sharing solutions, modular accessories, auto-upload capabilities, local language user-interfaces and voice recognition in more than 12 languages drive the expansion of our global market.
In the Fall of 2021, we began shipping our HERO10 Black flagship camera that features our new high-performance GP2 processor, which delivers blistering video frame rates. The camera's highest video resolution of 5.3K at 60 frames per second delivers 91% more pixel resolution than 4K at 30 frames per second and 665% more pixel resolution than 1080p HD at an impressive 60 frames per second, allowing for fluid playback and 2X slow motion. 4K video can be captured at 120 frames per second (4X slow motion) and 2.7K video can be captured at 240 frames per second (8X slow motion). The new GP2 processor also enables HyperSmooth 4.0 video stabilization, ensuring that HERO10 Black smooths out even the most shake-ladened experiences. HERO10 Black's in-camera horizon leveling feature benefits from an increased tilt limit of 45° in high-performance settings, making even the most chaotic video footage look professionally smooth and steady. The new GP2 processor combined with the ultra-high resolution 23.6MP sensor enables life-like image quality. In addition to 23 megapixel photos, HERO10 Black enables 19.6 megapixel video stills to be pulled from 5K 4:3 video at 30 frames per second and 15.8 megapixel video stills from 5.3K video at 60 frames per second, which is ideal for capturing
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
still images of sports and fast-paced activities. The HERO10 Black is also cloud connected while being charged and will automatically upload recently captured footage to the user’s GoPro cloud account. Additionally, the HERO10 Black continues to build off the noteworthy HERO9 Black features, including Power Tools, TimeWarp 3.0, front-facing and rear touch displays, and camera Mod compatibility. Our HERO10 Black, HERO9 Black, HERO8 Black and MAX cameras are compatible with our ecosystem of mountable and wearable accessories. We also sell our GoPro subscription, which includes unlimited cloud storage supporting source video and photo quality, camera replacement and damage protection, access to a high-quality live streaming service on GoPro.com as well as discounts on GoPro gear, mounts and accessories.
In March 2021, we launched a refresh of our mobile app, Quik, which makes it easy for users to get the most out of their favorite photos and videos no matter which phone or camera is used to capture the footage. We believe the launch of Quik and the new Quik subscription is an important step in expanding our total addressable market to those who value organizing the visual moments of their lives. Quik users can conveniently share their favorite photos or videos to the Quik app where those special “keeper” photos or videos will be added to a private “Mural” feed within the app. Quik also features a suite of powerful yet simple editing tools which allows users to edit photos or videos themselves. In June 2021, we announced Open GoPro, an open API initiative that makes it easy for third-party developers to integrate their HERO camera into their own development efforts.
The COVID-19 pandemic is continuing to have widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets, supply chains and business practices. During the year ended December 31, 2021, sales improved compared to 2020 through both our e-commerce platform on GoPro.com as well as our retail channel in certain regions. In the first quarter of 2020, we closed all of our offices and required most of our employees to work remotely. These changes remained largely in effect in the fourth quarter of 2021. We expect our offices to remain closed at least through the second quarter of 2022. At this point, the duration and impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement is uncertain, but changes we have implemented have not affected and are not expected to affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. See Item 1A Risk Factors for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
The following is a summary of measures presented in our consolidated financial statements and key metrics used to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions.
(1) Represents the number of camera units that are shipped during a reporting period, net of any returns.
(2) One basis point (bps) is equal to 1/100th of 1%.
(3) We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude the impact of provision for income taxes, interest income, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, point of purchase (POP) display amortization, stock-based compensation, intangible asset impairment charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, and restructuring and other costs, including right-of-use asset impairment charges.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(4) We define non-GAAP net income as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation, acquisition-related costs, restructuring and other costs, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, non-cash interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt and income tax adjustments. Acquisition-related costs include the amortization of acquired intangible assets and impairment charges (if applicable), as well as third-party transaction costs for legal and other professional services.
Reconciliations of non-GAAP adjusted measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures are presented under Non-GAAP Financial Measures.
Full Year and Fourth quarter 2021 financial performance
Revenue was $1.16 billion for the full year 2021 compared to $891.9 million in 2020. The year-over-year improvement in revenue was driven by sales of our cameras at higher price points, which was positively impacted by a $50 increase in the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) on our latest flagship camera from 2020 to 2021. In addition to sales of our cameras at higher price points, the year-over-year improvement in revenue was positively impacted by direct-to-consumer sales and subscriptions and services, as well as sales through our retail channel as stores began to reopen. Retail revenue for the full year 2021 was $769.0 million, an increase of 26% year-over-year from $609.4 million in 2020, driven by overall growth across all regions. Revenue from our retail channel represented 66.2% and 68.3% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year improvement in revenue was also driven by our continued focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. GoPro.com revenue for the full year 2021 was $392.1 million, which was a 39% increase year-over-year from $282.6 million in 2020. GoPro.com revenue represented 33.8% and 31.7% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. We shipped 3,145,000 camera units for the full year 2021, compared to 2,820,000 camera units for the full year 2020, representing a 12% camera unit growth year-over-year. Our average selling price, which is defined as total revenue divided by camera units shipped, for the full year 2021 was $369, or a 17% year-over-year increase, primarily due to 97% of our camera revenue mix being derived from cameras with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300, along with growth in GoPro subscribers. We had approximately 1.6 million GoPro subscribers as of December 31, 2021, or a 107% increase year-over-year. Subscription revenue for the full year 2021 was $52.9 million, or an increase of 131% year-over-year. The gross margin percentage for 2021 was 41.1%, up from 35.3% in 2020. The 580 bps year-over-year increase in gross margin was primarily driven by sales of cameras at higher price points, growth in direct-to-consumer sales, and growth in our high margin subscription revenue. Operating expenses for the full year 2021 were $363.9 million, a 4% increase year-over-year, primarily due to increases in personnel-related expenses and costs to support the growth of our direct-to-consumer business on GoPro.com. Net income for the full year 2021 was $371.2 million, an improvement of $437.9 million, when compared to a net loss of $66.8 million for the full year 2020. The full year 2021 benefitted from the release of our tax valuation allowances which contributed $284.6 million. Adjusted EBITDA for the full year 2021 was $167.8 million, or 15% of revenue compared to $43.2 million for the full year 2020, or 5% of revenue.
Revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $391.1 million, or a 9% increase from the same period in 2020. The year-over-year increase was primarily driven by sales of our cameras at higher price points, which was positively impacted by a $50 increase in MSRP on our latest flagship camera from 2020 to 2021. In addition to sales of our cameras at higher price points, the year-over-year improvement in revenue was positively impacted by direct-to-consumer sales and subscriptions and services, and strong sales through our retail channel as stores began to reopen. Retail revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $263.4 million, an increase of 9.1% year-over-year from $241.3 million during the same period in 2020, primarily driven by Europe. Revenue from our retail channel represented 67.3% and 67.5% of total revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year improvement in revenue was also driven by our continued focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. GoPro.com revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $127.8 million, which was a 9.8% increase year-over-year from $116.4 million during the same period in 2020. GoPro.com revenue represented 32.7% and 32.5% of total revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our average selling price, which is defined as total revenue divided by camera units shipped, for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $379, or a 17.2% increase from the same period in 2020, primarily due to 100% of our camera revenue mix being derived from cameras with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300 and growth in GoPro subscribers. We shipped 1,033,000 camera units during the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to 1,108,000 camera units for the same period in 2020, or a decline of 7% year-over-year. Subscription revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $16.8 million, or an increase of 118% from the same period in 2020. The gross margin percentage for the fourth quarter of 2021 was 41.2%, up from 38.0% in the fourth quarter of 2020. The 320 bps increase in gross margin year-over-
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
year was primarily driven by sales of cameras at higher price points, growth in direct-to-consumer sales, and growth in our high margin subscription revenue. Operating expenses for the fourth quarter of 2021 were $102.4 million, a 27% increase year-over-year, primarily due to increases in personnel-related expenses, advertising expenses, and costs to support the growth of our direct-to-consumer business on GoPro.com. Net income for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $52.6 million, an 18.5% increase compared to net income of $44.4 million generated in the same period in 2020. Adjusted EBITDA for the fourth quarter of 2021 was a positive $71.6 million, compared to a positive $67.7 million for the same period in 2020.
Factors affecting performance
We believe that our future success will be dependent on many factors, including those further discussed below. While these areas represent opportunities for us, they also represent challenges and risks that we must successfully address in order to operate our business and improve our results of operations.
Driving profitability through improved efficiency, lower costs and better execution. We generated positive operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, and we continue to make strategic decisions to create sustainable growth and profitability in our business. Prior to fiscal year 2021, we incurred operating losses during fiscal years 2020, 2019, and 2018. Our restructuring actions have significantly reduced our on-going operating expenses, resulting in a flatter, more efficient global organization that has allowed for improved communication and better alignment among our functional teams. Primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took additional restructuring actions in April 2020 to further reduce our operating expenses in marketing, sales, and general and administrative functions, and to reduce our global facility footprint. Operating expense reductions related to research and development were minor in order to protect our product roadmap and innovation. Additionally, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated a shift in our sales channel strategy to reduce the number of distributors and retailers that we work with to focus more on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com.
If we are unable to generate adequate revenue growth, particularly in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, successfully sustain our direct-to-consumer sales model and current revenue growth rate, or continue to manage our expenses, we may incur significant losses in the future and may not be able to achieve profitability.
Investing in research and development and enhancing our customer experience. Our performance is significantly dependent on the investments we make in research and development, including our ability to attract and retain highly skilled and experienced research and development personnel. We expect the timing of new product releases to continue to have a significant impact on our revenue and we must continually develop and introduce innovative new cameras, mobile applications and other new offerings. We plan to further build upon our integrated mobile and cloud-based storytelling solutions, and subscription offerings. Our investments, including those for marketing and advertising, may not successfully drive increased revenue and our customers may not accept our new offerings. If we fail to innovate and enhance our brand, our products, our integrated storytelling solutions, the value proposition of our subscriptions, our market position and revenue will be adversely affected. Further, we have incurred substantial research and development expenses and if our efforts are not successful, we may not recover the value of these investments.
Improving Profitability. We believe that our continued focus on growing our direct-to-consumer sales and subscription services will accelerate our ability to become consistently profitable due to an improved margin structure and lower operating expenses to support this shift in channel, particularly in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of this shift toward direct sales, we believe we can become consistently profitable with lower overall unit sales. We continue to believe that international markets represent a significant opportunity to achieve continued profitability. While the total market for digital cameras has continued to decline as smartphone and tablet camera quality has improved, we continue to believe that our consumers’ differentiated use of GoPro cameras, our integrated storytelling solutions, our continued innovation of product features desired by our users, and our brand, all help support our business from many of the negative trends facing this market. However, we expect that the markets in which we conduct our business will remain highly competitive as we face new product introductions from competitors. We will continue to leverage the brand recognition of our Company to increase our global presence through GoPro.com with the active promotion of our brand, the expansion of localized products in international markets with region-specific marketing, and a focus on the biggest investment opportunities.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our profitability also depends on expanding our subscription service offerings. If we are not successful in our shift to a direct-to-consumer sales model, expanding our product and subscription offerings and increasing our paid subscriber base, we might not be able to become consistently profitable and we may not recognize benefits from our investment in new areas.
Marketing the improved GoPro experience. We intend to focus our marketing resources to increase traffic to GoPro.com, improve the consumer experience on GoPro.com, and further improve brand recognition. Historically, our growth has largely been fueled by the adoption of our products by people looking to self-capture images of themselves participating in exciting physical activities. Our goal of sustaining profitability depends on continuing to reach, expand and re-engage with this core user base in alignment with our strategic priorities. Sales and marketing investments will often occur in advance of any sales benefits from these activities, and it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating our resources in this area.
Seasonality. Historically, we have experienced the highest levels of revenue in the fourth quarter of the year, coinciding with the holiday shopping season, particularly in the United States and Europe. While we have implemented operational changes aimed at reducing the impact of fourth quarter seasonality on full year performance, timely and effective product introductions and forecasting, whether just prior to the holiday season or otherwise, are critical to our operations and financial performance.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue. Our revenue is primarily comprised of product sales and subscription services, net of returns and sales incentives. Revenue is derived from the sale of our cameras and accessories directly to retailers, through our network of domestic and international distributors, and on GoPro.com. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding revenue recognition.
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue primarily consists of product costs, including costs of contract manufacturing for production, third-party logistics and procurement costs, warranty repair costs, tooling and equipment depreciation, excess and obsolete inventory write-downs, amortization of acquired developed technology, license fees, tariffs and certain allocated costs related to our manufacturing team, facilities, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, and personnel-related expenses.
Operating expenses. We classify our operating expenses into three categories: research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative.
Research and development. Our research and development expense consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. Research and development expense also includes consulting and outside professional services costs, materials, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses associated with the development of our product and service offerings.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expense consists primarily of advertising and marketing promotions of our products and services, and personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. Sales and marketing expense also includes point of purchase (POP) display expenses and related amortization, sales commissions, webstore and subscription provider fees, trade show and event costs, sponsorship costs, consulting and contractor expenses, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits for our finance, legal, human resources, information technology and administrative personnel. The expense also includes professional service costs related to accounting, tax, legal services, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the components of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for each of the periods presented, and each component as a percentage of revenue:
Revenue
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2021 Compared to 2020. Revenue was $1.16 billion for the full year 2021 compared to $891.9 million in 2020. The year-over-year improvement in revenue was driven by sales of our cameras at higher price points, which was positively impacted by a $50 increase in MSRP on our latest flagship camera from 2020 to 2021. In addition to sales of our cameras at higher price points, the year-over-year improvement in revenue was positively impacted by direct-to-consumer sales and subscriptions and services, as well as sales through our retail channel as stores began to reopen. Retail revenue for the full year 2021 was $769.0 million, an increase of 26% year-over-year from $609.4 million in 2020, driven by overall growth across all regions. Revenue from our retail channel represented 66.2% and 68.3% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year improvement in revenue was also driven by our continued focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. GoPro.com revenue for the full year 2021 was $392.1 million, which was a 39% increase year-over-year from $282.6 million in 2020. GoPro.com revenue represented 33.8% and 31.7% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. We shipped 3,145,000 camera units for the full year 2021, compared to 2,820,000 camera units for the full year 2020. Our average selling price, which is defined as total revenue divided by camera units shipped, for the full year 2021 was $369, or a 17% year-over-year increase, primarily due to 97% of our camera revenue mix being derived from cameras with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300, along with growth in GoPro subscribers. We had approximately 1.6 million GoPro subscribers as of December 31, 2021, or a 107% increase year-over-year. Subscription revenue for the full year 2021 was $52.9 million, or an increase of 131% year-over-year.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
2021 Compared to 2020. Gross margin of 41.1% in 2021 increased from 35.3% in 2020, or 580 bps, primarily due to camera sales at higher price points, 475 bps, increased margin contribution from subscriptions, 58 bps, and better leverage on fixed costs and operational expenses, 47 bps.
Research and development
2021 Compared to 2020. The year-over-year increase of $9.9 million, or 8%, in total research and development expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected a $13.6 million increase in cash-based personnel-related costs due to an increase in R&D headcount and a $3.8 million increase in stock-based compensation, partially offset by a $7.5 million decrease in restructuring costs.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Sales and marketing
2021 Compared to 2020. The year-over-year increase of $5.3 million, or 4%, in total sales and marketing expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected a $13.8 million increase in webstore and subscription provider fees, a $1.8 million increase in cash-based personnel-related costs and a $2.3 million increase in stock-based compensation, partially offset by a $10.3 million decrease in restructuring costs, and a $3.2 million decrease in allocated facilities, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses.
General and administrative
2021 Compared to 2020. The year-over-year decrease of $2.7 million, or 4%, in total general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected a $5.3 million decrease in restructuring costs, a $3.6 million decrease in legal consulting fees, and a $2.4 million decrease in allocated facilities and other supporting overhead expenses, partially offset by a $5.9 million increase in cash-based personnel-related costs and $2.3 million increase in stock-based compensation.
Restructuring costs
Second quarter 2020 restructuring. On April 14, 2020, we approved a restructuring that provided for a reduction of our global workforce by approximately 20% and the consolidation of certain leased office facilities. Under the second quarter 2020 restructuring, we recorded restructuring charges of $29.0 million to date, including a $12.5 million right-of-use asset impairment primarily related to our headquarter campus, $7.4 million related to severance, and $9.1 million related to accelerated depreciation and other charges. The right-of-use asset impairment charge was recorded as a restructuring expense, primarily in the operating expense financial statement line items in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We ceased using a portion of our headquarters campus in the third quarter of 2020 as part of the second quarter 2020 restructuring. The unused portion of our headquarters campus has its own identifiable expenses and is not dependent on other parts of our business, and thus was considered its own asset group. As a result, we impaired a part of the carrying value of the related right-of-use asset to its estimated fair value using the discounted future cash flows method. The discounted future cash flows were based on future sublease rental rates, future sublease market conditions and a discount rate based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Based on the results of our assessment, we recognized a $12.3 million impairment. On October 2021, the Company entered into a fully executed and consented sublease agreement for this previously ceased-use portion of our headquarters campus. The sublease term will extend through December 2026.
First quarter 2017 restructuring. On March 15, 2017, we approved a restructuring that provided for a reduction of our workforce by approximately 17% and the consolidation of certain leased office facilities. Under the first quarter
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2017 restructuring, we recorded restructuring charges of $23.5 million to date, including $10.3 million related to severance and $13.2 million related to accelerated depreciation and other charges. The actions associated with the first quarter 2017 restructuring were substantially completed by the fourth quarter of 2017.
See Note 11 Restructuring charges, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other income (expense)
2021 Compared to 2020. Total other expense, net, decreased $2.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $5.4 million loss on the partial extinguishment of our 2022 Notes in 2020 which did not occur in 2021, which was partially offset by a $3.8 million increase in non-cash interest expense related to the amortization of the debt discount of our 2022 and 2025 Notes.
Income taxes
We recorded an income tax benefit of $281.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, on a pre-tax net income of $90.1 million. Our income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily resulted from a tax expense on pre-tax book income, offset by the income tax benefit from the full release of valuation allowances on United States federal and state deferred tax assets and the release of a portion of our uncertain tax positions as a result of a lapse of the statute of limitations in certain jurisdictions, as well as income tax benefits from stock-based compensation and federal and California research and development credits.
Our 2020 negative effective tax rate of 7.8% was primarily related to a significant benefit on pre-tax book losses, offset by the valuation allowance on United States federal and state deferred tax assets and by income taxes paid or accrued in profitable foreign jurisdictions (primarily wholly owned subsidiaries in Europe).
See Note 8 Income taxes, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Quarterly results of operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the eight quarterly periods in the two-year period ended December 31, 2021.
(1) Included in operating expenses were restructuring charges of $13.7 million for the quarter ended September 30, 2020, and $11.0 million
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
for the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Our primary source of cash is receipts from sales of our products and services. Other sources of cash are from proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, employee participation in the employee stock purchase plan, the exercise of employee stock options, tax refunds and facility subleases. The primary uses of cash are for inventory procurement, payroll-related expenses, general operating expenses, including advertising, marketing and office rent, purchases of property and equipment, other costs of revenue, repurchases of convertible notes, interest, and taxes.
Our liquidity position has historically been impacted by seasonality, which is primarily driven by higher revenues during the second half of the year as compared to the first half. Net cash provided by operating activities during the second half of 2021 and 2020 was $231.5 million and $205.8 million, respectively, which represents more than 100% of the total cash provided by operating activities for each respective year.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $538.9 million, a $211.3 million increase from 2020. Our cash, net of the outstanding principal balance of the 2022 and 2025 Notes, as of December 31, 2021 was $270.1 million. The overall cash provided by operating activities of $229.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to net income of $371.2 million, net cash inflows from changes in our working capital of $61.3 million, net cash inflows from other non-cash expenses of $70.2 million, partially offset by a non-cash tax benefit of $273.5 million. The non-cash tax benefit of $273.5 million was primarily related to the release of tax valuation allowances against deferred tax assets that we consider is more likely than not to be realized against future income. Working capital changes during the year ended December 31, 2021, of $61.3 million was the result of a decrease in inventory of $11.5 million, an increase in accounts payable and other liabilities of $56.3 million, and an increase in deferred revenue of $19.2 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $8.1 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $17.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, $11.5 million of cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
Convertible Notes
In April 2017, we issued $175.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes in a private placement to purchasers for resale to qualified institutional buyers. The 2022 Notes mature on April 15, 2022, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of Class A common stock subject to certain conditions. The 2022 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of the Class A common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, at an initial conversion rate of 94.0071 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2022 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $10.64 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment. We pay interest on the 2022 Notes semi-annually, which has historically been due on April 15 and October 15 of each year. We have one interest payment remaining, which will be due on April 15, 2022. Proceeds received from the issuance of the 2022 Notes are allocated between a liability component (short-term debt) and an equity component (additional paid-in capital). The fair value of the liability component was measured using rates determined for similar debt instruments without a conversion feature.
In connection with the 2022 Notes offering, we entered into a prepaid forward stock repurchase transaction agreement (Prepaid Forward) with a financial institution. Pursuant to the Prepaid Forward, we used approximately $78.0 million of the proceeds from the offering of the 2022 Notes to pay the prepayment amount. The aggregate
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
number of shares of our Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward is approximately 9.2 million shares. The expiration date for the Prepaid Forward is April 15, 2022, although it may be settled earlier in whole or in part. Upon settlement of the Prepaid Forward, at expiration or upon any early settlement, the forward counterparty will deliver to us the number of shares of Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward or the portion thereof being settled early. The shares purchased under the Prepaid Forward were treated as treasury stock on the Consolidated Balance Sheets (and not outstanding for purposes of the calculation of basic and diluted income (loss) per share), but remain outstanding for corporate law purposes, including for purposes of any future stockholders’ votes, until the forward counterparty delivers the shares underlying the Prepaid Forward to us. The net proceeds from the 2022 Convertible Senior Notes offering of approximately $91 million were used for general corporate purposes.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, 8.8 million shares out of the 9.2 million shares of Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward entered into as part of our 2022 Notes were early settled and delivered to us. In April 2021, the remaining 0.4 million shares of Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward were early settled and delivered to us. There was no financial statement impact due to the return of shares; however, shares outstanding for corporate law purposes were reduced by the early settlement.
In November 2020, in connection with the offering of the 2025 Notes, we repurchased $50.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the April 2022 Notes reducing the amount owed on the 2022 Notes to $125 million.
In November 2020, we issued $143.8 million aggregate principal amount of 2025 Notes in a private placement to purchasers for resale to qualified institutional buyers. The 2025 Notes mature on November 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of Class A common stock subject to certain conditions. The 2025 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of the Class A common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, at an initial conversion rate of 107.1984 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2025 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $9.3285 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment. We pay interest on the 2025 Notes semi-annually, which is due on May 15 and November 15. Proceeds received from the issuance of the 2025 Notes are allocated between a liability component (long-term debt) and an equity component (additional paid-in capital). The fair value of the liability component was measured using rates determined for similar debt instruments without a conversion feature.
In connection with the offering of the 2025 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain financial institutions (Capped Calls). We used $10.2 million of the net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes to purchase the Capped Calls and $56.2 million of the net proceeds to repurchase $50.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes. The remaining net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations related to the 2022 and 2025 Convertible Notes as of December 31, 2021 and the expected timing of those payments:
(1) Our convertible senior notes are due in April 2022 and November 2025. The balances include accrued and unpaid interest as of December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 4 Financing arrangements, for additional discussion regarding our 2022 and 2025 Notes.
Other Contractual Commitments
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into multi-year agreements to purchase sponsorships with event organizers, resorts and athletes as part of our marketing efforts; software licenses related to our financial and IT systems; operating lease arrangements to support our operations in the US and international locations; and various other contractual commitments. The following table summarizes our other contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the expected timing of those payments:
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(1) Operating lease obligations exclude cash inflows from existing contractual facility subleases thru the end of 2026 as of December 31, 2021.
See Note 9 Commitments, contingencies and guarantees, for a discussion regarding facility leases and other contractual commitments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity
Based on our most current projections, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and amounts available under our credit facility, will be sufficient to address our working capital needs, capital expenditures, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
•The $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes matures on April 15, 2022, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of Class A common stock subject to certain conditions. We intend to deliver cash up to the principal amount of the 2022 Notes.
•We expect that operating expenses and inventory purchases will constitute a material use of our cash balances. We intend to continue to manage our operating activities in line with our existing cash and available financial resources.
•In January 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement which provides for a revolving credit facility under which we may borrow up to an aggregate amount of $50.0 million. Our credit facility will terminate and any outstanding borrowings become due and payable on the earlier of (i) January 2024 and (ii) unless we have cash in a specified deposit account in an amount equal to or greater than the amount required to repay our convertible notes due April 2022, 91 days prior to the maturity date of such convertible notes. No borrowings have been made from the credit facility to date. (See Note 4 Financing arrangements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.)
In the future, we may require additional financing to respond to business opportunities, challenges or unforeseen circumstances. If we are unable to obtain adequate debt or equity financing when we require it or on terms acceptable to us, especially in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to grow or support our business, repay debt and respond to business challenges could be significantly limited. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, the success of our operations and the global economic outlook, in each case, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
In January 2022, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of its Class A common stock. Share repurchases under the program may be made from time-to-time through open market purchases, block trades or otherwise in compliance with all federal and state securities laws and state corporate law and in accordance with the single broker, timing, price and volume guidelines set forth in Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as such guidelines may be modified by the SEC from time to time. We expect to fund repurchases through cash generated from operations. This stock repurchase program has no time limit and may be modified, suspended, or discontinued at any time.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities of $229.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to net income of $371.2 million, net cash inflows from changes in our working capital of $61.3 million, net cash inflows from other non-cash expenses of $70.2 million, partially offset by a non-cash tax benefit of $273.5 million. The non-cash tax benefit of $273.5 million was primarily related to the release of tax valuation allowances against deferred tax assets that we consider is more likely than not to be realized against future income. Working capital changes during the year ended December 31, 2021, of $61.3 million was the result of a decrease in inventory of $11.5 million, an increase in accounts payable and other liabilities of $56.3 million, and an increase in deferred revenue of $19.2 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $8.1 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $17.5 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities of $143.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily attributable to purchases of marketable securities of $146.5 million and net purchases of property and equipment of $5.5 million, partially offset by maturities of marketable securities of $8.3 million.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash used in financing activities of $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily attributable to $17.4 million in tax payments for net restricted stock unit (RSU) settlements, partially offset by $7.5 million received from stock purchases made through our employee stock purchase plan and employee stock option exercises.
Indemnifications
We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and executive officers which require us to indemnify our directors and executive officers against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service. In addition, in the normal course of business, we enter into agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties, and provide for general indemnification. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future, but have not yet been made. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount under these indemnification agreements due to our limited history with indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we have not paid any claims, nor has it been required to defend any action related to its indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Our senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our board of directors.
Revenue recognition
We derive substantially all of our revenue from the sale of cameras, mounts, accessories, subscriptions and services, and the related implied post contract support to customers. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The transaction price we expect to be entitled to is primarily comprised of product revenue, net of returns and variable consideration, which includes sales incentives provided to customers.
For most of our revenue, revenue is recognized at the time the product is delivered and when collection is considered probable. For the Company’s subscription services, revenue is recognized on a ratable basis over the subscription term, with payments received in advance of services being rendered recorded in deferred revenue. For customers who purchase products directly from GoPro.com, we retain a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit, which are accounted for as fulfillment costs.
Our camera sales contain multiple performance obligations that can include the following four separate obligations: a) a camera hardware component (which may be bundled with hardware accessories) and the embedded firmware essential to the functionality of the camera component delivered at the time of sale, b) the implicit right to our downloadable free apps and software solutions, c) the implied right for the customer to receive post contract support after the initial sale (PCS), and d) a subscription service. PCS includes the right to receive, on a when and if available basis, future unspecified firmware upgrades and features as well as bug fixes, and email, chat and telephone support. Judgment is required to properly identify the units of accounting for our camera sales arrangements.
For our camera sale arrangements with multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell our products, subscriptions, and services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, then we estimate the standalone selling prices considering market conditions and entity-specific factors. For example, the standalone selling price for PCS is determined based on a cost-plus approach, which incorporates the level of support provided to customers, estimated costs to provide our support, and the amount of time and cost that is allocated to our efforts to develop the undelivered elements. While changes in the allocation of the transaction price among the performance obligations will not affect the amount of total revenue ultimately recognized for a particular camera sales arrangement, any significant change in these allocations could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Our standard terms and conditions for non-web based sales do not allow for product returns other than under warranty. However, we grant limited rights to return product for certain large retailers. Estimates of expected future product returns are recognized at the time of sale based on analyses of historical return trends by customer class and other factors. An estimated return liability along with a right to recover assets are recorded for future product returns. Return trends are influenced by product life cycles, new product introductions, market acceptance of products, product sell-through, the type of customer, seasonality and other factors. Return rates may fluctuate over time, but are sufficiently predictable to allow us to estimate expected future product returns. Actual returns in any future period could differ from our estimates, which could impact the revenue that we report.
We provide our customers with sales incentives through various programs, including cooperative advertising, marketing development funds and other incentives. Sales incentives are considered to be variable consideration, which we estimate and record as a reduction to revenue at the date of sale. Sales incentives are influenced by historical experience, product sell-through and other factors. Actual sales incentives and their impact on reported revenue could differ from our estimates.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Inventory valuation
Inventory consists of finished goods and component parts, and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis. Our inventory balances were $86.4 million and $97.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our assessment of market value requires the use of estimates regarding the net realizable value of our inventory balances, including an assessment of excess or obsolete inventory. We determine excess or obsolete inventory based on multiple factors, including market conditions, an estimate of the future demand for our products within a specified time horizon, generally 12 months, product life cycle status, product development plans and current sales levels.
Warranty
We establish a liability for estimated product warranty costs at the time product revenue is recognized. We generally provide a 12-month warranty coverage on all of our products except in the European Union where we provide a 24-month warranty. The Company also offers extended warranty programs for a fee. Our estimate of costs to service our warranty obligations are based on historical experience of repair and replacement of the associated products and expectations of future conditions. The warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates and the related use of materials, labor costs and freight incurred in correcting any product failure. Should actual product failure rates, use of materials or other costs differ from our estimates, additional warranty liabilities could be required, which could materially affect our results of operations.
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and multiple foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the United States federal statutory rate, primarily due to changes in our valuation allowance, the effect of non-United States operations, deductible and non-deductible stock-based compensation expense, state taxes, federal and state research and development tax credits and other adjustments. Our effective tax rate was negative 312.0%, negative 7.8% and positive 23.2% in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The calculation of our provision for income taxes involves the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments while taking into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of future tax audits. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Our income tax rate is primarily affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings.
Each quarter we assess the recoverability of our existing deferred tax assets under ASC Topic 740. We assess available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to use our existing deferred tax assets. In the assessment for the period ended September 30, 2021, we concluded it was more likely than not that our deferred tax assets related to future United States federal and state income taxes will be realizable. Therefore, in 2021 the United States federal and state valuation allowances were released, which resulted in a $284.6 million non-cash net benefit to earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our Company’s foreign deferred tax assets in each jurisdiction are supported by taxable income or in the case of acquired companies, by the future reversal of deferred tax liabilities. It is more likely than not that our Company’s foreign deferred tax assets will be realized and thus, a valuation allowance is not required on its foreign deferred tax assets. We will continue to assess the realizability of the deferred tax assets in each of the applicable jurisdictions going forward.
Uncertain tax positions. We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world and a number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. We have established reserves to address potential exposures related to tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position and we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different, we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected if actual earnings are different than our estimates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, outcomes resulting from income tax examinations, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets. We perform an annual assessment of our goodwill during the fourth quarter of each calendar year or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist, such as an adverse change in business climate or a decline in the overall industry demand, that would indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit would be less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we measure the amount of impairment as the amount the carrying value of our single reporting entity exceeds the fair value. As of December 31, 2021, we determined that no impairment of the carrying value of goodwill was required.
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, intangible assets subject to amortization and right-of-use assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount to the estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If it is determined that an asset group is not recoverable, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value. We recorded a $12.5 million right-of-use asset impairment in 2020 primarily related to our headquarters campus. We used the following significant assumptions to determine the impairment charge: future sublease rental rates, future sublease market conditions and a discount rate based on the weighted-average cost of capital.
Convertible Senior Notes
We account for our convertible senior notes in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. As our 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes have a net settlement feature and may be settled wholly or partially in cash upon conversion, we are required to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument. The carrying amount of the liability component of the instrument is determined by estimating the fair value of a similar liability without the conversion option using income and market based approaches. For the income-based approach, we use a convertible bond pricing model that includes several assumptions such as volatility and the risk-free rate. For the market-based approach, we evaluate issuances of convertible debt securities by other companies at the time of issuance. The amount of the equity component is then calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the instrument. The difference between the principal amount and the liability component represents a debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes using an effective interest rate method. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the issuance costs related to the 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes, the allocation of issuance costs incurred between the liability and equity components were based on their relative values. Similarly, in accordance with ASC 470-20, transactions involving contemporaneous exchanges of cash between the same debtor and creditor in connection with the issuance of a new debt obligation and satisfaction of an existing debt obligation by the debtor, such as the contemporaneous 2022 Notes partial repurchase and issuance of the 2025 Notes, should be evaluated as a modification or an exchange transaction depending on whether the exchange is determined to have substantially different terms. The 2022 Notes partial repurchase and issuance of the 2025 Notes were deemed to have substantially different terms due to the significant difference between the value of the conversion option immediately prior to and after the exchange, and consequently, we accounted for the 2022 Notes partial repurchase as a debt extinguishment. The total consideration for the 2022 Notes partial repurchase was separated into liability and equity components by estimating the fair value of a similar liability without a conversion option and assigning the residual value to the equity component. The effective interest rate used to estimate the fair value of the liability component of the 2022 Notes partial repurchase is based on the income approach used to determine the effective interest rate of the 2025 Notes, adjusted for the remaining term of the 2022 Notes. The gain or loss on extinguishment of the debt is subsequently determined by comparing repurchase consideration allocated to the liability component to the sum of the carrying value of the liability component, net of the proportionate amounts of unamortized debt discount and remaining unamortized debt issuance costs.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Recent Accounting Pronouncements in Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report net income (loss) and diluted net income (loss) per share in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and on a non-GAAP basis. Additionally, we report non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA. We use non-GAAP financial measures to help us understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operational plans. Our management uses, and believes that investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating results. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as an alternative to, the measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, and are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. We believe that these non-GAAP measures, when read in conjunction with our GAAP financials, provide useful information to investors by facilitating:
•the comparability of our on-going operating results over the periods presented;
•the ability to identify trends in our underlying business; and
•the comparison of our operating results against analyst financial models and operating results of other public companies that supplement their GAAP results with non-GAAP financial measures.
These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that reduce cash available to us;
•adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization and, although these are non-cash charges, the property and equipment being depreciated and amortized often will have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements;
•adjusted EBITDA excludes the amortization of point of purchase (POP) display assets because it is a non-cash charge, and is treated similarly to depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of acquired intangible assets;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude restructuring and other related costs which primarily include severance-related costs, stock-based compensation expenses, facilities consolidation charges recorded in connection with restructuring actions announced in the fourth quarter of 2016, first quarter of 2017, first quarter of 2018 and second quarter of 2020, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, and the related ongoing operating lease cost of those facilities recorded under ASC 842, Leases. These expenses do not reflect expected future operating expenses and do not contribute to a meaningful evaluation of current operating performance or comparisons to the operating performance in other periods;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards granted primarily to our workforce. We exclude stock-based compensation expense because we believe that the non-GAAP financial measures excluding this item provide meaningful supplemental information regarding operational performance. In particular, we note that companies calculate stock-based compensation expense for the variety of award types that they employ using different valuation methodologies and subjective assumptions. These non-cash charges are not factored into our internal evaluation of net income (loss) as we believe their inclusion would hinder our ability to assess core operational performance;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude the loss on extinguishment of debt because it is not reflective of ongoing operating results in the period, and such losses vary in the frequency and amount;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) excludes acquisition-related costs including the amortization of acquired intangible assets (primarily consisting of acquired technology), the impairment of acquired intangible assets (if applicable), as well as third-party transaction costs incurred for legal and other professional services. These costs are not factored into our evaluation of potential acquisitions, or of our performance after completion of
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
the acquisitions, because these costs are not related to our core operating performance or reflective of ongoing operating results in the period, and the frequency and amount of such costs vary significantly based on the timing and magnitude of our acquisition transactions and the maturities of the businesses being acquired. Although we exclude the amortization of acquired intangible assets from our non-GAAP net income (loss), management believes that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) excludes non-cash interest expense. In connection with the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes in April 2017 and November 2020, we are required to recognize non-cash interest expense, such as the amortization of debt discounts, in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance for convertible debt that may be settled in cash;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) includes income tax adjustments. We utilize a cash-based non-GAAP tax expense approach (based upon expected annual cash payments for income taxes) for evaluating operating performance as well as for planning and forecasting purposes. This non-GAAP tax approach eliminates the effects of period specific items, which can vary in size and frequency and does not necessarily reflect our long-term operations. Historically, we computed a non-GAAP tax rate based on non-GAAP pre-tax income on a quarterly basis, which considered the income tax effects of the adjustments above; and
•other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA:
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) to non-GAAP net income (loss):