ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITIPON AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS FOR GREENIDGE
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our
consolidated financial statements and related notes included herein. Among other things, those financial statements include more
detailed information regarding the basis of presentation for the following information. The financial statements have been
prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are presented in U.S. dollars. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under "Item 1A - Risk Factors," "Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. You should carefully review the sections titled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation Segment
We own cryptocurrency datacenter operations in the Town of Torrey, New York and in Spartanburg, South Carolina. Our operation in the Town of Torrey, New York is a vertically integrated cryptocurrency datacenter and power generation facility with an approximately 106 MW natural gas power generation facility that has undergone a remarkable transformation in recent years. We generate all the power we require for our cryptocurrency datacenter operations in the New York facility, where we enjoy low power costs due to our access to the Millennium Pipeline price hub, which provides relatively low market rates for natural gas. At our facility in Spartanburg, South Carolina, we purchase power from a supplier of approximately 60% zero-carbon sourced energy. We believe our competitive advantages include low fixed costs, an efficient mining fleet and in-house operational expertise. We are currently mining bitcoin and contributing to the security and transactability of the bitcoin ecosystem while concurrently supplying power to assist in meeting the power needs of homes and businesses in the New York region.
As of December 31, 2021, we powered approximately 51 MW of mining capacity capable of producing an estimated aggregate hash rate of 1.4 EH/s at our facilities, substantially all of which is dedicated to bitcoin mining. Our Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation segment generates revenue i) through the exchange of bitcoins earned by ASICs as rewards and transaction fees for U.S. dollars and, to a much lesser extent, through revenue earned from third parties for hosting ASICs owned by third parties and providing operations, maintenance and other blockchain related services to third parties and ii) through the sale of electricity generated by our power plant, and not consumed in cryptocurrency datacenter operations, to New York State’s power grid at prices set on a daily basis through the NYISO wholesale market. We opportunistically increase or decrease the total amount of electricity sold by the power plant based on prevailing prices in the wholesale electricity market.
We believe that our behind-the-meter power generation capability provides a stable, cost-effective source of power for cryptocurrency datacenter activities. Our behind-the-meter power generation capability provides us with stable delivery due to the absence of any contract negotiation risk with third-party power suppliers, the absence of transmission and distribution cost risk and the firm delivery of gas for our New York facility via our captive pipeline. Notwithstanding the structural stability of our behind-the-meter capabilities, we do however procure natural gas at our New York facility through a third-party energy manager which schedules delivery of our
natural gas needs from the wholesale market which is subject to price volatility. We procure the majority of our gas at spot prices and enter into fixed price forward contracts from time to time for the purchase of a portion of anticipated natural gas purchases based on prevailing market conditions to partially mitigate the financial impacts of natural gas price volatility. These forward contracts qualify for the normal purchases and sales exception under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, as it is probable that these contracts will result in physical delivery.
Volatility in the natural gas market may impact our results of operations and financial performance. While natural gas prices decreased in 2020, partially due to COVID-19 related demand reduction, prices have been on an upward trajectory since June of 2021 and are expected to continue rising during 2022 due to low inventory levels. Volatility in the natural gas market may be caused by disruption in the delivery of fuel, including disruptions as a result of weather, transportation difficulties, global demand and supply dynamics, labor relations, environmental regulations or the financial viability of fuel suppliers. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Risks Related to our Power Generation Operations.” We procure the majority of our natural gas supply at our New York facility from the Millennium Pipeline price hub, which provides relatively low market rates for natural gas.
Support Services Segment
Our Support Services segment provides solutions and technical programs to customers delivered by home-based employees. The Support Services segment provides customer service, sales support, and technical support primarily to large corporations, businesses and professional services organizations. The Support Services segment also earns revenues for end-user software products provided through direct customer downloads and sale via partners. The Support Services segment operates primarily in the United States, but has international operations that include staff providing support services.
Expansion Opportunities
We have an active development pipeline of potential new locations we believe are suitable to develop additional cryptocurrency datacenters. We intend to use our significant power plant and bitcoin technical know-how to achieve at least 500 MW of mining capacity by 2025 across multiple locations in North America. We expect to achieve this through a combination of the available capacity of our existing sites in New York and South Carolina and through additional capacity at future expansion locations. In September 2021, we entered into exclusive agreements that expire in 2022 regarding the potential construction of new cryptocurrency data centers in Texas that includes at least six sites in the pipeline that we and the developer have identified as potential locations for new data centers. In total, these sites have over 2,000 MW of electrical capacity and include several locations surrounded by abundant wind and solar power generation. Furthermore, in October 2021, we entered into an agreement giving us an exclusive right of first refusal at multiple power generation sites comprising over 1,000 MW of power generation assets in the ERCOT market. The agreement gives us the exclusive right of first refusal to develop cryptocurrency datacenters at any current or future power generation sites controlled by the counterparty in the ERCOT market until January 2023.
Merger
On September 14, 2021, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, by and among Greenidge, Support.com and Merger Sub. As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Support.com, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased and Support.com survived as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Greenidge. At the effective time of the Merger, we issued 2,998,261 shares of class A common stock in exchange for all shares of common stock, par value $0.0001, of Support.com and all outstanding stock option and restricted stock units of Support.com. Support.com’s results of operations and balance sheet have been consolidated effective with the Merger. Refer to Note 3, Merger with Support.com, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of the Merger.
Miner Fleet Growth
We began mining bitcoin in 2019 with the construction of a pilot data center to operate approximately 1 MW of bitcoin mining capacity located at our power generation facility in the Town of Torrey, New York. We launched a commercial datacenter for bitcoin mining and blockchain services in January 2020, and as of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 6,900 miners deployed on our site capable of producing an estimated aggregate hash rate capacity of approximately 0.4 exahash per second (“EH/s”). Although the number of miners deployed provides a sense of scale of cryptocurrency datacenter operations as compared to our peers, management believes that hash rate, or the number of hashes a miner can perform in each second, typically expressed in EH/s or terahash per second (“TH/s”) and used as a measure of computational power or mining capacity used to mine and process transactions on a blockchain such as bitcoin, provides a more comparable measure of our fleet’s ability to process cryptocurrency transactions as compared to other bitcoin datacenter operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we deployed approximately 10,300 additional miners comprised primarily of Bitmain S19 and S19 Pro Bitmain Antminers, as well as MicroBT M30 and M31 Whatsminers, bringing our total miners to approximately 17,300, capable of producing an estimated aggregate hash rate of 1.4 EH/s and consuming power capacity of approximately 51MW. We have ordered additional miners that will bring our committed total capacity to approximately 49,000 miners and 4.7 EH/s, including our launch order for Bitmain’s new Antminer S19 XP. These new advanced miners have substantially greater hash rate capacities and use electric power more efficiently than our existing miner fleet. See “Risk Factors- Risk Related to Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Industry-Bitcoin miners and other necessary hardware are subject to malfunction, technological obsolescence, the global supply chain and difficulty and cost in obtaining new hardware.”
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
a)Adjusted Amounts and Other Financial Data are non-GAAP performance measures. A reconciliation of reported amounts to adjusted amounts can be found in the "Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations" section of this management discussion and analysis ("MD&A").
Revenue
The components of revenue, expressed as a percentage of total revenue were:
Total revenue increased $87.2 million, or 433.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was driven by the Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation segment, specifically cryptocurrency mining, due to the significant expansion of our miner fleet over the last year. The Merger increased the consolidated revenue by $10.0 million during 2021. Refer to the “Segment Discussion” of this MD&A for a more detailed discussion of revenues from the Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation segment and the Support Services segment. Refer to Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for concentrations of revenue.
Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization)
Total cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, increased 168.4% to $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the significant increase in our cryptocurrency mining fleet requiring an increase in the use of MWh for cryptocurrency mining. Additionally, the cost of revenue per MWh (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased significantly for both cryptocurrency datacenter and power and capacity primarily due to a significant increase in the gas cost per dekatherm, which increased 97% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by higher demand caused by more extreme weather during 2021 as compared to the same periods in 2020 that the plant was online and the New York stay-at-home regulations during 2020, which reduced the demand for power. The Merger accounted for $5.4 million, or 43.1%, of the increase in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Total cost of revenue as a percentage of total revenue declined significantly due primarily to the change in mix of revenue. Cryptocurrency datacenter operations generate significantly higher revenue per MWh than power and capacity.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $21.6 million, or 387.3%, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to costs related to operating costs as a public company and costs of corporate infrastructure to support the our growth, including non-cash stock compensation of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to none for the year ended December 31, 2020, $3.3 million of higher professional fees (primarily legal and accounting fees), $2.0 million of higher insurance costs, $2.0 million of higher operating taxes and $1.9 million higher compensation related costs. Additionally, we incurred $1.5 million of higher expansion costs in 2021 and the Merger added $3.4 million, or 60.1%, of the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Merger and other costs
Merger and other costs of $32.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, included approximately $28.5 million of costs associated with the Merger and approximately $3.7 million of costs associated with becoming a publicly traded company. The Merger-related costs included $26.6 million of noncash costs associated with issuance of equity instruments, whose issuance was contingent upon the successful completion of the Merger.
Goodwill impairment charge
In connection with the Support.com all-stock Merger in September 2021, we recorded goodwill of $45.4 million. At December 31, 2021,Greenidge performed its annual goodwill impairment test which concluded that the fair value of the Support Services reporting unit was less than its carrying value (including goodwill), and that a portion of the Company’s goodwill was impaired. Accordingly, the Company recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $42.3 million. Refer to Note 3, Merger with Support.com, and Note 7, Goodwill, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $4.3 million, or 94.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the purchase and deployment of additional miners during 2020 and 2021.
Additionally, the Merger increased depreciation and amortization by $0.4 million, or 8.3%, for the years ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income (Loss) from operations
We reported loss from operations of $37.1 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The loss from operations during the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by the $42.3 million noncash goodwill impairment charge and $32.2 million of Merger-related and other costs, $26.6 million of which were noncash fees contingent upon the completion of the Merger.
Adjusted income from operations was $39.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to an adjusted loss from operations of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The significant improvement in adjusted operating income is primarily attributable to an increase in bitcoin mining hash rate as well as operating leverage. Adjusted income from operations is a non-GAAP performance measure. A reconciliation of reported amounts to adjusted amounts can be found in the “Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations” section of this MD&A.
Other expense, net
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Other expense, net increased $6.3 million to $6.9 million primarily due to increased interest expense associated with the incurrence of debt to finance the expansion of the mining fleet, as well as the impact of the remeasurement of an environmental liability associated with a landfill at our New York facility, which operated a coal-fired generator prior to being converted to a natural gas power generation facility.
Provision for income taxes
Prior to the formation of Greenidge on January 27, 2021, GGH was treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes; therefore, no provision for Federal or State taxes has been made for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized a provision for income taxes of $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 with an effective tax rate of (0.9)%. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily due to the recognition of the goodwill impairment charge, for which there was no tax benefit, and other permanent book-tax differences.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors described above, net loss increased to $44.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On an adjusted basis, excluding the after-tax impact of the impairment of goodwill, Merger-related costs, costs associated with becoming a public company, expansions costs and the remeasurement of the environmental liability, adjusted net income during the year ended December 31, 2021 would have been $26.8 million as compared to an adjusted net loss of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted net income (loss) is a non- GAAP performance measure. A reconciliation of reported amounts to adjusted amounts can be found in the “Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations” section of this MD&A.
Segment Discussion
The following summary of revenue and segment adjusted EBITDA provides a basis for the discussion that follows. We evaluate the performance of our reportable segments based on Adjusted EBITDA, which excludes items not indicative of ongoing business trends. The reported amounts in the table below are from our Consolidated Statements of Operations in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation Segment
The following table provides a summary of key metrics associated with the Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation segment.
Cryptocurrency datacenter revenue
For our cryptocurrency datacenter revenue, we generate electricity at our Town of Torrey, New York facility from our power plant and use that electricity to power ASIC miners, generating bitcoin which we then exchange for U.S. dollars or hold in our wallet. Our cryptocurrency datacenter revenue increased by $74.9 million, or 575.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to our increased mining fleet resulting in a 121.7% increase in the average hash rate during year ended December 31, 2021. We produced 1,866 bitcoins during the year ended December 31, 2021, which increased by 720 bitcoins when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the increased average hash rate, partially offset by a 22.5% increased average mining difficulty and the halving event that occurred in May 2020 and reduced the block reward from 12.5 bitcoin per block to 6.25 bitcoin per block. The increased number of bitcoins mined along with the significantly higher average bitcoin price in 2021 resulted in the significant growth in cryptocurrency datacenter revenue.
Power and capacity revenue
Power and capacity revenue at our Town of Torrey, New York facility is earned when we sell capacity and energy and ancillary services to the wholesale power grid managed by the NYISO. Through these sales, we earn revenue in three streams, including: (1) power revenue received based on the hourly price of power, (2) capacity revenue for committing to sell power to the NYISO when dispatched and (3) other ancillary service revenue received as compensation for the provision of operating reserves. Our power and capacity revenue increased 32.8% to $9.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, higher prices, signified by the higher power and capacity revenue per MWh, were offset by a decline in volume, signified by the decrease in power and capacity MWh. The increase in prices were driven by higher demand caused by more extreme weather during 2021 as compared to the same periods in 2020 that the plant was online and the New York stay-at-home regulations during 2020, which reduced the demand for power. We do not anticipate further COVID-19 impacts in the future unless additional COVID-19 outbreaks require further statewide shutdowns.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Segment adjusted EBITDA for the Cryptocurrency Datacenter and Power Generation segment increased to $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by the significant increase in cryptocurrency datacenter operations due to the expansion of our mining fleet, which significantly changed the revenue mix of the segment during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year period. The revenue from cryptocurrency datacenters
has resulted in higher adjusted EBITDA margins than power and capacity revenue, as cryptocurrency mining generates higher revenue per MWh.
Cryptocurrency datacenter revenue per MWh and power and capacity revenue per MWh are used by management to consider the extent to which it will generate electricity to either mine cryptocurrency or sell power to the New York wholesale power market. Cost of revenue (excluding depreciation and amortization) per MWh represents a measure of the cost of natural gas, emissions credits, payroll and benefits and other direct production costs associated with the MWhs produced to generate the respective revenue category for each MWh utilized.
Depreciation and amortization costs are excluded from the cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) per MWh metric; therefore, not all cost of revenues for cryptocurrency datacenter and power and capacity are fully reflected. To the extent any other bitcoin miners are public or may go public, the cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) per MWh metric may not be comparable because some competitors may include depreciation in their cost of revenue figures.
Support Services Segment
We acquired Support.com, which constitutes the Support Services segment as of close of business on September 14, 2021. As such, there was less than four months of operations included in our consolidated results in 2021, resulting in Support Services revenue of $10.0 million and segment adjusted EBITDA of $1.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021.
In October 2021, Support.com agreed with a major customer to terminate its contract to provide support services effective in the first quarter of 2022. This major customer represented approximately 24% and 29% of the revenues of the Support.com business for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, which includes periods prior to the Merger, which were not included in our consolidated results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We believe the following accounting policies are most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating this management discussion and analysis:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
As a result of the merger with Support.com, we recorded $45.4 million of goodwill and $3.8 million of intangible assets based on estimates and assumptions at the date of acquisition. Acquisitions are accounted for using the acquisition method which requires allocation of the purchase price to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on estimated fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired is recorded as goodwill.
For the period immediately prior to the effective date of the Merger, we were a private company, and Support.com’s stock price fluctuated significantly based on factors not representative of the value of its underlying operations; therefore, we used the average of Greenidge's closing stock price for the first ten days of trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market ($31.71 per share) to measure the value of the consideration paid to Support.com shareholders. Refer to Note 3, Merger with Support.com, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We are required to perform a goodwill impairment test annually, which occurs in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred. The applicable guidance allows an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than carrying value. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than carrying value then the company will estimate and compare the fair value of its reporting units to their carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value of goodwill is not recoverable, an impairment is recognized for the difference. The test concluded that the fair value of the Support Services reporting unit was less than its carrying value (including goodwill), and that a portion of our goodwill was impaired. Accordingly, the Company recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $42.3 million in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, in the caption, Goodwill impairment charge. In making this determination, we updated our discounted cash flow analysis, including updated business projections and weighted average cost of capital factors, and considered other valuation methodologies such as comparisons with similar companies and industry multiples. Refer to Note 7, Goodwill, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Prior to completing the annual goodwill impairment test, we tested the recoverability of definite-lived intangible assets and concluded that they were not impaired
Accounts Receivable
We provide credit in the normal course of business to our power customer, the NYISO, and to customers of our Support Services segment. We perform periodic credit evaluations of our customer’s financial condition and generally do not require collateral. The NYISO makes payments, depending on the type of revenue, within seven days of usage or seven days of month end. The customers of the Support Services segment generally are invoiced monthly and make payments within 30 days of the invoice. There are currently no accounts receivable associated with cryptocurrency datacenter revenues.
Digital Assets
Digital assets, primarily consisting of bitcoin, are included in current assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Digital assets are classified as indefinite-lived intangible assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, and are accounted for in connection with our revenue recognition policy disclosed below. Cryptocurrencies held are accounted for as intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment annually, or more frequently, when events or changes in circumstances occur indicating that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived asset is impaired. Events or circumstances that may trigger an impairment assessment other than annually include but are not limited to material changes in the regulatory environment, potential technological changes in digital currencies, and prolonged or material changes in the price of bitcoin below the carrying cost of the asset. Upon determining an impairment exists, the amount of the impairment is determined as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is measured using the quoted price of the cryptocurrency at the time its fair value is being measured. In testing for impairment, we have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. If it is determined that it is not more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative impairment test is not necessary. If we conclude otherwise, we are required to perform a quantitative impairment test. To the extent an impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment losses is not permitted. We have assessed these digital assets and determined no impairment existed as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our digital assets consisted of approximately 29.0 bitcoins compared to 26.1 bitcoins as of December 31, 2020.
Digital assets awarded to us through our mining activities are included within the operating activities in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. We account for our gains or losses in accordance with the specific identification method of accounting. Gains and losses from the sales of digital assets are recorded in other expense, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
While management uses available information to evaluate and recognize impairment losses on digital assets, reductions in the carrying amounts may be necessary based on the changes in the underlying value of bitcoin.
Emissions Expense and Credits
We generate carbon dioxide emissions in conjunction with our energy producing activities. As a result, we incur emissions expense and are required to purchase emission credits, which are valued at cost, to offset the liability.
We participate in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (“RGGI”), which requires, by law, that we remit credits to offset 50% of our annual emission expense in the following year, for each of the years in the three-year control period (January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2023) with final settlement required subsequent to the three-year control period. We recognize expense on a per ton basis, where one ton is equal to one RGGI credit. After the control period ends, we will remit credits to extinguish the remaining emission expense liability. We recognize expense on a per ton basis, where one ton is equal to one RGGI credit.
The RGGI credits are recorded on a first in, first out basis.
Environmental and Asset Retirement Obligations
We recognized an environmental liability relating to the landfill we own and operate on our property in the Town of Torrey, New York. As required by the NYSDEC, landfills are required to fund a trust or provide an equivalent financial commitment to cover expenses for approximately 30 years of estimated expenses to maintain the landfill after a landfill has ceased operations. As of December 31, 2021, the landfill owned by us is a fully permitted, operational landfill and acts as a leachate treatment facility. A report
was completed by a third-party engineering firm to provide environmental compliance and estimate combined closure and post-closure costs. In accordance with ASC 410-30, Environmental Obligations, we have recorded an environmental liability of $8.6 million and $4.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Estimates are based on various assumptions including, but not limited to, closure and post-closure cost estimates, timing of expenditures, escalation factors, and requirements of granted permits. Additional adjustments to the environment liability may occur periodically due to potential changes in estimates and assumptions.
Asset retirement obligations are legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. The obligations represent the present value of the estimated costs for an asset’s future retirement discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate and are recorded in the period in which the liability is incurred. The asset retirement obligation liability recognized by us relates to an obligation associated with coal combustion residuals associated with the closure of a coal ash pond located on our property in the Town of Torrey, New York as coal combustion residuals are subject to federal and state regulations. In accordance with federal law and ASC 410-20, Asset Retirement Obligations, we recorded an asset retirement obligation of $2.7 million and $2.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Estimates are based on various assumptions including, but not limited to, closure and post-closure cost estimates, timing of expenditures, escalation factors, discount rates and methods for complying with coal combustion residuals regulations. Additional adjustments to the asset retirement obligations may occur periodically due to potential changes in estimates and assumptions.
Cryptocurrency Datacenter Revenue
We enter into digital asset mining pools by executing contracts with the mining pool operators to provide computing power to the mining pool. The contracts are terminable at any time by either party and our enforceable right to compensation only begins when we provide computing power to the mining pool operator. In exchange for providing computing power, we are entitled to a theoretical fractional share of the cryptocurrency award the mining pool operator receives less digital asset transaction fees to the mining pool operator. Revenue is measured as the value of the fractional share of the cryptocurrency award received from the pool operator, which has been reduced by the transaction fee retained by the pool operator, for our pro rata contribution of computing power to the mining pool operator for the successful solution of the current algorithm.
Providing computing power in digital asset transaction verification services is an output of our ordinary activities. The provision of providing such computing power is the only performance obligation in our contracts with mining pool operators. The transaction consideration we receive, if any, is noncash consideration, which we measure at fair value on the date received, which is not materially different than the fair value at the contract inception or the time we have earned the award from the pools. The consideration is all variable. Because it is not probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur, the consideration is constrained until the mining pool operator successfully places a block (by being the first to solve an algorithm) and we receive confirmation of the consideration we will receive, at which time revenue is recognized.
Pool fees paid by miners to pooling operators are based on a fixed percentage of the theoretical bitcoin block reward and network transaction fees received by miners. Pooling fees are netted against daily bitcoin payouts. We do not expect any material future changes in pool fee percentages paid to pooling operators, however as pools become more competitive, these fees may trend lower over time.
Fair value of the cryptocurrency award received is determined using the quoted price on our primary exchange of the related cryptocurrency at the time of receipt.
There is currently no specific definitive guidance under GAAP or alternative accounting framework for the accounting for cryptocurrencies recognized as revenue or held, and management has exercised significant judgment in determining the appropriate accounting treatment. In the event authoritative guidance is enacted by the FASB, we may be required to change our policies, which could have an effect on our consolidated financial position and results of operations. See “Risk Factors-Risks related to Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Industry-There has been limited precedent set for financial accounting of digital assets and so it is unclear how we will be required to account for digital asset transactions.”
Power and Capacity Revenue
We recognize power revenue at a point in time, when the electricity is delivered to the NYISO and our performance obligation is met. We recognize revenue on capacity agreements over the life of the contract as our series of performance obligations are met as capacity to provide power is maintained.
Sales tax, value-added tax, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Incidental contract costs that are not material in the context of the delivery of goods and services are recognized as expense. There is no significant financing component in these transactions.
Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations
The following non-GAAP measures are intended to supplement investors’ understanding of our financial information by providing measures which investors, financial analysts and management use to help evaluate our operating performance. Items which we do not believe to be indicative of ongoing business trends are excluded from these calculations so that investors can better evaluate and analyze historical and future business trends on a consistent basis. Definitions of these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similar definitions used by other companies. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation and other special items determined by management, including, but not limited to costs associated with the Merger, costs of becoming a public company (which included the costs of corporate reorganization from an LLC, public registration of shares and associated costs), business expansion costs, remeasurement adjustments for certain financial liabilities (including environmental liabilities), and impairment charges as they are not indicative of business operations. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or
non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $82.6 million and short term investments of $0.5 million. To date, we have primarily relied on debt and equity financing to fund our operations, including meeting ongoing working capital needs, and to execute on the initial stages of our business plan.
We entered into two equity financing transactions during 2021. First, we completed a private placement offering in January 2021 of 1,620,000 shares of series A preferred stock, at a price per share of $25.00, to certain individuals and investors for an aggregate amount of $40.5 million. In addition to this offering, in September 2021, we entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement (the "Purchase Agreement"), pursuant to which we have the right to sell to B. Riley Principal Capital, LLC (the "Investor") up to $500 million of shares of class A common stock, subject to certain limitations, from time to time during the term of the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement is described further below. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we sold 2,132,500 shares of our class A common stock to the Investor for proceeds of $47.4 million, net of discounts and issuance costs. Since December 31, 2021 and through March 31, 2022, we sold an additional 415,000 shares of class A common stock to the Investor for proceeds of $3.9 million, net of discounts. There can be no assurance that we will be able to sell shares of class A common stock on favorable terms, or at all.
Additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed registered public offerings of $72.2 million, in the aggregate, of our 8.50% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Bonds”). The Bonds are senior unsecured obligations and rank equal in right of payment with our existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness. The Company netted proceeds, after discounts, commissions, and debt issuance costs of approximately $66.9 million. We have also obtained financing through equipment finance and security agreements that financed the purchase of miners that have been delivered. These notes payable carry annual interest rates between 15% and 17%, and are repaid by way of blended payments of interest and principal, as well as an additional risk premium payment, with the final payment generally due 18 months from delivery date.
In addition to the financings noted above, on September 14, 2021, we completed the Merger, through the issuance of class A common stock, which included cash and cash equivalents of $27.1 million and short term investments of $0.5 million.
In March 2022, we entered into two additional financing arrangements: a $26.5 million Bridge Promissory Note (the “Bridge Promissory Note”) and an $81.0 million Master Equipment Financing Agreement (the “NYDIG Financing Agreement”) with NYDIG ABL LLC that was partially funded under loan schedules on March 21, 2022. The Bridge Promissory Note bears interest at a rate of 6% per annum and matures on July 20, 2022, subject to up to five 30-day extensions that may be elected by the Company provided there is no Event of Default, as defined in the agreement. The loan schedules funded under the NYDIG Financing Agreement on March 21, 2022 bear interest at a rate of 13% per annum and have terms of 25 months. The remaining loan schedules will be funded to finance the acquisition of certain bitcoin miners and related equipment. Refer to Note 19, Subsequent Events, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We may seek to raise capital through alternative sources, such as a public offering, an additional private placement of equity or debt securities or traditional or non-traditional credit type facilities. If we raise additional equity financing, our stockholders may experience significant dilution of their ownership interests, and the per share value of our class A common stock could decline. Furthermore, if we engage in additional debt financing, the debt holders would likely have priority over our stockholders, on order of payment preference.
While we held a relatively small amount of digital assets for an extended period as of December 31, 2021, our current business strategy is to sell digital assets within a short period after earning such assets. We may choose to change this strategy in the future. The average period between receipt of bitcoin and the subsequent conversion to cash is less than one day because at least 95% of the bitcoin mined each day is liquidated the same day it is mined. Our liquidity is subject to volatility in both number of bitcoins mined and the underlying price of bitcoin.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021, and the years in which these obligations are due:
The debt payments included in the table above include the principal, interest and risk premium amounts due. The lease payments include fixed monthly rental payments and exclude any variable payments. The natural gas payments represent forward purchase contracts to purchase natural gas through March 1, 2022.
In the next twelve months, we expect that our operations and committed financing arrangements will provide sufficient cash for our operating expenses, purchase commitments, capital expenditures, interest payments and debt repayments. This is predicated on us achieving our forecast which could be negatively impacted by items outside of our control, in particular, significant decreases in the price of bitcoin, regulatory changes concerning cryptocurrency or other macroeconomic conditions including if further COVID-19 outbreaks require further statewide shutdowns and the other matters identified in the section entitled “Risk Factors.”
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table provides information about our net cash flow (in thousands) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $40.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the operating cash flow during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to year ended December 31, 2020 was driven primarily by the cash generated from net income (which is the net income adjusted for noncash items impacting net income, such as impairment of goodwill, depreciation and amortization, equity-based Merger-related costs, deferred taxes, accretion of asset retirement obligations, stock- based compensation and remeasurement of environmental liability), which increased by approximately $37.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $136.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, purchases of and deposits for property and equipment significantly increased as compared to the prior year due to our expansion of our miner fleet for cryptocurrency mining. During 2021, we acquired Support.com through the issuance of common stock, and as a result acquired $27.1 million of cash held by Support.com.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $173.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $37.1 million in proceeds from issuance of preferred stock that was later converted into common stock, $46.5 million from issuance of common stock, $97.9 million from notes payable and $3.2 million from stock options and warrants exercised. These cash inflows were offset by repayments on notes payable and finance lease obligations related to equipment finance agreements of $8.5 million and $2.3 million of costs associated with the issuance of shares for the Merger.
Equity Purchase Agreement with B. Riley Principal Capital, LLC
On September 15, 2021, we entered into the Purchase Agreement with the Investor pursuant to which we have the right to “put”, or sell, to the Investor up to $500 million of shares of class A common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement, from time to time during the term of the Purchase Agreement. Under the applicable Nasdaq rules, in no event may we issue to the Investor under the Purchase Agreement more than 19.99% of the total number of combined shares of our class A common stock and class B common stock that were outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the Purchase Agreement (the “Exchange Cap”), unless we obtain stockholder approval to issue shares in excess of the Exchange Cap in accordance with applicable Nasdaq rules. The per share purchase price for the shares of class A common stock that we elect to sell to the Investor pursuant to the Purchase Agreement will be determined by reference to the volume weighted average price of our class A common stock (“VWAP”) during the applicable purchase date on which we have timely delivered written notice to the Investor directing it to purchase shares under the Purchase Agreement, less a fixed 5% discount, which shall be increased to a fixed 6% discount at such time that we received aggregate cash proceeds of $200 million as payment for all shares of class A common stock purchased by the Investor in all prior sales of class A common stock made under the Purchase Agreement. The Investor will have no obligation to purchase shares pursuant to the Purchase Agreement to the extent that such purchase would cause the Investor to own more than 4.99% of our issued and outstanding shares of class A common stock.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement, we entered into a registration rights agreement with the Investor pursuant to which we agreed to prepare and file a registration statement registering the resale by the Investor of those shares of our class A common stock to be issued under the Purchase Agreement. The registration statement became effective on October 6, 2021 relating to the resale of 3,500,000 shares of class A common stock in connection with this Purchase Agreement.
Since becoming effective on October 6, 2021, through March 31, 2022, we sold 2,547,500 shares of the Company’s class A common stock to the Investor for proceeds of $54.9 million, net of discounts.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
•have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
•comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
•submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay,” “say-on-frequency” and pay ratio; and
•disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards.
In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
•We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our class A common stock that are held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had 1,125,000 mmbtu of natural gas purchase commitments through March 1, 2022 at an average cost of $4.77 / mmbtu, which represents an aggregate commitment of $5.4 million.