ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Tiga Acquisition Corp.” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Tiga Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on July 27, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Public Offering, and the sale of the Private Placements Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Public Offering, described below, and, after our Public Offering, identifying a target for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $23,194,905, which consisted of a gain from change in fair value of warrant liabilities (Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants) of $23,121,405, a gain from change in fair value of forward purchase agreement (“FPA”) liabilities of $1,749,732, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $85,130, offset by operating costs of $1,761,362.
For the period from July 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $20,851,423 which consisted of operating cost of $124,923, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $11,408,319, change in fair value of FPA liabilities of $3,358,302, fair value of Private Placement Warrants in excess of purchase price of $1,646,600, initial classification of FPA liabilities of $3,399,475 and transaction costs incurred in connection with the IPO of $928,450, offset by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $14,646.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until May 27, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. However, if the Company anticipates that it may not be able to consummate a Business Combination by May 27, 2022, it may, by resolution of the board if requested by the Sponsor, extend the period of time to consummate a Business Combination by an additional 6 months (until November 27, 2022 to complete a Business Combination), subject to the Sponsor purchasing additional private placement warrants, such extended deadline, the “Contractual Redemption Date.” In connection with each extension, the Sponsor must purchase an additional 2,760,000 Private Placement Warrants at $1.00 per warrant and deposit the $2,760,000 in proceeds therefrom must be deposited into the trust account. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date and an extension not requested by the Sponsor, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after May 27, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $17,499. Until the consummation of the Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of ordinary shares by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On November 27, 2020, we consummated the Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,600,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 10,280,000 private placement warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant generating gross proceeds of $10,280,000.
Following the Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the Initial Private Placement, a total of $278,760,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $15,736,649 in transaction costs, including $5,520,000 of underwriting fees, $9,660,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $556,649 of other offering costs. On May 18, 2021 and November 17, 2021, respectively, the Company announced the approval and extension of the time period to consummate a Business Combination and the approval of the issuance and sale of certain private placement warrants in connection therewith. On May 20, 2021 and November 22, 2021, respectively, the required deposit of $2,760,000 was placed into the Trust Account and on May 25, 2021 and November 23, 2021, respectively, the Company issued and sold to the Sponsor 2,760,000 Extension Private Placement Warrants. The total amount of outstanding Private Placement Warrants is 15,800,000 and the total deposits into the Trust Account have been $284,280,000 ($10.30 per public share).
On March 16, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized the execution and delivery of a Convertible Promissory Note in the principal amount of $2,000,000 (the “Note”) to the Sponsor, as part of the Working Capital Loans. On January 25, 2022, the Sponsor had advanced the sum of $750,000 to the Company on account of the Note. All unpaid principal under the Note shall be due and payable in full on the effective date of our initial business combination, unless accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for overhead expenses and related services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 23, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,660,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We entered into a private placement warrants purchase agreement, dated as of November 23, 2020, with the Sponsor which provides that at the option of the Sponsor, on the dates that are six, 12 and 18 months, respectively from the closing date of the Initial Public Offering, the Company shall issue and sell to the Sponsor, its affiliates or permitted designees and the Sponsor shall purchase from the Company, an additional 2,760,000, private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant for an aggregate purchase price of $2,760,000.
We entered into a forward purchase agreement with the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor which provides for the purchase by the Sponsor of an aggregate of 5,000,000 Class A ordinary shares, plus an aggregate of 2,500,000 forward purchase warrants to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $50,000,000, or $10.00 per Class A ordinary share, in a private placement to close prior to or concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination. Pursuant to the forward purchase agreement, the forward purchaser was also granted an option to subscribe, in the forward purchaser’s sole discretion, for an additional 5,000,000 Class A ordinary shares plus an additional 2,500,000 redeemable warrants to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, for an additional purchase price of $50,000,000, or $10.00 per Class A ordinary share, in one or multiple private placements to close prior to or concurrently with the closing of our initial business combination. The obligations under the forward purchase agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the Public Shareholders. The forward purchase warrants will have the same terms as the public warrants issued as part of the Units.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant and Forward Purchase Agreement (FPA) Liability
The Company accounts for the Warrants and FPA in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, under which the Warrants and FPA do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants and FPA as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants and FPA to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
The Public Warrants for periods where no observable trade price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was determined using a Black-Scholes-Merton model. The committed units of the FPA are valued using a discounted valuation of a reconstructed unit price and the optional units of the FPA are valued using the same reconstructed unit price within a Black-Scholes-Merton model framework.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The net income or loss is allocated to each class of shares using an allocation of total shares, which is then divided by the total shares for the respective class.
We did not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering and the private placement in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share because their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from income (loss) per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.