ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto. The management's discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words "believe," "plan," "intend," "anticipate," "target," "estimate," "expect" and the like, and/or future tense or conditional constructions ("will," "may," "could," "should," etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those under "Risk Factors," which appear in elsewhere in this Annual Report, that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report.
The share and per share information in the following discussion reflects a reverse stock split of our outstanding common stock at a 1-for-32 ratio, effective as of May 13, 2021.
Overview
We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida on April 14, 2014, as Illumination America, Inc.
Effective August 17, 2017, we acquired Grom Holdings pursuant to the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement entered into on May 15, 2017. In connection with the Share Exchange, the Company issued an aggregate of 3,464,184 shares of its common stock to the Grom Holdings stockholders, pro rata to their respective ownership percentage of Grom Holdings. Each share of Grom Holdings was exchanged for 0.13 shares of our common stock. As a result, the stockholders of Grom Holdings owned approximately 92% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock at such time.
In connection with the Share Exchange, we changed our name from Illumination America, Inc. to “Grom Social Enterprises, Inc.”
We are a media, technology and entertainment company that focuses on delivering content to children under the age of 13 years in a safe secure platform that is compliant with COPPA and can be monitored by parents or guardians. We conduct our business through the following five operating subsidiaries:
· Grom Social was incorporated in the State of Florida on March 5, 2012 and operates our social media network designed for children under the age of 13 years.
· TD Holdings was incorporated in Hong Kong on September 15, 2005. TD Holdings operates through its two wholly-owned subsidiaries: (i) Top Draw HK and (ii) Top Draw Philippines. The group’s principal activities are the production of animated films and televisions series.
· GES was incorporated in the State of Florida on January 17, 2017. GES operates our web filtering services provided to schools and government agencies.
· GNS was incorporated in the State of Florida on April 19, 2017. GNS intends to market and distribute nutritional supplements to children. GNS has no operations since its inception.
· Curiosity was organized in the State of Delaware on January 5, 2017. Curiosity acquires and develops kids and family entertainment properties and associated business opportunities.
Impact of COVID-19
The Company has experienced significant disruptions to its business and operations due to circumstances related to COVID-19, and as a result of delays caused government-imposed quarantines, office closings and travel restrictions, which affect both the Company’s and its service providers. The Company has significant operations in Manila, Philippines, which was initially locked down by the government on March 12, 2020 due to concerns related to the spread of COVID-19. As a result of the Philippines government’s call to contain COVID-19, the Company’s animation studio, located in Manila, Philippines, which accounts for approximately 89% of the Company’s total revenues on a consolidated basis, was forced to close its offices for significant periods of time during both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In response to the outbreak and business disruptions, the Company instituted employee safety protocols to contain the spread, including domestic and international travel restrictions, work-from-home practices, extensive cleaning protocols, social distancing and various temporary closures of its administrative offices and production studio. Further, the Company implemented a range of actions aimed at temporarily reducing costs and preserving liquidity.
Recent Events
Reverse Stock Split
On April 7, 2021, the Company’s board of directors approved, and, on April 8, 2021, the Company’s shareholders approved, a reverse stock split at a ratio of no less than 1-for-2 and no more than 1-for-50. On May 6, 2021, the board fixed the ratio for a reverse stock split at 1-for-32, and, on May 7, 2021, the Company filed a certificate of amendment to its articles of incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Florida to effect the reverse stock split which became effective as of May 13, 2021. The Company’s common stock began being quoted on the OTCQB on a post-reverse split basis beginning on May 19, 2021.
Listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market
On June 17, 2021, our common stock and warrants began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbols “GROM” and “GROMW,” respectively.
Registered Offering
On June 21, 2021 (in this case, the “Closing Date”), the Company, sold an aggregate of 2,409,639 units (the “Units”), at a price to the public of $4.15 per Unit (the “Underwritten Offering”), each Unit consisting of one share of common stock and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $4.565 per share pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated as of June 16, 2021 (the “Underwriting Agreement”), between the Company and EF Hutton, division of Benchmark Investments, LLC, as representative (the “EF Hutton”) of the several underwriters named in the Underwriting Agreement. In addition, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company granted EF Hutton a 45-day option to purchase up to 361,445 additional Units of common stock and warrants, to cover over-allotments in connection with the Offering, which EF Hutton exercised with respect to warrants exercisable for up to an additional 361,445 shares on the Closing Date.
The shares and the warrants were offered and sold to the public pursuant to the Company’s registration statement on Form S-1, as amended (File No. 333-253154), filed by the Company with the SEC under the Securities Act, which became effective on June 16, 2021.
On the Closing Date, the Company received gross proceeds of approximately $10,000,000, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of 8% of the gross proceeds and estimated offering expenses. The Company is using the net proceeds from the Underwritten Offering primarily for sales and marketing activities, product development, acquisition of, or investment in, technologies, solutions, or businesses that complement the Company’s business, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company issued to EF Hutton five-year warrants to purchase up to 144,578 shares (6% of the shares sold in the Underwritten Offering), on the Closing Date. EF Hutton’s warrants are exercisable at $4.15 per share and are subject to a lock-up for 180 days from the commencement of sales in the Underwritten Offering, including a mandatory lock-up period in accordance with FINRA Rule 5110(e).
The total expenses of the Underwritten Offering were approximately $1,162,738, which included the underwriting discounts and commissions and EF Hutton’s reimbursable expenses relating to the Underwritten Offering.
On July 15, 2021, EF Hutton exercised in full the over-allotment option with respect to all 361,445 additional shares. After giving effect to the full exercise of the over-allotment option, the total number of Units sold by the Company in the Underwritten Offering was 2,771,084, for total gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $11,500,000, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by the Company.
Curiosity Acquisition
On July 29, 2021, the Company entered into a membership interest purchase agreement (in this case, the “Purchase Agreement”) with CIM, and the holders of all of CIM’s outstanding membership interests (the “Sellers”), for the purchase of 80% of CIM’s outstanding membership interests (the “Purchased Interests”) from the Sellers (the “Acquisition).
On August 19, 2021, pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company consummated the Acquisition and acquired the Purchased Interests in consideration for the issuance to the Sellers of an aggregate of 1,771,883 shares of the Company’s common stock to the Sellers, pro rata to their membership interests immediately prior to the closing of the Acquisition. The shares were valued at $2.82 per share which represents to the 20-day volume-weighted average price of the Company’s common stock on August 19, 2021.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Company also paid $400,000 and issued an 8% eighteen-month convertible promissory note in the principal amount $278,000 (the “Note”) to pay-down and refinance certain outstanding loans and advances previously made to CIM by two of the Sellers, Russell Hicks and Brett Watts.
The Note is convertible into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price of $3.28 per share, but may not be converted if, after giving effect to such conversion, the noteholder and its affiliates would beneficially own in excess of 9.99% of the Company’s outstanding common stock. The Note may be prepaid at any time, in whole or in part. The Note is subordinate to the Company’s senior indebtedness.
The Sellers also have the ability to earn up to $17,500,000 (payable 50% in cash and 50% in stock) upon the achievement of certain performance milestones as of December 31, 2025.
Executive Officers
On July 26, 2021, Melvin Leiner resigned as Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer of the Company. Mr. Leiner remains the Company’s Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, and a director.
On July 26, 2021, effective immediately upon Mr. Leiner’s resignation, Jason Williams was appointed the Company’s Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer.
Payoff of TDH Sellers Notes
On August 18, 2021, the Company paid the holders of certain secured promissory notes (the “TDH Secured Notes”) an aggregate of $834,759.77, representing all remaining amounts due and payable under the TDH Secured Notes. Upon receipt of such payment by the holders of the TDH Secured Notes, the pledged shares of TDH Holdings and its subsidiary, Top Draw HK were released from escrow, and the holders of the TDH Secured Notes had no further security interest in the assets of the Company or its subsidiaries.
L1 Capital Financing
Closing of First Tranche
On September 14, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with L1 Capital Global Opportunities Master Fund (“L1 Capital”), pursuant to which it sold L1 Capital (i) a 10% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Note in the principal amount of $4,400,000, due March 13, 2023 (the “Original Note”), and (ii) a five-year warrant to purchase 813,278 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $4.20 per share (the “Original Warrant”), for consideration of $3,960,000 (the “First Tranche”).
EF Hutton acted as exclusive placement agent for the offering and received a fee of $316,800.
The Original Note is convertible into common stock at a rate of $4.20 per share (the “Conversion Price”), and is repayable in 18 equal monthly installments, in cash, or, at the discretion of the Company, and if the Equity Conditions described below are met, by issuance of shares of common stock at a price equal to 95% of the volume weighted average price (“VWAP”) prior to the respective monthly redemption dates (with a floor of $1.92), multiplied by 102% of the amount due on such date. In the event that the 10-day VWAP drops below $1.92, the Company will have the right to pay in shares of common stock at said VWAP, with any shortfall to be paid in cash. The Conversion Price may be adjusted in the event of dilutive issuances but in no event to less than $0.54. In addition, under the terms of the Original Note, L1 Capital had the right to accelerate up to 3 of the monthly payments. Neither the Company, nor L1 Capital, may convert any portion of the Original Note to the extent that, after giving effect to such conversion, L1 Capital (together with any affiliated parties) would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% of the Company’s outstanding common stock.
The Equity Conditions required to be met in order for the Company to redeem the Original Note with shares of common stock in lieu of a monthly cash payment, include, without limitation, that (i) a registration statement must be in effect with respect to the resale of the shares issuable upon conversion or redemption of the Original Note (or, that an exemption under Rule 144 is available), and (ii) that the average daily trading volume of the Company’s common stock will be at least $250,000 immediately prior to the date of the monthly redemption.
The Original Warrant has the same anti-dilution protection as the Original Note and same adjustment floor. The Original Warrant is exercisable for cash, or on a cashless basis only for so long as no registration statement covering resale of the shares is in effect. L1 Capital shall not have the right to exercise any portion of the Original Warrant to the extent that, after giving effect to such exercise, L1 Capital (together with any affiliated parties), would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% of the Company’s outstanding common stock.
The Company entered into a Security Agreement with L1 Capital pursuant to which L1Capital was granted a security interest in all of the assets of the Company and certain of its subsidiaries. As further inducement for L1 Capital to enter into the Security Agreement, certain of the Company’s pre-existing secured creditors agreed to give up their exclusive senior security interest in the assets of TD Holdings, in exchange for a shared senior secured interest with L1 Capital on a pari pasu basis on all assets of the Company. Repayment of the Note is also guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company pursuant to a subsidiary guaranty.
The Company agreed to file a registration statement with the SEC within 35 days of the closing of the First Tranche registering all First Tranche Conversion Shares and First Tranche Warrant Shares for resale, to go effective no later than 75 days after the closing of the First Tranche.
The Purchase Agreement also contemplated the purchase by L1 Capital (the “Second Tranche”) of an additional 10% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Note in the principal amount of $1,500,000, and warrants to purchase approximately 277,000 shares (presuming current market prices) of common stock on identical terms to the Original Note and Warrant, subject to, and upon receipt of, shareholder approval under Nasdaq rules and effectiveness of a registration statement covering the resale of the shares issuable under the Original Note and Warrant issued in the First Tranche.
Amendment to Purchase Agreement and Original Note
On October 20, 2021, the Company and L1 Capital entered into an Amended and Restated Purchase Agreement (the “Amended Purchase Agreement”), pursuant to which the amount of the proposed Second Tranche investment was increased from $1,500,000 to $6,000,000. In the event that the conditions to closing the Second Tranche investment are satisfied, the Company intends on issuing (i) a 10% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Note in the principal amount of $6,000,000 (the “Additional Note”), identical to the Original Note, but due 18 months from the closing of the Second Tranche, and (ii) a five-year warrant to purchase 1,041,194 at an exercise price of $4.20 per share (the “Additional Warrant”), for consideration of $5,400,000.
The closing of the Second Tranche is subject to a registration statement being declared effective by the SEC covering the shares issuable upon conversion or redemption of the Original Note and Original Warrant, shareholder consent being obtained as required by Nasdaq Rule 5635(d), and a limitation on the principal amount of notes that may be issued to no more than 30% of the Company’s market capitalization as reported by Bloomberg L.P., which requirement may be waived by L1 Capital.
The conversion and redemption terms, as well as all other material terms of the Additional Note, and exercise price of terms of the warrants to be issued in the Second Tranche, are identical in all other material respects as the originally issued note and warrants, except for the amendments provided herein.
As of October 20, 2021, and as part of the terms of the Amended Purchase Agreement, the Original Note was amended (the “Amended Original Note”) to increase the monthly redemption amount for the 18 monthly installments from $275,000 to $280,500. In addition, the Amended Original Note provides that, in the event that the Second Tranche closes, the Equity Conditions required to be satisfied in order for the Company to elect to make monthly note payments by issuance of common stock in lieu of cash (and in addition to the requirement that a registration statement is in effect or an exemption exists) the average trading volume of the Company’s common stock must be at least $550,000 (increased from $250,000) during the five trading days prior to the respective monthly redemption. Except as described above, the other terms of the Original Note as previously disclosed remain in full force and effect. In addition, if the Second Tranche is consummated, L1 Capital will have the right to accelerate up to six of the monthly payments as opposed to just three.
Closing of Second Tranche
The Purchase Agreement, as amended on October 20, 2021, contemplated a closing of a second tranche of the offering (the “Second Tranche Closing”) of up to an additional $6,000,000 principal amount of Notes identical to the First Tranche Note, and warrants exercisable for five years to purchase up to 1,041,194 shares at an exercise price of $4.20 per share.
On January 20, 2022 (the “Second Tranche Closing”) the Company and LI Capital closed on the Second Tranche of the offering, resulting in the issuance of (i) a $1,750,000 10% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Note, Due July 20, 2023, (the “Second Tranche Note”); and (ii) a five year warrant to purchase 303,682 shares of Common Stock of the Company at an exercise price of $4.20 per share (the “Second Tranche Warrants”), in exchange for consideration of $1,575,000 (i.e. the face amount less the 10% Original Issue Discount of $175,000).
In connection with the Second Tranche Closing, the Company paid to EF Hutton a fee of $126,000.
The Second Tranche Note is convertible into common stock of the Company at a rate of $4.20 per share (the “Conversion Price”) into 416,667 shares of Common Stock (the “Second Tranche Conversion Shares”) and, is repayable in 16 equal monthly installments commencing on the date that the SEC declares a registration statement with respect to the resale of such shares effective, with all remaining amounts due on July 20, 2023. The Second Tranche Note is repayable by payment of cash, or, at the discretion of the Company and if the below listed “Equity Conditions” are met, by issuance of shares of the Common Stock at a price of 95% of the lowest daily VWAP during the ten-trading day period prior to the respective monthly redemption dates (with a floor of $1.92) multiplied by 102% of the amount due on such date. In the event that the ten-trading day VWAP drops below $1.92 the Company will have the right to pay in stock at such ten-trading day VWAP with any shortfall paid in cash. The Conversion Price may be adjusted in the event of dilutive issuances but in no event to less than $0.54 (the “Monthly Conversion Price”).
If the Company elects to repay the entire Second Tranche Note by issuance of shares, presuming recent stock prices, an aggregate of approximately 1,201,373 shares may be issued over 16 months plus interest.
The Company’s right to make monthly payments in stock in lieu of cash for the Second Tranche Note is conditioned on certain conditions (the “Equity Conditions”). The Equity Conditions required to be met each month in order to redeem the Second Tranche Note with stock in lieu of a monthly cash payment, among other conditions set forth therein, include without limitation, that a registration statement be in effect with respect to the resale of the shares issuable upon conversion or redemption of the Second Tranche Note (or, that an exemption under Rule 144 is available), that no default be in effect, that the average daily trading volume of the Company’s common stock would have to be at least $550,000 during the five trading days prior to the respective monthly redemption and that the outstanding principal amounts of the First Tranche Note and Second Tranche Note combined, shall not exceed 30% of the market capitalization of the Company’s Common Stock as reported on Bloomberg L.P., which percentage is subject to increase by the Investor at its sole discretion.
Other provisions of the Second Tranche Note, which is similar in terms to the First Tranche Note, include that the Second Tranche Note Conversion Price is subject to full anti-dilution price protections in the event of financings that are below the Conversion Price with a floor of $0.54.
In the event of an Event of Default as defined in the notes, if the stock price is below the Conversion Price at the time of default and only for so long as a default is continuing, the Second Tranche Notes would be convertible at a rate of 80% of the lowest VWAP in the ten prior trading days, provided, that if the default is cured the default conversion rate elevates back to the normal Conversion Price.
As part of the Second Tranche Closing, the Company issued Second Tranche Warrants exercisable for five years from the date of issuance, at $4.20 per share which carry the same anti-dilution protection as the Second Tranche Notes, subject to the same adjustment floor. The Second Tranche Warrants are exercisable via cashless exercise only for so long as no registration statement covering resale of the shares is in effect.
The Company is required to file a registration statement with the SEC which shall be declared effective on or prior to 75 days the closing of the Second Tranche.
The Second Tranche Note continues to be subject to (i) the repayment and performance guarantees by the subsidiaries of the Company pursuant to a subsidiary guaranty and, (ii) the Security Agreement pursuant to which the LI Capital was granted a security interest in all of the assets of the Company and certain of its subsidiaries, each as entered into in connection with the First Tranche closing on September 14, 2021.
Results of Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6,297,922, compared to revenue of $6,159,531 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $2,137,466 or 25.8%.
Animation revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5,602,466, compared to animation revenue of $5,483,332 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $119,134 or 2.2%. The increase in animation revenue is primarily attributable to the increase in the overall number of contracts completed offset, in part, by client delays caused by concerns related to the spread of COVID-19.
Web filtering revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $594,996, compared to web filtering revenue of $673,182 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $78,186 or 11.6%. The decrease is primarily due to a decline in organic sales growth, and the timing or loss of multi-year contract renewals.
Produced and licensed content revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $98,301, compared to produced and licensed content revenue of $0 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in produced and licensed content revenue is directly attributable to revenue derived from our acquisition of Curiosity Ink Media LLC on August 19, 2021.
Subscription and advertising revenue from our Grom Social mobile application has been nominal. Subscription and advertising revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,159 compared to subscription and advertising revenue of $3,017 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $858 or 28.4%, primarily attributable to a decrease in marketing and promotion activities.
Gross Profit
Our gross profits vary significantly by subsidiary. Historically, our animation business has realized gross profits between 45% and 55%, while our web filtering business has realized gross profits between 75% and 90%. Additionally, our gross profits may vary from period to period due to the nature of the business of each subsidiary, and the timing and volume of customer contracts and projects. Current gross margins percentages may not be indicative of future gross margin performance.
Gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,590,654, or 41.1%, and $2,806,891, or 45.6%, respectively. The decrease in gross profit is primarily attributable lower contract margins realized in our animation business due to the absorption of fixed overhead expenses against reduced revenue levels and certain projects exceeding budgeted costs.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $9,463,580, compared to operating expenses of $6,188,689 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $3,274,891 or 52.9%. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in selling, general and administrative costs and fees for professional services rendered during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the Company’s registered offering, Nasdaq stock exchange uplisting, the acquisition of Curiosity, and stock-based compensation from the grant of stock and stock option awards.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are comprised of selling, marketing and promotional expenses, compensation and benefits, insurance, rent and related facility costs, research and development, and other general expenses. SG&A expenses were $5,811,792 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4,643,539 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $688,921 or 15.4%.
Stock-based compensation, a non-cash component of our SG&A, was $493,563 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $62,600 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $430,963 or 688.4%. On August 2, 2021, we issued 157,943 shares of our common stock valued at $410,652 to our chief executive officer as compensation. On August 19, 2021, we granted 208,500 options to purchase shares of our common stock in connection with certain employment agreements entered into in connection with our acquisition of Curiosity.
Professional fees are comprised of accounting and compliance services, legal services, investor relations and other advisory fees. Professional fees were $2,773,510 for the year ended December 2021, compared to $623,014 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $2,150,496 or 345.2%. The significant increase is largely attributable to our registration offering and Nasdaq stock exchange uplisting processes.
At December 31, 2021, we performed our annual impairment tests as prescribed by ASC 350 on the carrying value of our goodwill and recorded an impairment charge totaling $382,798; of which $276,448 was attributed to the carrying value of goodwill and $106,350 of intangible assets related to the NetSpective webfiltering business acquired in 2017. The determination was made as the result of our qualitative assessment of our webfiltering business, including a multi-year decline in sales revenue and the unexpected loss of certain renewal customer accounts.
Other Income (Expense)
Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3,329,015, compared to a net other expense of $2,585,662 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $743,353 or 28.8%. The increase in net other expense is primarily attributable to increased interest expense related to the amortization of debt discounts, and a one-time extinguishment loss of $947,179 related to the exchange of $1,447,996 in principal and interest accrued under certain convertible notes for 2,395,175 shares of our Series B Stock.
Interest expense is comprised of interest accrued and paid on our convertible notes and recorded from the amortization of note discounts. Interest expense was $2,556,689 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1,398,731 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $1,157,958 or 40.6%. The increase is attributable to an increase in amortization expense associated with debt discounts recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on loan forgiveness of the paycheck protection program loan of $228,912.
Net Loss Attributable to Common Stockholders
We realized a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $10,612,267, or $1.18 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $6,020,933, or $0.03 per share, during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in net loss attributable to common stockholders of $4,202,049 or 69.8%.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $6,530,161.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7,856,242, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1,223,148 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in cash used of $6,633,094, primarily due to the increase in our loss from operations and the change in working capital assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 417,096, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $574,512 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing a decrease in cash used of $157,416. This change is attributable to a decrease in the amount of fixed assets purchased and leasehold improvements made by our animation studio in Manilla, Philippines offset by an increase related to acquisition of majority interest for Curiosity, net of cash received.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $14,673,567, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $1,375,559 for the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in cash provided of $13,298,008. The increase is attributable to proceeds received from the sale of preferred and common stock and the issuance of convertible notes, net of issuance costs, and to the decrease in repayments of convertible notes during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our primary sources of cash from financing activities were attributable to $10,220,351 in proceeds from issuance of common stock, $1,050,000 in proceeds from issuance of preferred stock and $4,516,700 in proceeds from issuance of convertible notes during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $483,500 in proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, and $4,143,500 from issuance of convertible notes.
We believe we have adequate working capital to meet our operational needs for the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates relate to revenue recognition, valuation of accounts receivable and inventories, purchase price allocation of acquired businesses, impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill, valuation of financial instruments, income taxes, and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience, known or expected trends and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable given the quality of information available as of the date of these financial statements. The results of these assumptions provide the basis for making estimates about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Business Combinations
We generally account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. The method requires the acquirer to recognize the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date, measured at their fair values as of that date. Any transaction costs are expenses as incurred. The results of operations of businesses acquired by the Company have been included in the consolidated income statement since their respective date of acquisition. The Company may use independent valuation services to assist in determining the estimated fair values.
Revenue Recognition
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. The guidance provided in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 ("ASC 606") requires entities to use a five-step model to recognize revenue by allocating the consideration from contracts to performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The standard also requires new disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. ASC 606 also includes Subtopic 340-40, Other Assets and Deferred Costs - Contracts with Customers, which requires the deferral of incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer.
Animation Revenue
Animation revenue is primarily generated from contracts with customers for preproduction and production services related to the development of animated movies and television series. Preproduction activities include producing storyboards, location design, model and props design, background color and color styling. Production focuses on library creation, digital asset management, background layout scene assembly, posing, animation and after effects. We provide services under fixed-price contracts. Under fixed-price contracts, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent actual costs vary from estimated costs, our profit may increase, decrease, or result in a loss.
We identify a contract under ASC 606 once (i) it is approved by all parties, (ii) the rights of the parties are identified, (iii) the payment terms are identified, (iv) the contract has commercial substance, and (v) collectability of consideration is probable.
We evaluate the services promised in each contract at inception to determine whether the contract should be accounted for as having one or more performance obligations. The services in our contracts are distinct from one another as the referring parties typically can direct all, limited, or single portions of the various preproduction and production activities required to create and design and entire episode to us and we therefore have a history of developing standalone selling prices for all of these distinct components. Accordingly, our contracts are typically accounted for as containing multiple performance obligations.
We determine the transaction price for each contract based on the consideration we expect to receive for the distinct services being provided under the contract.
We recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied and the customer obtains control of the services. In determining when performance obligations are satisfied, we consider factors such as contract terms, payment terms and whether there is an alternative future use of the product or service. Substantially all of our revenue is recognized over time as we perform under the contract due to the contractual terms present in each contract which irrevocably transfer control of the work product to the customer as the services are performed.
For performance obligations recognized over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress made towards completion of the performance obligation. We use the percentage-of-completion cost-to-cost measure of progress because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer as we incur costs against its contracts. Under the percentage-of-completion cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs to complete the performance obligation. The percentage-of-completion cost-to-cost method requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of contract assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates relate to the total estimated amount of costs that will be incurred for a project or job.
Web Filtering Revenue
Web filtering revenue from subscription sales is recognized on a pro-rata basis over the subscription period. Typically, a subscriber purchases computer hardware and a software and support service license for a period of use between one year to five years. The subscriber is billed in full at the time of the sale. We immediately recognize revenue attributable to the computer hardware as it is non-refundable and control passes to the customer. The advanced billing component for software and service is initially recorded as deferred revenue and subsequently recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the subscription period.
Produced and Licensed Content Revenue
Since the acquisition of Curiosity to the period ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a total of $98,301, of produced and licensed content revenue from contracts with customers.
Produced and licensed content revenues are generated from the licensing of internally-produced films and television programs.
Licensed internally-produced films and television programming, each individual film or episode delivered represents a separate performance obligation and revenues are recognized when the episode is made available to the licensee for exhibition. For license agreements containing multiple deliverables, revenues are allocated based on the relative standalone selling price of each film or episode of a television series, which is based on licenses for comparable films or series within the marketplace. Agreements to license programming are often long term, with collection terms ranging from one to five years.
The advanced billing component for licensed content is initially recorded as deferred revenue and subsequently recognized as revenue upon completion of the performance obligation in accordance with the terms of licensing agreement.
Publishing Revenue
Since the acquisition of Curiosity to the period ended December 31, 2021, no publishing revenue has been recorded.
Publishing revenues are recognized when merchandise is shipped or electronically delivered to the consumer. Consumer print books are generally sold with a right of return. The Company records a returns reserve and corresponding decrease in revenue at the time of sale based upon historical trends. For publishing revenues, payments are due shortly after shipment or electronic delivery.
Fair Value Measurements
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” (“ASC 820”) defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are either directly or indirectly observable.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing.
Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. We use the market approach to measure fair value for its Level 1 financial assets and liabilities. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. The respective carrying value of certain balance sheet financial instruments approximates its fair value. These financial instruments include cash, trade receivables, related party payables, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and short-term borrowings. Fair values were estimated to approximate carrying values for these financial instruments since they are short term in nature, and they are receivable or payable on demand.
The estimated fair value of assets and liabilities acquired in business combinations and reporting units and long-lived assets used in the related asset impairment tests utilize inputs classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
We determine the fair value of contingent consideration based on a probability-weighted discounted cash flow analysis. The fair value remeasurement is based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 measurement as defined in the fair value hierarchy. In each period, we reassess our current estimates of performance relative to the stated targets and adjusts the liability to fair value. Any such adjustments are included as a component of Other Income (Expense) in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Prepublication Costs
Prepublication costs include costs incurred to create and develop the art, prepress, editorial, digital conversion and other content required for the creation of the master copy of a book or other media. Prepublication costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over a two- to five-year period based on expected future revenue. The Company regularly reviews the recoverability of the capitalized costs based on expected future revenues.
Produced and Licensed Content Costs
Produced and licensed content costs include capitalizable direct costs, production overhead, interest and development costs and are stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or fair value. Marketing, distribution and general and administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
Film, television and direct to consumers through streaming services production and residual costs are expensed over the product life cycle based upon the ratio of the current period’s revenues to estimated remaining total revenues (Ultimate Revenues) for each production. For film productions and direct to consumer services, Ultimate Revenues include revenues from all sources that will be earned within ten years from the date of the initial release. For television series, Ultimate Revenues include revenues that will be earned within ten years from delivery of the first episode, or if still in production, five years from delivery of the most recent episode, if later. Costs of film, television and direct to consumer productions are subject to regular recoverability assessments, which compare the estimated fair values with the unamortized costs. The Company bases these fair value measurements on the Company’s assumptions about how market participants would price the assets at the balance sheet date, which may be different than the amounts ultimately realized in future periods. The amount by which the unamortized costs of film and television productions exceed their estimated fair values is written off. Costs for projects that have been abandoned are written off. Projects that have not been set for production within three years are also written off unless management has committed to a plan to proceed with the project and is actively working on and funding the project.
Capitalized Website Development Costs
The Company capitalizes certain costs associated with the development of its Santa.com website after the preliminary project stage is complete and until the website is ready for its intended use. Planning and operating costs are expensed as incurred. Capitalization begins when the preliminary project stage is complete, project plan is defined, functionalities are determined and internal and external resources are identified. Qualified costs incurred during the operating stage of our software applications relating to upgrades and enhancements are capitalized to the extent it is probable that they will result in added functionality, while costs that cannot be separated between maintenance of, and minor upgrades and enhancements to the websites are expensed as incurred.
Capitalized website costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life of three years beginning with the time when it is ready for intended use. Amounts amortized are presented through cost of sales. Management evaluates the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the future economic benefit arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized. The goodwill arising from our acquisitions is attributable to the value of the potential expanded market opportunity with new customers. Intangible assets have either an identifiable or indefinite useful life. Intangible assets with identifiable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their economic or legal life, whichever is shorter. Our amortizable intangible assets consist of customer relationships and non-compete agreements. Their useful lives range from 1.5 to 10 years. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trade names.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived assets are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment testing unless circumstances dictate more frequent assessments. We perform an annual impairment assessment for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets during the fourth quarter of each year and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than the carrying amount. Goodwill impairment testing is a two-step process performed at the reporting unit level. Step one compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by considering both the income approach and market approaches. The fair values calculated under the income approach and market approaches are weighted based on circumstances surrounding the reporting unit. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit, which are discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. For the discount rate, we rely on the capital asset pricing model approach, which includes an assessment of the risk-free interest rate, the rate of return from publicly traded stocks, our risk relative to the overall market, our size and industry and other Company-specific risks. Other significant assumptions used in the income approach include the terminal value, growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approaches use key multiples from guideline businesses that are comparable and are traded on a public market. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, then the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. Step two calculates the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible net assets of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as calculated in step one. In this step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the reporting unit’s assets and liabilities in a hypothetical purchase price allocation as if the reporting unit had been acquired on that date. If the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment at the individual asset level by assessing whether it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired (for example, that the fair value of the asset is below its carrying amount). If it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, its carrying amount is written down to its fair value.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, strategic plans, and future market conditions, among others. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the goodwill impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Changes in assumptions and estimates could cause us to perform an impairment test prior to scheduled annual impairment tests.
We performed our annual fair value assessment at December 31, 2020 on our subsidiaries with material goodwill and intangible asset amounts on their respective balance sheets and determined that an impairment charge of $472,757 was necessary.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the recoverability of our long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances have indicated that an asset may not be recoverable. The long-lived asset is grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. If the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the assets, the assets are written down to the estimated fair value.
We evaluated the recoverability of our long-lived assets at December 31, 2020, respectively on its subsidiaries with material amounts on their respective balance sheets and determined that no impairment exists.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations except as noted below:
In January 2017, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment by removing Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test, which requires a hypothetical purchase price allocation. Under this pronouncement, an entity would perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and would recognize an impairment change for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects will be considered, if applicable. ASU 2017-04 is effective for annual or interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and should be applied on a prospective basis.
On November 15, 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, which (1) provides a framework to stagger effective dates for future major accounting standards and (2) amends the effective dates for certain major new accounting standards to give implementation relief to certain types of entities. Specifically, ASU 2019-10 amends the effective date for ASU 2017-04 to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and interim periods therein.
Early adoption continues to be permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017. The Company does not anticipate the adoption of ASU 2017-04 will have a material impact on its financial statements for both annual and interim reporting periods.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) which enhances and simplifies various aspects of the income tax accounting guidance, including requirements such as tax basis step-up in goodwill obtained in a transaction that is not a business combination, ownership changes in investments, and interim-period accounting for enacted changes in tax law. The amendment wase effective for public companies with fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted this ASU on January 1, 2021, which did not result in a material impact to the consolidated financial statements and disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815 - 40), (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. The ASU2020-06 amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is evaluating the impact of this guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modification or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (“ASU 2021-04”), which clarifies and reduces diversity in an issuer’s accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options due to a lack of explicit guidance in the FASB Codification. ASU 2021-04 provides guidance on modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options that are not within the scope of another Topic. Entities should treat a modification of the terms or conditions, or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity-classified after modification or exchange, as an exchange of the original instrument for a new instrument. ASU 2021-04 provides further guidance on measuring the effect of such modifications or exchanges, and also provides guidance on the recognition of such modifications or exchanges on the basis of the substance of the transaction, in the same manner as if cash had been paid as consideration. Management is evaluating the effect of the adoption of ASU 2021-04 on the consolidated financial statements. ASU 2021-04 is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted this ASU on January 1, 2022, which did not result in a material impact to the consolidated financial statements and disclosures.