Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on January 13, 2021 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 7, 2021, we entered into a Merger Agreement with by and among us, VGAC II Merger Sub and Grove. The Merger Agreement provides for, among other things, (i) at least one day prior to the closing date, the Domestication and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) VGAC II’s name will be changed to “Grove Collaborative Holdings, Inc.,” (B) each then-issued and outstanding Class A ordinary share of VGAC II will convert automatically into one share of New Grove Class A Common Stock, (C) each then-issued and outstanding Class B ordinary share of VGAC II will convert automatically into one share of New Grove Class A Common Stock and (D) each then-issued and outstanding common warrant of VGAC II will convert automatically into one warrant to purchase one share of New Grove Class A Common Stock; and (ii) on the closing date, VGAC II Merger Sub will merge with and into Grove, with Grove as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of New Grove.
In connection with the Business Combination, VGAC II will adopt a dual class stock structure, comprised of New Grove Class A Common Stock, which will carry one vote per share, and New Grove Class B common stock (the “New Grove Class B Common Stock”), which will carry ten votes per share. The New Grove Class B Common Stock will be subject to conversion to New Grove Class A Common Stock (i) upon any transfers of New Grove Class B Common Stock (except for certain permitted transfers) or (ii) on the date that is the earliest to occur of (A) the fifth anniversary of the closing date and (B) the forty-fifth day (or, if such day is not a business day in the United States, the next such business day) after the end of the first fiscal quarter of New Grove in which the number of shares of New Grove Class B Common Stock outstanding or subject to outstanding securities convertible into or exercisable therefor, or otherwise underlying outstanding equity compensation awards, represents, in the aggregate, less than ten percent (10%) of all shares of common stock outstanding or subject to outstanding securities convertible into or exercisable therefor, or otherwise underlying outstanding equity compensation awards, in each case, measured on the last day of such fiscal quarter.
The Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants of each of the parties thereto that are customary for transactions of this type. VGAC II and Grove have also agreed to take all necessary action such that, effective immediately after the closing of the Business Combination, the VGAC II board of directors (the “Board”) shall consist of nine directors, of whom one individual shall be designated by VGAC II, with the remaining eight individuals designated by Grove. In addition, VGAC II has agreed to adopt an equity incentive plan in an amount not to exceed 15% of New Grove’s equity interests outstanding as of immediately following the Merger with an annual evergreen provision in an amount not to exceed 5% of New Grove’s equity interests outstanding as of the day prior to such increase, as well as an employee stock purchase plan in an amount to be determined by the Board prior to the closing of the Business Combination with an annual evergreen provision in an amount of no less than 1% of New Grove’s equity interests outstanding as of the day prior to such increase.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and our search for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the period from January 13, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,698,369, which consisted of a gain of $6,811,133 for the change in fair value of our warrant liability and interest income of $30,526, offset by formation and operating costs of $3,572,794 and offering costs allocated to warrants of $570,496. We are required to revalue our liability-classified warrants at the end of each reporting period and reflect in the statement of operations a gain or loss from the change in fair value of the warrant liability in the period in which the change occurred.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 25, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 35,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $350,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,000,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $9,000,000.
On April 13, 2021, in connection with the underwriter’s election to fully exercise its over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 5,250,000 Units and the sale of an additional 700,000 Private Placement Warrants, generating total gross proceeds of $53,550,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants and the underwriter’s election to fully exercise its over-allotment option, a total of $402,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account, and we had $166,264 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $22,733,025 in transaction costs, including $8,050,000 of underwriting fees, $14,087,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $595,525 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 13, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,922,242.
At December 31, 2021, we had $507,233 in our operating bank account and a working capital deficit of $2,284,652.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments held in the Trust Account of $402,530,526 (including approximately $30,526 of interest income). We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $507,233 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,000,000 of outstanding borrowings under such loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 1, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $14,087,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”)
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 13, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable
ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable
ordinary shares outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”)
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 13, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.