Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is presented on a consolidated basis and focuses on the major components of our operations and significant changes in our results of operations for the periods presented. We encourage you to read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and the other statistical information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Historical results of operations and the percentage relationships among any amounts included, and any trends that may appear, may not indicate trends in our operations or results of operations for any future periods.
We have made, and will continue to make, various forward-looking statements with respect to financial and business matters. Comments regarding our business that are not historical facts are considered forward-looking statements that involve inherent risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements. For additional information regarding our cautionary disclosures, see the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company was incorporated in 2000 under the laws of South Carolina and is a bank holding company registered under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. The Company’s primary purpose is to serve as the holding company for the Bank. On October 2, 2000, pursuant to a Plan of Exchange approved by the shareholders of the Bank, all of the outstanding shares of capital stock of the Bank were exchanged for shares of the Company, and the Company became the owner of all of the outstanding capital stock of the Bank. The Company presently engages in no business other than that of owning the Bank and has no employees.
The Company has one non-bank subsidiary, the GrandSouth Capital Trust I, a Delaware statutory trust, formed to facilitate the issuance of trust preferred securities. The GrandSouth Trust is not consolidated in the Company’s financial statements.
We provide a full range of financial services through offices located throughout South Carolina. We provide full-service retail and commercial banking products.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and variants of the virus continue to create disruptions to the global economy and financial markets and to businesses and the lives of individuals throughout the world. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its related variants is fluid and continues to evolve, adversely affecting many of our customers. Our business, financial condition and results of operations generally rely upon the ability of our borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral underlying our secured loans, and demand for loans and other products and services we offer, which are highly dependent on the business environment in our primary markets where we operate and in the United States as a whole. The unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19 and its variants and their associated impacts on trade (including supply chains and export levels), travel, employee productivity, unemployment, consumer spending, and other economic activities have resulted and continue to result in less economic activity, and volatility and disruption in financial markets.
The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations remains uncertain and will depend on various developments and other factors, including the effect of governmental and private sector initiatives, the effect of the continued rollout of vaccinations for the virus, whether such vaccinations will be effective against another resurgence of the virus, including any new strains, and the ability for customers and businesses to return to, and remain in, their pre-pandemic routine.
Lending Operations and Accommodations to Customers
We are focused on serving the needs of our commercial and consumer customers and have offered flexible loan payment arrangements, including short-term loan modifications or forbearance payments, and reduced or waived certain fees on deposit accounts. During 2020, we granted short-term deferrals related to the COVID-19 crisis for $93.0 million of loans, which as of December 31, 2020 had all resumed payments or had been paid off. During 2021, the Bank did not grant any deferrals related to the COVID-19 crisis.
We also participated in the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). During 2020 and 2021, we secured funding of 272 loans and 95 loans, respectively, through the PPP totaling approximately $37.4 million and $12.0 million, net of deferred lending fees for the same periods, respectively. PPP loans totaled $1.3 million and $22.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Impact on Results of Operations and Financial Condition
We are monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the operations and value of our investments. We mark to market our AFS investments and review our investment portfolio for impairment at each period end. Because of changing economic and market conditions affecting issuers, we may be required to recognize impairments on the securities we hold as well as reductions in other comprehensive income. We cannot currently determine the ultimate impact of the pandemic on the long-term value of our investment portfolio.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.7 million of goodwill. At each quarter end in 2021, we have considered whether a quantitative assessment of our goodwill was required because of the significant economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. At December 31, 2021, we determined no goodwill impairment was required. However, further delayed recovery or further deterioration in market conditions related to the general economy, financial markets, and the associated impacts on our customers, employees and vendors, among other factors, could significantly impact the impairment analysis and may result in future goodwill impairment charges that, if incurred, could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Capital and Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, all of our capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by loan losses.
We continue to monitor unfunded commitments through the pandemic, including home equity lines of credit, for evidence of increased credit exposure as borrowers utilize these lines for liquidity purposes. As clients manage their own liquidity stress, we could experience an increase in the utilization of existing lines of credit. We believe that we have ample liquidity to meet the needs of our customers through our low cost deposits, our ability to borrow against approved lines of credit (federal funds purchased) from correspondent banks, and our ability to obtain advances secured by certain securities and loans from the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”).
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and conform to general practices within the industry in which we operate. To prepare financial statements in conformity with GAAP, management makes estimates, assumptions and judgments based on available information. These estimates, assumptions and judgments affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements and, as this information changes, actual results could differ from the estimates, assumptions and judgments reflected in the financial statements, which could have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations.
Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and, as such, have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. We have identified the determination of the allowance for loan losses to be an accounting area that requires the most subjective or complex judgments and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new or additional information becomes available or circumstances change, including overall changes in the economic climate. Therefore, we consider this policy, discussed below, to be a critical accounting policy and estimate and discuss it directly with the Audit Committee of our board of directors.
Additional information about our critical and significant accounting policies can be found in Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021, included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Allowance for Loan Losses (“ALL”) - The ALL reflects our estimates of probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. Our management evaluates the ALL on a regular basis. It is based on the collectability of our loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available and such revisions can materially affect our financial results.
The methodology for determining the ALL has two main components: the evaluation of individual loans for impairment and the evaluation of certain groups of homogeneous loans with similar risk characteristics.
A loan is considered impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all principal and interest payments due according to the original contractual terms of the loan agreement. We individually evaluate loans, or relationships, greater than $200,000 for impairment that are classified as nonaccrual, TDRs, or performing substandard loans. If the impaired loan is considered collateral dependent, a charge-off is taken based upon the appraised value of the property (less an estimate of selling costs if foreclosure is anticipated) compared to the loan’s carrying value, if necessary. If the impaired loan is not collateral dependent, a specific reserve is established based upon an estimate of the future discounted cash flows after consideration of modifications and the likelihood of future default and prepayment.
The allowance for non-impaired loans consists of a base historical loss reserve and a qualitative reserve. The loss rates for the base loss reserve, segmented into seven loan categories, contain average net loss rates ranging from approximately 0.00% to 0.56%.
The qualitative reserve adjusts the average loss rates utilized in the base loss reserve for trends in the following internal and external factors:
· Changes in lending and loan review policies;
· Economic conditions - including unemployment rates, federal macroeconomic data, housing prices and sales, and regional economic outlooks;
· Changes in the nature and volume of the portfolio and in the terms of the loans;
· Experience, ability, and depth of lending management;
· Volume and severity of past due, nonaccrual, and classified loans;
· Changes in the quality of the institution's loan review system;
· Collateral values;
· Loan concentrations and loan growth; and
· The effect of other external factors such as competition, legal and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses.
Qualitative reserve adjustment factors are decreased for favorable trends and increased for unfavorable trends. There is no certainty that our ALL will be appropriate over time to cover losses in our portfolio as economic and market conditions may ultimately differ from our reasonable and supportable forecast; however, we believe our estimate has been reasonably accurate in determining ALL adequacy.
Financial Highlights
The following table sets forth certain financial highlights (in thousands, except per share data) concerning the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary. The information was derived from audited consolidated financial statements. The information should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes, which are presented elsewhere in this report.
(1) The interest rate spread represents the difference between the fully taxable equivalent weighted-average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted-average cost of interest-bearing liabilities for the period.
(2) The net interest margin represents fully taxable equivalent net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets for the period.
(3) The efficiency ratio represents noninterest expense as a percentage of the sum of net interest income on a fully taxable equivalent basis and noninterest income.
(4) Capital ratios are for GrandSouth Bancorporation, Inc. on a consolidated basis.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020
General
Total assets increased $113.9 million, or 10.5%, to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase in assets was primarily due to increases in interest-earnings deposits of $69.5 million, or 135.8%, from $51.1 million at December 31, 2020 to $120.6 million at December 31, 2021, and loans, which increased $54.9 million, or 6.3%, from $878.5 million at December 31, 2020 to $933.5 million at December 31, 2021.
Total liabilities increased $103.1 million, or 10.3%, to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.0 billion at December 31, 2020, due primarily to the $112.6 million increase in total deposits, which was partially offset by the $11.0 million decrease in FHLB advances.
Total shareholders’ equity increased $10.9 million to $97.4 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $86.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to $16.1 million of net income and $1.4 million from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by the repurchases of $3.9 million of our common stock and $0.1 million of our preferred stock and dividends declared of $2.2 million. Tangible book value per common share, a non-GAAP measure, increased $2.44 to $18.47 at December 31, 2021 from $16.03 at December 31, 2020.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Total cash and cash equivalents increased $61.1 million to $124.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $63.0 million at December 31, 2020, primarily due to the increase of total deposits, partially offset by the increase in loans. We continue to hold adequate levels of liquid and short-term assets.
Investment Securities
Our investment securities portfolio is classified as AFS. AFS securities are carried at fair value. The following table shows the amortized cost and fair value for our AFS investment portfolio at the dates indicated (in thousands).
AFS investment securities increased $1.3 million, or 1.1%, to $112.0 million at December 31, 2021 from $110.7 million at December 31, 2020. Corporate bonds, which increased $7.8 million, or 169.3%, to $12.4 million at December 31, 2021 from $4.6 million at December 31, 2020, include subordinated debt issued by community banks that are within and outside of our footprint. We continue to look for opportunities to re-deploy funds from investment securities to higher yielding loans.
During 2021, we decided to sell $28.2 million of our AFS investment securities that were below market rates and as a result in an unrealized loss position. While this resulted in a $0.8 million loss on sale, we believe making this balance sheet change will assist in positioning us for better earnings in the future.
We believe the number of securities in an unrealized loss position is due entirely to interest rate fluctuation from the time that many of these securities were originally purchased. We regularly review our investment portfolio for impairment that is other than temporary (“OTTI”) and concluded that no OTTI existed during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. In addition, we do not currently intend to sell the securities, nor do we believe it is more likely than not that we would be required to sell these securities before their anticipated recovery of amortized cost. The number and dollar amount of securities in an unrealized loss position decreased between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, as indicated in the table below (in thousands).
We closely monitor the financial condition of the issuers of our municipal securities. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of our municipal securities portfolio balance consists of approximately 34.1% of general obligation bonds and 65.9% of revenue bonds. As of December 30, 2021, and December 31, 2020, all of our municipal securities were performing and rated A or better by either Moody’s or Standard and Poor’s.
The composition and maturities of the available-for-sale investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2021 are summarized in the following table (in thousands). Maturities are based on the final contractual payment dates, and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur. The composition and maturity distribution of the securities portfolio is subject to change depending on rate sensitivity, capital, and liquidity needs. The weighted average yield was calculated using net income (interest accrual plus or minus accretion/amortization) divided by ending book value.
(1) Tax exempt municipal obligations are shown on a tax equivalent basis using a 21% federal tax rate.
Other Investments
As of December 31, 2021, we held $3.0 million in other investments accounted for at cost which was a decrease of $3.3 million, or 52.3%, compared to $6.3 million at December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes other investments as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
The amount of FHLB stock required to be owned by the Bank is determined by the amount of FHLB advances outstanding. The decrease in our FHLB stock of $0.8 million to $0.7 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $1.5 million at December 31, 2020 was the result of decreased FHLB borrowings. FHLB advances totaled $5.0 million and $16.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans
The following table presents our loan portfolio composition and the corresponding percentage of total loans as of the dates indicated (in thousands). Other construction and land loans include residential acquisition and development loans and loans on commercial undeveloped land and one-to-four family improved and unimproved lots. Commercial real estate loans include loans on non-residential owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied real estate, multi-family, and owner-occupied investment property. Commercial loans include unsecured commercial loans and commercial loans secured by business assets.
Loans receivable, net of deferred fees increased $54.9 million, or 6.3%, to $933.5 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $878.5 million at December 31, 2020. Most of our loan growth in concentrated in One-to-four family residential and Commercial real estate with increases of $18.7 million, or 16.4% and $53.8 million, or 14.6%, respectively, as compared to relative balances as of December 31, 2020. This growth was partially offset by a decrease in our Consumer loan portfolio, which contracted by $28.2 million, or 79.8%, as compared to the relative balance as of December 31, 2020.
In 2021, we processed 95 loans under the PPP for a total of $12.0 million in loans funded and $0.6 million of lender fees collected. As of December 31, 2021, 83 of these loans totaling $10.8 million had been forgiven and lender fee income totaling $0.5 million had been recognized and is included in Interest and fees on loans in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
In 2020, we processed 272 loans under the PPP for a total of $39.0 million in loans funded and $1.6 million of lender fees collected. As of December 31, 2020, 80 of these loans totaling $15.9 million had been forgiven and lender fee income totaling $1.0 million had been recognized and is included in Interest and fees on loans in the Consolidated Statements of Income. As of December 31, 2021, 271 of the loans originated under the PPP in 2020 totaling $38.9 million had been forgiven and lender fees income totaling $1.6 million had been recognized and is included in Interest and fees on loans in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
In 2021, $24.6 million of the purchased student loan portfolio was sold which, along with the continued paydowns, decreased the balance as of December 31, 2021 to $0.7 million from $25.6 million at December 31, 2020. The sale resulted in a net gain of $1.2 million.
Maturities and Sensitivity of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates
Renewal of loans is subject to the same credit approval and underwriting standards as new loans, the terms of which may be modified upon renewal. The information in the following table is based on the contractual maturities of individual loans, including loans which may be subject to renewal at their contractual maturity (in thousands).
Actual repayments of loans may differ from the maturities reflected below because borrowers have the right to prepay obligations with or without prepayment penalties.
Longer term One-to-four family residential, Residential construction, Commercial real estate, and Home equity loans and lines of credit typically carry interest rates which adjust to certain LIBOR indexes or The Wall Street Journal Prime Rate. Longer term One-to-four family residential construction loans represent construction-to-permanent loans which, upon completion of the construction phase, become One-to-four family residential loans.
The following table sets forth the recorded investment of all loans maturing after one year that have either fixed interest rates or floating or adjustable interest rates (in thousands).
Delinquent Loans
When a loan becomes 15 days past due, we contact the borrower to inquire as to the status of the loan payment. When a loan becomes 30 days or more past due, we increase collection efforts to include all available forms of communication. Once a loan becomes 45 days past due, we generally issue a demand letter and further explore the reasons for non-repayment, discuss repayment options, and inspect the collateral. In the event the loan officer or collections staff has reason to believe restructuring will be mutually beneficial to the borrower and the Bank, the borrower is referred to the Bank’s Credit Administration staff to explore restructuring alternatives to foreclosure. Once the demand period has expired and it has been determined that restructuring is not a viable option, the Bank’s counsel is instructed to pursue foreclosure.
The accrual of interest on loans is discontinued at the time a loan becomes 90 days delinquent or when it becomes impaired, whichever occurs first, unless the loan is well secured and in the process of collection. All interest accrued but not collected for loans that are placed on nonaccrual is reversed. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans are generally applied as a direct reduction to the principal outstanding until the loan is returned to accrual status. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans may be recognized as income on a cash basis if recovery of the remaining principal is reasonably assured. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured. Interest payments applied to principal while the loan was on nonaccrual may be recognized in income over the remaining life of the loan after the loan is returned to accrual status.
If a loan is modified in a TDR, the loan is generally placed on non-accrual until there is a period of satisfactory payment performance by the borrower (either immediately before or after the restructuring), generally six consecutive months, and the ultimate collectability of all amounts contractually due is not in doubt. For a discussion of TDRs, see the section entitled “Troubled Debt Restructurings” below.
We had one loan 90 days or more past due that was still accruing interest as of December 31, 2021 for $50.0 thousand that was not 98% guaranteed by the issuing agency. We had no loans 90 days or more past due that are still accruing interest as of December 31, 2020 that are not 98% guaranteed by the issuing agency.
Total delinquencies as a percentage of loans have decreased from 0.58% at December 31, 2020 to 0.07% at December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of 87.29% over the period. Delinquent loans decreased $4.4 million, or 86.50%, to $0.7 million at December 31, 2021 from $5.1 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in 30-59 days delinquencies of $1.8 million, or 97.07%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 is concentrated primarily in consumer loans. The sale of $24.6 million of the purchased student loan portfolio in 2021 drove the past due consumer balances lower. As of December 31, 2020, purchased student loans made up 99.6% of the $5.1 million total consumer past due balance. We continue to focus on collection efforts and favorable resolutions.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming loans include all loans past due 90 days and over that are not 98% guaranteed by the issuing agency, certain impaired loans, and TDR loans that have not yet established a satisfactory period of payment performance (some of which may be contractually current). Nonperforming assets include nonperforming loans and real estate owned (“REO”). The table below sets forth the amounts and categories of our nonperforming assets at the dates indicated (in thousands).
(1) At December 31, 2021, total nonperforming loans were comprised of only nonaccrual loans. 	
Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans increased from 0.06% at December 31, 2020, to 0.14% at December 31, 2021, representing an increase of 133.3% over the period. Nonperforming assets as a percentage of total assets decreased from 0.23% at December 31, 2020, to 0.18% at December 31, 2021, or a decrease of 21.7% over the period. The gross interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of the nonaccrual loans was $0.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The changes in nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets is the result of the resolution and disposal of nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets by means of restructure, foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure and short sales for less than the indebtedness, in which cases the deficiency is charged-off.
REO was $0.8 million and $1.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, but has declined $5.8 million, or 87.4% since December 31, 2017.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
In situations where, for economic or legal reasons related to a borrower’s financial difficulties, we grant a concession that we would not otherwise consider, for other than an insignificant period of time, the related loan is classified as a TDR. We strive to identify borrowers in financial difficulty early so that we may work with them to modify their loans before they reach nonaccrual status. Modified terms generally include extensions of maturity dates at a stated interest rate lower than the current market rate for a new loan with similar risk characteristics, reductions in contractual interest rates, periods of interest-only payments, and principal deferments. A restructuring that results in only a delay in payments that is insignificant is not considered an economic concession. While unusual, there may be instances of forgiveness of loan principal. We individually evaluate all substandard loans that experience a modification of terms to determine if a TDR has occurred.
All TDRs over $200,000 are considered to be impaired loans and are reported as such for the remaining life of the loan, unless the restructuring agreement specifies an interest rate equal to or greater than the rate that would be accepted at the time of the restructuring for a new loan with comparable risk and the ultimate collectability of all amounts contractually due is not in doubt. We may also remove a loan from TDR and impaired status if the loan is subsequently restructured and at the time of the subsequent restructuring the borrower is not experiencing financial difficulties and, under the terms of the subsequent restructuring agreement, no concession has been granted to the borrower.
The following table presents our TDRs by accrual status as of the dates indicated (in thousands).
As noted in the above table, the majority of our borrowers with restructured loans have been able to comply with the revised payment terms for at least six consecutive months, resulting in their respective loans being restored to accrual status.
The following table presents details of TDRs made in each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
During 2021, we have continued to be proactive in working with borrowers to identify potential issues and restructure certain loans to prevent future losses.
As of December 31, 2020, all loans with short-term deferral related to the COVID-19 pandemic had resumed making payments or had been paid off. During 2021, the Bank did not grant any deferrals related to the COVID-19 crisis.
Classification of Loans
The following table sets forth amounts of classified and criticized loans at the dates indicated. As indicated in the table, loans classified as “doubtful” or “loss” are charged off immediately (in thousands).
Total classified loans to total loans increased to 0.46% at December 31, 2021, from 0.42% at December 31, 2020. Total criticized loans to total loans increased to 1.48% at December 31, 2021, from 1.31% at December 31, 2020. Management continues to dedicate resources to monitoring and resolving classified and criticized loans.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses reflects our estimates of probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a regular basis by management and is based upon management’s periodic review of the collectability of our loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of our loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect our borrowers’ abilities to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. The methodology for determining the allowance for loan losses has two main components: the evaluation of individual loans for impairment and the evaluation of certain groups of homogeneous loans with similar risk characteristics.
A loan is considered impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all principal and interest payments due according to the original contractual terms of the loan. We individually evaluate loans, or relationships, greater than $200,000 for impairment that are classified as nonaccrual, TDRs, or performing substandard loans. If the impaired loan is considered collateral dependent, a charge-off is taken based upon the appraised value of the property less an estimate of selling costs if foreclosure or sale of the property is anticipated. If the impaired loan is not collateral dependent, a specific reserve is established based upon an estimate of the future discounted cash flows after consideration of modifications and the likelihood of future default and prepayment.
The allowance for homogenous loans consists of a base loss reserve and a qualitative reserve. The loss rates for the base loss reserve, segmented into seven loan categories, contain average net loss/(recovery) rates ranging from approximately 0.0% to 0.6%.
The qualitative reserve adjusts the average loss rates utilized in the base loss reserve for trends in the following internal and external factors:
· Changes in lending and loan review policies;
· Economic conditions - including unemployment rates, federal macroeconomic data, housing prices and sales, and regional economic outlooks;
· Changes in the nature and volume of the portfolio and in the terms of the loans;
· Experience, ability, and depth of lending management;
· Volume and severity of past due, nonaccrual, and classified loans;
· Changes in the quality of the institution's loan review system;
· Collateral values;
· Loan concentrations and loan growth; and
· The effect of other external factors such as competition, legal and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses.
Qualitative reserve adjustment factors are decreased for favorable trends and increased for unfavorable trends. There is no certainty that our ALL will be appropriate over time to cover losses in our portfolio as economic and market conditions may ultimately differ from our reasonable and supportable forecast.
The following table summarizes the net charge-off detail as a percenrage of average loans by loan composition for the periods indicated (in thousands).
(1) At December 31, 2021, total nonperforming loans were comprised of only nonaccrual loans.
Our allowance as a percentage of total loans increased to 1.47% at December 31, 2021 from 1.43% at December 31, 2020 primarily as the result of loan growth and changes in the composition of the bank’s loan portfolio.
We have continued to experience limited charge-off amounts and stable collections of amounts previously charged-off. The overall historical loss rate used in our allowance for loan losses calculation continues to decline as previous quarters with larger loss rates are eliminated from the calculation as time passes. Our coverage ratio of nonperforming loans decreased to 1,017.27% at December 31, 2021 from 2,358.72% at December 31, 2020 primarily as the result of the increased balance of nonperforming loans during the period.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
The table below summarizes the allowance for loan losses balance and percent of total loans by loan category (in thousands).
* Loan balance in each category, expressed as a percentage of total loans, net of deferred fees.
As discussed above, we compute our allowance for loan losses either through a specific allowance to individually impaired loans or through a general allowance applied to homogeneous loans by loan type. The above allocation represents the allocation of the allowance by loan type regardless of specific or general allocations. The largest allocation has been made to one-to-four family, commercial real estate, and commercial due to the elevated risk in those categories of loans.
The table below summarizes balances, charge-offs, and specific allowances related to impaired loans as of the dates indicated (in thousands).
As indicated in the above table, during the periods presented, we have consistently maintained more than 2% of impaired loans in a reserve, either through a direct charge-off or in a specific reserve included as part of the allowance for loan losses. The total dollar amount of impaired loans increased $1.1 million, or 59.7%, to $2.8 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $1.8 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in impaired loans is attributable to loans becoming impaired during 2021 in excess of those that were paid off, charged off or returned to non-impaired status upon changes to borrowers’ status that made collectability of all amounts contractually due no longer in doubt.
REO
The tables below summarize the balances and activity in REO as of the dates and for the periods indicated (in thousands).
As indicated in the above table, the balance in REO has totaled $0.8 million and $1.9 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We continue to write-down REO as needed and maintain focus on disposing of our remaining properties.
As of December 31, 2021, our REO property with the largest balance of $0.7 million consisted of approximately eight acres of commercial land with frontage on U.S. Highway 153 in Anderson, South Carolina. The property was acquired in October 2013.
Bank Owned Life Insurance (“BOLI”)
BOLI policies are recorded at book value based on cash surrender values provided by a third-party administrator. The assets of the separate BOLI account are invested in the Lincoln National Life Insurance Co. Investment Allocation account rated AA- which is composed primarily of U.S. Government agency sponsored funds and mortgage-backed securities fund. The assets in the general account are invested in four insurance carriers with ratings ranging from AA- to AA+. The assets of the hybrid account are invested in two different insurance carriers with ratings ranging from A+ to A++.
The following table summarizes the composition of BOLI as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
Net Deferred Tax Assets
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined using the asset and liability method and are reported on a net basis in our consolidated balance sheets. Under this method, the net deferred tax asset or liability is based on the tax effects of the differences between the book and tax basis of assets and liabilities and recognizes enacted changes in tax rates and laws. When deferred tax assets are recognized, they are subject to a valuation allowance based on management’s judgment as to whether realization is more likely than not. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the following sources of taxable income:
· future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
· future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards;
· taxable income in prior carryback years; and
· tax planning strategies that would, if necessary, be implemented.
We determined a tax valuation allowance totaling $0.4 million and $0.3 million was required as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to state net operating losses of the Company.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired (including identifiable intangibles) in transactions accounted for as business combinations. Goodwill has an indefinite useful life and is evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. We had $0.7 million of goodwill as of December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Deposits
The following table presents average deposits by category, percentage of total average deposits and average rates for the periods indicated (in thousands).
As indicated in the above table, average deposit balances increased approximately $158.3 million, or 18.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared December 31, 2020. The increase in total average deposits was mainly attributable to the $135.8 million, or 44.3%, increase in money market accounts and $75.4 million, or 42.9%, in noninterest-bearing demand accounts, offset by a $89.4 million, or 26.9%, decline in time deposits.
The following table presents details of the applicable interest rates on our certificates of deposit at the dates indicated (in thousands).
The following table presents contractual maturities for certificates of deposit, as of December 31, 2021, in amounts equal to or greater than $250,000 (in thousands):
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we estimate that we have approximately $393.8 million and $295.0 million, respectively, in uninsured deposits including related interest accrued and unpaid. Since it is not reasonably practicable to provide a precise measure of uninsured deposits, these amounts are estimates and are based on the same methodologies and assumptions used for the Bank’s regulatory reporting requirements by the FDIC for the Call Report.
Borrowings
We had fixed rate FHLB advances totaling $5.0 million and $16.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. FHLB advances are secured by qualifying one-to-four family permanent and commercial loans and by a blanket collateral agreement with the FHLB. At December 31, 2021, we had unused borrowing capacity with the FHLB of $30.7 million based on collateral pledged at that date. We had total additional credit availability with the FHLB of $355.7 million as of December 31, 2021, if additional collateral was available and pledged.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances and interest rates on our FHLB advances as of or for the period indicated (in thousands).
Junior Subordinated Notes
We had $35.9 million and $35.7 million in three issuances of junior subordinated notes outstanding at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Notes totaling $8.2 million, payable to an unconsolidated subsidiary, accrue interest at 1.85% above the 90-day LIBOR, adjusted quarterly. Notes totaling $10.0 million accrue interest at a fixed rate of 6.50% until November 30, 2023, at which time the interest will accrue at 3.43% above the 90-day LIBOR, adjusted quarterly. Notes totaling $18.0 million issued in 2020 accrue interest at a fixed rate of 4.375% until November 15, 2025, at which time the interest will accrue at 4.16% above the 90-day Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), adjusted quarterly. The effective interest rate on the notes was 4.43% at December 31, 2021 and 4.44% at December 31, 2020.
Equity
Total shareholders’ equity increased $10.9 million to $97.4 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $86.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to $16.1 million of net income partially offset by common and preferred stock repurchases of $4.0 million and dividends declared totaling $2.2 million.
Discussion of Results of Operation
Like most financial institutions, net interest income is our primary source of revenue. Net interest income is the difference between interest income earned on interest-earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and interest incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Net interest income depends upon the relative mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the ratio of interest-earning assets to total assets and of interest-bearing liabilities to total funding sources, and movements in market interest rates. Our net interest income can be significantly influenced by a variety of factors, including overall loan demand, economic conditions, credit risk, the amount of nonearning assets, the amounts of and rates at which assets and liabilities reprice, variances in prepayment of loans and securities, early withdrawal of deposits, exercise of call options on borrowings or securities, a general rise or decline in interest rates, changes in the slope of the yield-curve, and balance sheet growth or contraction. Our asset and liability management committee (“ALCO”) seeks to manage interest rate risk under a variety of rate environments by structuring our balance sheet and off-balance sheet positions.
Average Balances and Net Interest Income Analysis
The following table sets forth the average balances of assets and liabilities, the total dollar amounts of interest income and dividends from average interest-earning assets on a tax-equivalent basis, the total dollar amounts of interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, and the resulting average tax-equivalent yields and cost for the periods indicated. All average balances are daily average balances. Nonaccrual loans were included in the computation of average balances, but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or expense.
(1) Tax exempt loans and investments are calculated giving effect to a 21% federal tax rate, or $74,000, $52,000, and $30,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(2) Net interest-earning assets represents total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Tax-equivalent net interest rate spread represents the difference between the tax equivalent yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Tax-equivalent net interest margin represents tax equivalent net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any securities purchased with agreements to repurchase or commercial paper.
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to change in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately, based on the absolute values of changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
(1) Nonaccrual loans are included in the above analysis.
(2) Interest income on tax exempt loans and investments are adjusted for based on a 21% federal tax rate.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
General. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.1 million, compared to $8.6 million for 2020. The increase in net income was primarily the result of increases in net interest income and noninterest income of $8.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively, and a decrease in provision for loan losses of $1.8 million, partially offset by increases in noninterest expense totaling $1.1 million.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $8.2 million, or 19.6%, to $49.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $41.7 million for 2020. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a $104.7 million increase in average loans, a $38.8 million increase in average investments, both taxable and tax exempt and decreases in costs on our average time deposits and money market accounts. These changes were partially offset by the decline in yields on our loans and investments during the period and a $82.9 million increase in our average interest-bearing liabilities.
Our tax-equivalent net interest margin was 4.44% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 4.42% for 2020, an increase of two basis points. The increase in net interest margin was primarily attributable to interest rate reductions which impacted our cost of funds in the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by the impact of these interest rate reductions on our loans, investments, and interest-earning deposits.
CarBucks provides specialty floor plan inventory financing for more than 2,000 small automobile dealers in over 20 states. Credit lines are established for each approved dealer using Board approved underwriting guidelines. Advances and repayments on credit lines averaging $0.1 million are vehicle specific. The inventory typically consists of over 12,000 floored used vehicles with an average price of $8,400 per unit, generally has an average 61-day turnover, and generates approximately $250 in financing fees per vehicle which is included in loan interest income.
CarBucks net income increased $1.9 million to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.5 million for the same period in 2020. Net interest income increased $2.3 million to $17.2 million for the 2021 period from $14.9 million for the same period a year ago primarily due to increased fees related to increases in inventory. Provision for loan losses decreased $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 due to decreased net charge offs and lower qualitative adjustments related to COVID-19 uncertainty in 2021. Noninterest expense increased $0.3 million to $9.9 million for the 2021 period compared to $9.6 million for the same period in 2020 due primarily to increased salary and overhead allocation expenses.
Provision for Loan Losses. We recorded a provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $1.3 million due to organic loan growth and certain qualitative adjustments in response to shifts in used car demand which could impact our CarBucks portfolio. This compares to a $3.1 million provision for loan losses in 2020. We are experiencing continued stabilization in asset quality, low charge-off amounts and a decline in the historical loss rates used in our allowance for loan losses model. In light of ongoing supply chain disruptions, labor shortages and the associated impact on monetary policy, there is a risk that loss rates could increase.
Noninterest Income
The following table summarizes the components of noninterest income and the corresponding changes between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Our noninterest income increased $1.3 million to $3.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. This increase was driven by a $1.2 million gain on sale of a portion of the loan portfolio and a $0.8 million gain on the settlement of litigation, partially offset by a $0.8 million loss on sale of investment securities available for sale.
Noninterest Expense
The following table summarizes the components of noninterest expense and the corresponding change between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Our noninterest expense increased $1.1 million to $31.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020.
· Compensation and employee benefits increased $0.8 million, or 3.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase is primarily related to increased full-time equivalent employees, annual raises and increases in employee benefits, incentives and commissions.
· Federal deposit insurance premiums increased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to higher deposit balances.
· Professional and advisory expenses decreased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily as a result of the reduced reliance on external advisors.
· Data processing expenses increased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to an increased number of accounts and transactions.
· Marketing and advertising increased $22 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to sponsorship contributions and donations in 2021 that were not paid in 2020.
· Net cost of operation of REO decreased $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to valuation adjustments for updated appraisals or sales contract amounts.
· Other noninterest expense increased $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, primarily as the result of software maintence and license fees and a one-time fee rated to the prepayment of FHLB advances, partially offset by a decrease in office supplies expense.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense totaled $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.5 million for 2020. Income tax expense for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020 benefited from tax-exempt income related to municipal bond investments and BOLI income resulting in effective tax rates of 24.3% and 22.4%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily attributable to the growth of taxable income exceeding that of nontaxable income.
We continue to have unutilized net operating losses for state income tax purposes and do not have a material current tax receivable or liability.
Liquidity, Market Risk, and Capital Resources
Liquidity. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments, advances from the FHLB, and the sale of available-for-sale securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and mortgage prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. Our ALCO, under the direction of our Chief Financial Officer, is responsible for establishing and monitoring our liquidity targets and strategies in order to ensure that sufficient liquidity exists for meeting the borrowing needs and deposit withdrawals of our customers as well as unanticipated contingencies. We have not experienced any unusual pressure on our deposit balances or our liquidity position as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that, as of December 31, 2021, we have enough sources of liquidity to satisfy our liquidity needs for the next twelve months and thereafter.
We regularly monitor and adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of expected loan demand, expected deposit flows and borrowing maturities, yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities, and the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquid assets are invested generally in FHLB and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond (“FRB”) interest-earning deposits and investment securities and are also used to pay off short-term borrowings. At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $124.1 million. Included in this total was $102.5 million held at the FRB, $1.2 million held at the FHLB, and $16.9 million held at correspondent banks in interest-earning accounts.
Our cash flows are derived from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as reported in our consolidated statements of cash flows included in our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following summarizes the most significant sources and uses of liquidity during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
In addition, because the Company is a separate entity from the Bank, it must provide for its own liquidity. The Company is responsible for payment of dividends declared on its common and preferred stock and interest and principal on any outstanding debt or trust preferred securities. The Company currently has internal capital resources to meet these obligations. While the Company has access to capital, the ultimate sources of its liquidity are dividends from the Bank and tax allocation agreements, which are limited by applicable law and regulations. The Bank paid no dividends to the Company in 2021 or 2020.
At December 31, 2021, we had $327.6 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit through unused lines of credit and stand-by letters of credit.
During 2021, we entered into an agreement to fund capital contributions of up to $1 million with a financial technology company. As of December 31, 2021, none of the commitment has been funded. We will account for our ownership interest in the financial technology company in accordance with Subtopic 946-323 as an equity method investment. We have unfunded commitments of $1 million related to this agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on our deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on certificates of deposit. Based on historical experience and current market interest rates, we anticipate that following their maturity we will retain a large portion of our retail certificates of deposit with maturities of one year or less as of December 31, 2021.
In addition to loans, we invest in securities that provide a source of liquidity, both through repayments and as collateral for borrowings. Our securities portfolio includes both callable securities (which allow the issuer to exercise call options) and mortgage-backed securities (which allow borrowers to prepay loans). Accordingly, a decline in interest rates would likely prompt issuers to exercise call options and borrowers to prepay higher-rate loans, producing higher than otherwise scheduled cash flows.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of management. If we require more funds than we are able to generate locally, we have a borrowing agreement with the FHLB. The following summarizes our borrowing capacity as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Market Risk. One of the most significant forms of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Interest rate fluctuations affect earnings by changing net interest income and other interest-sensitive income and expense levels. Accepting this risk is a normal part of banking and can be an important source of profitability and shareholder value. However, excessive risk can threaten our earnings, capital, liquidity and solvency. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. The board of directors of the Bank has established an ALCO, which is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the board of directors. Our ALCO monitors and seeks to manage market risk through rate shock analyses, economic value of equity analyses and simulations in order to avoid unacceptable earnings and market value fluctuations due to changes in interest rates.
From a funding perspective, we expect to satisfy the majority of our future requirements with retail deposit growth, including checking and savings accounts, money market accounts and certificates of deposit generated within our primary markets. If our funding needs exceed our deposits, we will utilize our excess funding capacity with the FHLB.
We have taken the following steps to reduce our interest rate risk:
· increased our personal and business checking accounts and our money market accounts, which are less rate-sensitive than certificates of deposit and which provide us with a stable, low-cost source of funds;
· limited the fixed rate period on loans within our portfolio;
· utilized our securities portfolio for positioning based on projected interest rate environments;
· priced certificates of deposit to encourage customers to extend to longer terms; and
· utilized FHLB advances for positioning.
Net Interest Income. We analyze the impact of changing rates on our net interest income. Using our balance sheet as of a given date, we analyze the repricing components of individual assets, and, adjusting for changes in interest rates at 100 basis point increments, we analyze the impact on our net interest income. Changes to our net interest income are shown in the following table based on immediate changes to interest rates in 100 basis point increments.
The table below reflects the impact of an immediate increase in interest rates in 100 basis point increments on Pretax Net Interest Income (“NII”).
The results from the rate shock analysis on NII are consistent with having an asset sensitive balance sheet. Having an asset sensitive balance sheet means assets will reprice at a faster pace than liabilities during the short-term horizon. The implications of an asset sensitive balance sheet will differ depending upon the change in market rates. For example, with an asset sensitive balance sheet in a declining interest rate environment, the interest rate on assets will decrease at a faster pace than liabilities. This situation generally results in a decrease in NII and operating income. Conversely, with an asset sensitive balance sheet in a rising interest rate environment, the interest rate on assets will increase at a faster pace than liabilities. This situation generally results in an increase in NII and operating income. As indicated in the table above, a 200 basis point increase in rates would result in a 5.9% increase in NII as of December 31, 2021 as compared to a 5.4% increase in NII as of December 31, 2020, suggesting that there is a benefit for the Company to net interest income in rising interest rates The Company generally seeks to remain neutral to the impact of changes in interest rates by maximizing current earnings while balancing the risk of changes in interest rates.
Capital Resources. Regulatory capital rules adopted in July 2013 and fully-phased in as of January 1, 2019, which we refer to as the Basel III rules or Basel III, impose minimum capital requirements for bank holding companies and banks. The Basel III rules apply to all national and state banks and savings associations regardless of size and bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies other than “small bank holding companies,” generally holding companies with consolidated assets of less than $3 billion (such as the Company). In order to avoid restrictions on capital distributions or discretionary bonus payments to executives, a covered banking organization must maintain a “capital conservation buffer” on top of our minimum risk-based capital requirements. This buffer must consist solely of common equity Tier 1, but the buffer applies to all three measurements (common equity Tier 1, Tier 1 capital and total capital). The capital conservation buffer consists of an additional amount of common equity Tier 1 equal to 2.5% of risk-weighted assets.
The Bank is subject to various regulatory capital requirements, including a risk-based capital measure. The risk-based guidelines and framework under prompt corrective action provisions include both a definition of capital and a framework for calculating risk-weighted assets by assigning balance sheet assets and off-balance sheet items to broad risk categories.
The tables below summarize the capital amounts and ratios of the Bank and the minimum regulatory requirements in accordance with Basel III and the prompt corrective action provisions at December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
(1) Includes capital conservation buffer of 2.50%.
Under the Federal Reserve’s Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement, the Company is not subject to the minimum capital adequacy and capital conservation buffer capital requirements at the holding company level, unless otherwise advised by the Federal Reserve (such capital requirements are applicable only at the Bank level). Although the minimum regulatory capital requirements are not applicable to the Company, we calculate these ratios for our own planning and monitoring purposes. The Company is not subject to the prompt corrective action provisions applicable to the Bank. The tables below summarize the capital amounts and ratios of the Company and the minimum regulatory requirements in accordance with Basel III at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (in thousands).
(1) Includes capital conservation buffer of 2.50%.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
To accommodate the financial needs of our customers, we make commitments under various terms to lend funds. These commitments include revolving credit agreements, term loan commitments and short-term borrowing agreements. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since we expect many of these commitments to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness and the amount of collateral we obtain, if we deem it to be necessary upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. Collateral held includes first and second mortgages on one-to-four family residential real estate, accounts receivable, inventory, and commercial real estate. Certain lines of credit are unsecured.
The following summarizes our approximate commitments to extend credit (in thousands):