Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 14, 2021 for the purpose of effecting an Initial Business Combination. We intend to effectuate our Initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 14, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $663,517, which primarily consisted of formation and operating costs of $759,636, partially offset by interest earned from the Trust Account of $5,442 and a change in fair value of overallotment liability of $90,677.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs up to August 9, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 (see Note 5 to the financial statements) for the Class B Common Stock to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $300,000 (see Note 5 to the financial statements). In addition, to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans (see Note 5 to the financial statements). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
On August 9, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 10,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, which is discussed in Note 3 to the financial statements, and the sale of 4,200,000 Private Warrants which is discussed in Note 4 to the financial statements, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor that closed simultaneously with the IPO. On August 18, 2021, the underwriter of the IPO partially exercised their over-allotment option and purchased an additional 492,480 Units, generating an aggregate of gross proceeds of $4,924,800 (see Note 3 to the financial statements). Simultaneously with the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, our Sponsor purchased an additional 98,496 Private Warrants, generating aggregate gross proceeds of $98,496 (see Note 4 to the financial statements). As payment for services including the exercise of the over-allotment option, the underwriters received 209,850 Representative Shares for nominal consideration.
Transaction costs related to the IPO and partial over-allotment exercise and the over-allotment amounted to $6,265,859 consisting of $3,672,368 of deferred underwriting commissions, $2,098,500 of fair value of the Representative Shares and $494,991 of other cash offering costs.
After consummation of the IPO on August 9, 2021, and the partial over-allotment exercise on August 18, 2021, we had $2,023,122 in our operating bank account, and working capital of $1,475,504. As of December 31, 2021, we had $769,484 of cash in our operating bank account and working capital of $931,264. We will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures in connection with travel to and from the offices, farms or similar locations of prospective
target businesses or their representatives or owners, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Initial Business Combination.
We have until November 9, 2022 to consummate an Initial Business Combination (or February 9, 2023 if we exercise our option to extend the date). It is uncertain that we will be able consummate an Initial Business Combination by either date. If an Initial Business Combination is not consummated by the required dates, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the authoritative guidance in ASC Topic 205-40, "Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern", management has determined that mandatory liquidation, and subsequent dissolution, should the Company be unable to complete a business combination, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after November 9, 2022 (or February 9, 2023, if extended).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for general and administrative services, including office space, utilities and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on August 4, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Initial Business Combination or our liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs Associated with Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A, "Expenses of Offering." Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Public Offering. Offering costs amounted to $6,265,859 and were allocated among Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption, the Public Warrants and Private Warrants, and stockholders' deficit upon the completion of the IPO.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ deficit. Our shares of Class A Common Stock sold in the IPO feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 10,492,480 shares of Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Warrant Instruments
We account for warrants issued in connection with the IPO and the Private Placement in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 480 and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” Under that provision, warrants that do not meet the criteria for equity treatment would be classified as liabilities. The Public Warrants and Private Warrants do meet the criteria for equity treatment, and therefore are included as part of stockholder’s deficit on the balance sheet. As of December 31, 2021, there were 5,246,240 Public Warrants and 4,298,496 Private Warrants outstanding.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the redeemable shares of Class A Common Stock and the non-redeemable shares of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per share does not consider the effect of the warrants and rights issued in connection with the IPO since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. The warrants are exercisable for 9,544,736 shares of Class A Common Stock in the aggregate. Shares subject to forfeiture are not included in weighted-average shares outstanding until the forfeiture restriction lapses. Subsequent measurement of the Class A Common Stock to redemption value is not considered in the calculation because redemption value closely approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt- Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for the Company in years beginning after December 15, 2023 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.