Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
Overview
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
This discussion includes references to non-GAAP financial measures as defined in the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission (‘SEC’). We present such non-GAAP financial measures, specifically, Core Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS non-GAAP financial measures, as we believe such information is of interest to the investment community because it provides additional meaningful methods of evaluating certain aspects of the Company’s operating performance from period to period on a basis that may not be otherwise apparent under U.S. GAAP, and these provide a measure against which our businesses may be assessed in the future.
Our methods of calculating these measures may differ from those used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. These financial measures should be viewed in addition to, not in lieu of, the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. See ‘Non-GAAP Financial Measures’ below for further discussion of our Core Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS non-GAAP financial measures
We are a rapidly growing personal lines independent insurance agency, reinventing the traditional approach to distributing personal lines products and services throughout the United States. We were founded with one vision in mind-to provide consumers with superior insurance coverage at the best available price and in a timely manner. By leveraging our differentiated business model and innovative technology platform, we are able to deliver a superior insurance experience to our clients.
The following discussion contains references to the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019. See Goosehead’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of the changes from year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financial Highlights for 2021:
•Total revenue increased 29% from 2020 to $151.3 million; Core Revenues* of $133.4 million increased 40% over 2020
•Total Written Premiums Placed increased 45% from 2020 to $1.6 billion
•Net income decreased by $10.5 million from 2020 to $8.3 million
•Adjusted EBITDA*, a non-GAAP measure, decreased by 25% from 2020 to $20.8 million, or 14% of total revenues
•Basic earnings per share was $0.28 and Adjusted EPS*, a non-GAAP measure, was $0.48 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Policies in Force increased 42% from December 31, 2020 to 1,011,000 at December 31, 2021.
•Corporate sales headcount increased 39% from December 31, 2020 to 506 at December 31, 2021.
◦As of December 31, 2021, 293 of these Corporate sales agents had less than one year of tenure and 213 had greater than one year of tenure.
•Operating franchises increased 34% from December 31, 2020 to 1,198 at December 31, 2021.
◦In Texas as of December 31, 2021, 57 operating franchises had less than one year of tenure and 214 operating franchisees had greater than one year of tenure.
◦Outside of Texas as of December 31, 2021, 333 operating franchises had less than one year of tenure and 594 had greater than one year of tenure.
*Core Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS are non-GAAP measures. Reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) and Adjusted EPS to EPS, the most directly comparable financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP, are set forth in the "Key performance indicators" section of Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of this Form 10-K.
Factors affecting our results of operations
We believe that the most significant factors affecting our results of operations include:
•Investment in growth. We continue to invest in expanding our national footprint, increasing our revenue-producing headcount, and increasing the level of support provided to our salespeople. Our ability to attract and retain top Corporate Channel sales agents and franchise owners, ramp up new agent productivity, and retain existing and future Policies in Force are key to continued profitable growth.
•Investment in technology. We continue to develop and invest in our technology platform to drive scalability, adaptability, and efficiency in both the Corporate Channel and Franchise Channel. We believe our significant proprietary investment in our technology is a key competitive advantage that supports our growth and operating margins.
•Continued penetration of Franchise Channel into existing markets. We will continue to market actively for new franchises in our established markets, including Texas, which represent over 99% of the U.S. population. We are now licensed with the necessary state departments of commerce and insurance and registered as a franchisor in all 50 states in the U.S.
•Continued retention of existing Book of Business. We have made significant progress in recent years in Client Retention metrics, and maintaining these high levels of Client Retention is key to future profitability.
•Increase in margins as business shifts from new to renewal. Because we are entitled to a higher percentage of Royalty Fees after the first term of a policy and the higher level of back-office support needed during the first term of an insurance policy, the Company begins to see higher levels of profitability on Renewal Revenue. We will focus simultaneously on converting New Business Revenue to Renewal Revenue through our retention efforts, and on continuing to grow New Business Revenue that will convert and allow us to expand our margins in future periods.
•Strength of the insurance market or particular lines of business. We generate the majority of our revenues through commissions, which are calculated as a percentage of the total insurance policy premium. A softening of the insurance market or the particular lines of business that are our focus, characterized by a period of declining premium rates, could negatively impact our profitability.
•Seasonality and cyclicality of housing market conditions. The majority of our new accounts are sourced by referral sources tied to home closing transactions. Major slowdowns in the various housing markets Goosehead serves could impact our ability to generate new business. We experience seasonality and revenue related to the sale of insurance policies throughout the course of a calendar year that is tied to the seasonality of new home sales. Revenue from home insurance leads is higher from April to August and lower from October through January. While this can impact month-to-month or quarter-to-quarter results, we expect productivity to normalize year-over-year.
•Effect of natural or man-made disasters. Any increases in loss ratios due to natural or man-made disasters could impact our Contingent Commissions, which are primarily driven by both growth and loss ratio metrics.
•Cost of being a public company. To operate as a public company, we are required to continue to implement changes in certain aspects of our business and develop, manage, and train management level and other employees to comply with on-going public company requirements. We also incur expenses as a public company, including public reporting obligations, proxy statements, stockholder meetings, stock exchange fees and transfer agent fees.
Effects of the reorganization on our corporate structure
Goosehead Insurance, Inc. was formed for the purpose of the Offering and has engaged to date only in activities related to Goosehead Financial, LLC. Goosehead Insurance, Inc. is a holding company and its sole material asset is a controlling ownership and profits interest in Goosehead Financial, LLC. All of our business is conducted through Goosehead Financial, LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries, and the financial results of Goosehead Financial, LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements of Goosehead Insurance, Inc. Goosehead Financial, LLC is currently taxed as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, as a result, its members, including Goosehead Insurance, Inc., pay taxes with respect to their allocable shares of its net taxable income.
Prior redemptions and exchanges of LLC Units have resulted, and we expect future redemptions and exchanges will result in increases in the tax basis in our share of the tangible and intangible assets of Goosehead Financial, LLC that otherwise would not have been available. These increases in tax basis have reduced the amount of tax we are required to pay, and may reduce the amount of tax that we would otherwise be required to pay in the future. The tax receivable agreement requires Goosehead Insurance, Inc. to pay 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize to the Pre-IPO LLC Members. Furthermore, payments under the tax receivable agreement give rise to additional tax benefits and therefore additional payments under the tax receivable agreement itself. See "Item 13. Certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence".
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely restricted the level of economic activity around the world. In response to this outbreak, the governments of many countries, states, cities and other geographic regions, including in the United States, have taken preventative or protective actions, such as imposing restrictions on travel and business operations and advising or requiring individuals to limit or forego their time outside of their homes. In the United States, temporary closures of businesses have been ordered and numerous other businesses have temporarily closed voluntarily.
Given the uncertainty regarding the spread and severity of COVID-19 and the adverse effects on the national and global economy, the related financial impact on our business cannot be accurately predicted at this time. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from the authorities, including federal, state and local public health officials and as a result may take additional actions. While we intend to continue to execute on our strategic plans and operational initiatives during the outbreak, in these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. See Part II, Item 1A. “Risk Factors-The ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy in a significant manner and may continue to do so for an extended period of time, and could also materially adversely affect our business and operating results.”
Certain income statement line items
Revenues
In 2021, revenue increased by 29% to $151.3 million from $117.0 million in 2020. Total Written Premium growth, which is the best leading indicator of future revenue growth, was 45% to $1.6 billion from $1.1 billion in 2020. Total Written Premiums Placed drive our current and future Core Revenue and gives us potential opportunities to earn Ancillary Revenue in the form of Contingent Commissions. Our various revenue streams do not equally contribute to the long-term value of Goosehead. For instance, Renewal Revenue and Renewal Royalty Fees are more predictable and have higher margin profiles, thus are higher quality revenue streams for the Company. Alternatively, Contingent Commissions, while high margin, are unpredictable and dependent on insurance company underwriting and forces of nature and thus are lower quality revenue for the Company. Our revenue streams can be viewed in three distinct categories: Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, and Ancillary Revenue, which are non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation of Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, and Ancillary Revenue to total revenue, the most directly comparable financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP, are set forth in the "Key performance indicators" section of Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of this Form 10-K.
Core Revenue:
•Renewal Commissions - highly predictable, higher-margin revenue stream, which is managed by our service team.
•Renewal Royalty Fees - highly predictable, higher-margin revenue stream, which is managed by our service team. For policies in their first renewal term, we see an increase in our share of royalties from 20% to 50% on the commission paid by the Carriers.
•New Business Commissions - predictable based on agent headcount and consistent ramp-up of agents, but lower margin than Renewal Commissions because of higher commissions paid to agents and higher back-office costs associated with policies in their first term. This revenue stream has predictably converted into higher-margin Renewal Commissions historically, and we expect this to continue moving forward.
•New Business Royalty Fees - predictable based on franchise count and consistent ramp-up of franchises, but lower margin than Renewal Royalty Fees because the Company only receives a royalty fee of 20% on the commissions paid by the Carrier in the first term of every policy and higher back-office costs associated with policies in their first term. This revenue stream has predictably convert into higher-margin Renewal Royalty Fees historically, and we expect this to continue moving forward.
•Agency Fees - although predictable based on agent count, Agency Fees do not renew like New Business Commissions and Renewal Commissions.
Cost Recovery Revenue:
•Initial Franchise Fees - one-time Cost Recovery Revenue stream per franchise unit that covers the Company's costs to recruit, train, onboard, and support the franchise for the first year. These fees are fully earned and non-refundable when a franchise attends our initial training.
•Interest Income - like Initial Franchise Fees, interest income is a Cost Recovery Revenue stream that reimburses the Company for those franchises on a payment plan.
Ancillary Revenue:
•Contingent Commissions - although high margin, Contingent Commissions are unpredictable and susceptible to weather events and Carrier underwriting results. Management does not rely on Contingent Commissions for operating cash flow or budget planning.
•Other Income - book transfer fees, marketing investments from Carriers and other items that are unpredictable and supplemental to other revenue streams.
We discuss below the breakdown of our revenue by stream:
(1) Renewal Commissions, New Business Commissions, Agency Fees, and Contingent Commissions are included in "Commissions and agency fees" as shown on the Consolidated statements of operations.
(2) Renewal Royalty Fees, New Business Royalty Fees, Initial Franchise Fees, and Other Income are included in "Franchise revenues" as shown on the Consolidated statements of operations.
Core Revenue:
The Company's primary source of revenue is through the placement of insurance policies. We are paid a percentage of the premium from the Carriers in the form of New Business Commissions and, in states which allow it, we charge Agency Fees for the placement of the policy. For policies placed by the Franchise Channel, we receive 20% of the commissions and fees received as New Business Royalties during the first term of the policy. All clients are serviced by our world-class service centers, allowing for predictable retention of our Book of Business, which has historically been 89%. All commissions received in the Corporate Channel after the first term of the policy are recognized as Renewal Commissions, which are higher margin due to lower servicing costs. For all policies that renew in our Franchise Channel, we receive 50% of the commissions received from the Carrier as Renewal Royalty Fees, creating a mechanical increase in revenue of 120% if we renew at historical rates, and higher margin due to lower servicing costs on higher revenue. For this reason, and because we are placing an increasing percentage of Total Written Premium in the Franchise Channel, Core Revenue growth will lag that of Total Written Premium.
Cost Recovery Revenue:
The Company charges every franchise an Initial Franchise Fee, which, on a cash flow basis, covers our costs to recruit, train, onboard, and support the franchise for the first year. The Initial Franchise Fee is determined by the state of the Franchise location and the payment terms. The Company recognizes revenue over the 10-year life of the contract. If the franchise elects the payment plan, the difference between the pay-in-full and the payment plan amounts is recognized as Interest Income using the interest rate method over the 5-year term of the payment plan.
Ancillary Revenue:
With certain Carriers, the Company has the opportunity to earn additional revenue in the form of Contingent Commissions, typically based on the growth and loss ratio of the business placed with the select Carriers. The Contingent Commissions are extremely difficult to predict in any given period. Although the Company can control the amount of business placed with the Carriers, loss ratios depend on many factors that are outside of our control, such as weather events and Carrier underwriting accuracy. As such, we view these Contingent Commissions as a bonus and have historically returned the cash from the Continent Commissions to shareholders by way of a special dividend. The Company estimates the amount to be received during the period over which the Contingent Commissions are earned.
Below is a summary showing the historical Contingent Commissions as a percentage of Total Written Premiums Placed for the period in which the Contingent Commissions were earned (in thousands).
Contingent Commissions can vary significantly from year-to-year and should be viewed over several years. Since 2019, revenue from Contingent Commissions have historically represented approximately 0.97% of Total Written Premium at year-end. Most of our Contingent Commissions are earned in the year prior to when they are received. For the year ended December 31, 2019, $5.4 million of Contingent Commissions were earned (below our historical average as a percentage of premium), of which $3.6 million was still receivable at December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $16.7 million of Contingent Commissions were earned (significantly above our historical average as a percentage of premium), of which $15.1 million was still receivable at December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, $9.9 million of Contingent Commissions were earned (significantly below our historical average as a percentage of premium), of which $7.4 million was still receivable at December 31, 2021. Contingent Commissions are paid by Carriers based upon the profitability, volume and/or growth of the business
placed with such companies during the prior year, therefore, Contingent Commissions earned can vary greatly from year to year.
Premium by line of business
We are a distributor of insurance policies in a range of primarily personal lines of business including homeowner’s insurance, automotive, dwelling property insurance, flood, wind and earthquake insurance, excess liability or umbrella insurance, specialty lines insurance (motorcycle, recreational vehicle, and other insurance), commercial lines insurance (general liability, property and auto insurance for small businesses) and life insurance. The following table sets forth our Total Written Premium placed by line of business by amount and as a percentage of our Total Written Premium for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Expenses
Due to our purely organic-focused growth strategy, virtually all of our investments in future growth are in people and certain technologies. Therefore, the majority of our investments are not capitalizable and are recognized immediately on our statement of operations.
Employee compensation and benefits. Employee compensation and benefits is our largest expense and consists of (a) base compensation comprising salary, bonuses and benefits paid and payable to employees, and (b) stock option awards for our senior employees. We expect to continue to experience a general rise in compensation and benefits expense commensurate with expected growth in headcount and with the need to maintain competitive compensation levels as we expand geographically and create new products and services.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses include technology, travel, accounting, legal and other professional fees, commissions, placement fees, office expenses, depreciation and other costs associated with our operations. Our occupancy-related costs and professional services expenses, in particular, generally increase or decrease in relative proportion to the number of our employees and the overall size and scale of our business operations. Expenses allocated to the Segments related to our service centers and other overhead are applied to the appropriate Segment using a transfer pricing methodology that seeks to maximize the scale efficiencies of our business by sharing certain expenses across the two Segments. These shared expenses are then allocated between the two Segments based on certain cost drivers related to each expense. Examples of specific expenses and their cost drivers include, but are not limited to: service team compensation costs are allocated based on the number of cases processed for each Segment, our rent expense by location is allocated based on the full time equivalent count and Segment, and our technology charges are allocated based on the number of individual licenses used by each Segment.
Key performance indicators
Our key operating metrics are discussed below:
Total Written Premium
Total Written Premium represents for any reported period, the total amount of current (non-cancelled) gross premium that is placed with Goosehead’s portfolio of Carriers. We believe that Total Written Premium is an
appropriate measure of operating performance because it reflects growth of our business relative to other insurance agencies.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had $1.6 billion in Total Written Premium, representing a 45% increase, compared to $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table shows Total Written Premium by channel for the years ended 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
Policies in Force
Policies in Force means as of any reported date, the total count of current (non-cancelled) policies placed with Goosehead’s portfolio of Carriers. We believe that Policies in Force is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it reflects growth of our business relative to other insurance agencies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 1,011,000 Policies in Force compared to 713,000 as of December 31, 2020, representing a 42% increase.
NPS
Net Promoter Score (NPS) is calculated based on a single question: “How likely are you to refer Goosehead Insurance to a friend, family member or colleague?” Clients that respond with a 6 or below are Detractors, a
score of 7 or 8 are called Passives, and a 9 or 10 are Promoters. NPS is calculated by subtracting the percentage of Detractors from the percentage of Promoters. For example, if 50% of respondents were Promoters and 10% were Detractors, NPS is a 40. NPS is a useful gauge of the loyalty of client relationships and can be compared across companies and industries.
NPS has decreased modestly to 91 as of December 31, 2021 from 92 at December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the service team’s continued focus on delivering highly differentiated service levels.
Client Retention
Client Retention is calculated by comparing the number of all clients that had at least one policy in force twelve months prior to the date of measurement and still have at least one policy in force at the date of measurement. We believe Client Retention is useful as a measure of how well Goosehead retains clients year-over-year and minimizes defections.
Client Retention increased to 89% at December 31, 2021 when compared to 88% at December 31, 2020, again driven by the service team’s continued focus on delivering highly differentiated service levels. Our retention rate is even stronger on a premium basis. In 2021, we retained 93% of the premiums we distributed in 2020, an increase from premium retention in 2020 of 89% due to improved client retention and premium increases from our Carriers during the year. Our premium retention rate is higher than our Client Retention rate as a result of both premiums increasing year over year and additional coverages sold by our sales and service teams.
New Business Revenue
New Business Revenue is commissions received from the Carrier, Agency Fees received from clients, and Royalty Fees relating to policies in their first term.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, New Business Revenue grew 31% to $48.2 million, from $36.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Growth in New Business Revenue is driven by an increase in Corporate Channel sales agent headcount of 39% and growth in operating franchises of 34%.
Renewal Revenue
Renewal Revenue is commissions received from the Carrier and Royalty Fees after the first term of a policy.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Renewal Revenue grew 46% to $85.2 million, from $58.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Growth in Renewal Revenue was driven by Client Retention of 89% at December 31, 2021. As our agent force matures on both the Corporate Channel and the Franchise Channel, the policies they wrote in prior years begins to convert from New Business Revenue to more profitable Renewal Revenue.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, Ancillary Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted EPS are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered substitutes for net income or earnings per share, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP measure. We refer to these measures as "non-GAAP financial measures." We consider these non-GAAP financial measures to be useful metrics for management and investors to facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period by excluding potential differences caused by variations in capital structures, tax position, depreciation, amortization and certain other items that we believe are not representative of our core business. Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, Ancillary Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted EPS have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, you should not consider Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, Ancillary Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, or Adjusted EPS in isolation or as substitutes for net income, earnings per share or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies may calculate Core Revenue, Cost Recovery Revenue, Ancillary Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted EPS differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Core Revenue
Core Revenue is a supplemental measure of our performance and includes Renewal Commissions, Renewal Royalty Fees, New Business Commissions, New Business Royalty Fees, and Agency Fees. We believe that Core Revenue is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it summarizes all of our revenues from sales of individual insurance policies.
Core Revenue increased by $38.3 million, or 40%, to $133.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $95.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the increase is growth in operating franchises, corporate agent sales headcount, and number of policies in the renewal term from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
Cost Recovery Revenue
Cost Recovery Revenue is a supplemental measure of our performance and includes Initial Franchise Fees and Interest Income. We believe that Cost Recovery Revenue is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it summarizes revenues that are viewed by management as cost recovery mechanisms.
Cost Recovery Revenue increased by $2.7 million, or 52%, to $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the increase is a larger number of franchises in the system.
Ancillary Revenue
Ancillary Revenue is a supplemental measure of our performance and includes Contingent Commissions and Other Income. We believe that Ancillary Revenue is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it summarizes revenues that are ancillary to our core business.
Ancillary Revenue decreased by $6.7 million, or 39%, to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the decrease from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was unfavorable loss ratios with our carriers.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of our performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it eliminates the impact of items that do not relate to underlying business performance. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (the most directly comparable GAAP measure) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted to exclude equity-based compensation and other non-operating items, including, among other things, certain non-cash charges and certain non-recurring or non-operating gains or losses.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $7.0 million, or 25%, to $20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by a significant decrease in high-margin revenue from Contingent Commissions.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is Adjusted EBITDA as defined above, divided by total revenue excluding other non-operating items. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful in measuring profitability of operations on a consolidated level.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA Margin was 14% compared to 24% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Adjusted EBITDA margin reduction came from a significant decrease in high-margin Contingent Commissions, investments to grow the Corporate sales agents 39%, plus additional investments in systems technology.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS is a supplemental measure of our performance, defined as earnings per share (the most directly comparable GAAP measure) before non-recurring or non-operating income and expenses, adjusted to assume a single class of stock (Class A) and assuming non-controlling interest does not exist. Adjusted EPS is a useful measure to management because it eliminates the impact of items that do not relate to business performance and helps compare companies that may not have a dual-share class structure.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations
(1) Renewal Commissions, New Business Commissions, Agency Fees, and Contingent Commissions are included in "Commissions and agency fees" as shown on the Consolidated statements of operations.
(2) Renewal Royalty Fees, New Business Royalty Fees, Initial Franchise Fees, and Other Income are included in "Franchise revenues" as shown on the Consolidated statements of operations.
The following table show a reconciliation from net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
(1) Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by Total Revenue excluding other non-operating items ($20,838 / $151,312) for the year ended December 31, 2021, ($27,832 / $117,014) for the year ended December 31, 2020, and ($17,530 /$77,486) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following tables show a reconciliation from basic earnings per share to Adjusted EPS for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019. Note that totals may not sum due to rounding:
(1) Calculated as equity-based compensation divided by the weighted average of Class A and Class B shares outstanding during the period 2021 - [$7.3 million / ( 19.2 million + 17.7 million ) 2020 - [ $4.7 million / ( 16.8 million + 19.7 million )] 2019 - [ $1.5 million / ( 14.9 million + 21.4 million )]
Consolidated results of operations
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019. This information is derived from our accompanying consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. For further discussion regarding our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended
December 31, 2019, refer to "Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
Revenues
In 2021, revenue increased by 29% to $151.3 million from $117.0 million in 2020.
Commissions and agency fees
Commissions and agency fees consist of Core Revenue from New Business Commissions, Renewal Commissions, and Agency Fees, and Ancillary Revenue from Contingent Commissions generated from the Corporate Channel and Franchise Channel and other income.
The following table sets forth our commissions and agency fees by amount and as a percentage of our revenues for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Renewal Commissions increased by $10.2 million, or 35%, to $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $28.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases are primarily attributable to an increase in the number of policies in the renewal term at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020.
New Business Commissions increased by $4.8 million, or 28%, to $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from Agency Fees increased by $2.6 million, or 29%, to $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were primarily attributable to an increase in total sales agent head count to 506 at December 31, 2021, from 364 at December 31, 2020, a 39% increase.
Revenue from Contingent Commissions decreased by $6.7 million, or (40)%, to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to the increase in loss ratios in our book of business with the Carriers that offer contingency programs.
Franchise Revenues
Franchise Revenues consist of Core Revenues from Royalty Fees, Cost Recovery Revenues from Initial Franchise Fees, and Ancillary Revenues from Interest Income.
The following table sets forth our franchise revenues by amount and as a percentage of our revenues for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Revenue from Renewal Royalty Fees increase by $16.8 million, or 57%, to $46.1 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue from Renewal Royalty Fees was primarily attributable to an increase in the number of policies in the renewal term, and the higher Royalty Fee rate on renewal business compared to new business (50% vs. 20%, respectively).
Revenue from New Business Royalty Fees increased by $4.0 million, or 38%, to $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue from New Business Royalty Fees was primarily attributable to an increase in the total number of operating franchises at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020.
Initial Franchise Fee revenue increased approximately $2.3 million, or 54%, to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the increase in Initial Franchise Fees was the increase in total franchises.
Interest Income
Interest Income increased $0.4 million, or 42% to $1.2 million for 2021 from $0.8 million for 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to additional Franchise Agreements signed under the payment plan option.
Expenses
Employee compensation and benefits
Employee compensation and benefits expenses increased by $26.2 million, or 39%, to $93.0 million for 2021 from $66.8 million for 2020. This was attributable to an increase in total headcount from 2020 to 2021, as well as additional stock options granted during 2021.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $16.2 million, or 63%, to $41.7 million for 2021 from $25.5 million for 2020. This increase was attributable to travel expenses related to the ease of travel restrictions in 2021 and increases in expenses related to continued development of technology. The remainder of the increase is attributable to higher costs associated with an increase in operating franchises and employees.
Bad debts
Bad debts increased by $1.4 million, or 90%, to $3.0 million for 2021 from $1.6 million for 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to increases in Agency Fees sold by the company.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $1.7 million, or 55%, to $4.9 million for 2021 from $3.1 million for 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the increase in fixed assets during the same period, including a full year of depreciation on the fixed assets put in place in connection with the additional hiring and lease space taken during the year.
Other income (expense)
During 2021 the Company had other income of $185,000 related to franchise transfer fees and sublease income, compared to $90,000 in 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expenses increased by $0.6 million, or 24%, to $2.9 million for 2021 from $2.3 million for 2020. This increase is attributable to an increase in the average debt balance during the year.
Liquidity and capital resources
Historical liquidity and capital resources
We have managed our historical liquidity and capital requirements primarily through the receipt of revenues from our Corporate Channel and our Franchise Channel. Our primary cash flow activities involve: (1) generating cash flow from Corporate Channel operations, which largely includes Renewal Revenue (Corporate) and New Business Revenue (Corporate); (2) generating cash flow from Franchise Channel operations, which largely includes Royalty Fees and Initial Franchise Fees; (3) making distributions to the Goosehead Management Holders and Texas Wasatch Holders; and (4) borrowings, interest payments and repayments under our Credit Agreement. As of
December 31, 2021, our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash was $30.5 million. We have used cash flow from operations primarily to pay compensation and related expenses, general, administrative and other expenses, debt service and distributions to our owners.
Credit agreement
See "Note 9. Debt" in the consolidated financial statements included herein for a discussion of the Company's credit facilities.
Comparative cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operational, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operational activities was $35.4 million for 2021 as compared to net cash provided by operational activities of $24.6 million for 2020. This increase in net cash provided by operational activities was primarily attributable to a $17.6 million increase in cash provided by commissions and fees receivable, offset by a $10.5 million decrease in net income.
Investing activities
Net cash used in business investment activities was $15.4 million for 2021 as compared to net cash used in business investment activities of $10.3 million for 2020. This increase in net cash used in business investment activities was primarily attributable to intangible assets growth related to investments in the digital agent, as well as fixed asset growth directly related to headcount increases and additional office space buildout during the year.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $15.8 million for 2021 as compared to net cash used by financing activities of $3.3 million for 2020. This increase in net cash used financing activities is due to the $20.2 million decrease in proceeds received from notes payable during 2021, offset by a $23.5 million decrease in repayments made on notes payable and a $15.3 million increase in distributions and dividends paid during 2021.
Future sources and uses of liquidity
Our initial sources of liquidity will be (1) cash on hand, (2) net working capital, (3) cash flows from operations and (4) our Revolving Credit Facility. Based on our current expectations, we believe that these sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements and to meet our commitments in the foreseeable future.
We expect that our primary liquidity needs will comprise cash to (1) provide capital to facilitate the organic growth of our business, (2) pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees, (3) make payments under the tax receivable agreement, (4) pay interest and principal due on borrowings under our Credit Agreement and (5) pay income taxes.
Dividend policy
Assuming Goosehead Financial, LLC makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, tax receivable agreement payments and expenses (any such portion, an “excess
distribution”) will be made at the sole discretion of our board of directors. Our board of directors may change our dividend policy at any time. See “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities - Dividend policy".
Tax receivable agreement
We entered into a tax receivable agreement with the Pre-IPO LLC Members on May 1, 2018 that provides for the payment by us to the Pre-IPO LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in Goosehead Insurance, Inc.’s assets and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed arising as a result of payments made under the tax receivable agreement. See "Item 13. Certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence".
Holders of Goosehead Financial, LLC Units (other than Goosehead Insurance, Inc.) may, subject to certain conditions and transfer restrictions described above, redeem or exchange their LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock of Goosehead Insurance, Inc. on a one-for-one basis. Goosehead Financial, LLC has made an election under Section 754 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the regulations thereunder (the “Code”) effective for each taxable year in which a redemption or exchange of LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock occurs, which has resulted and is expected to result in increases to the tax basis of the assets of Goosehead Financial, LLC at the time of a redemption or exchange of LLC Units. Prior redemptions and exchanges have resulted, and we expect future redemptions and exchanges will result in increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of Goosehead Financial, LLC. These increases in tax basis have reduced the amount of tax we are required to pay, and may reduce the amount of tax that Goosehead Insurance, Inc. would otherwise be required to pay in the future. We have entered into a tax receivable agreement with the Pre-IPO LLC Members that provides for the payment by us to the Pre-IPO LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in Goosehead Insurance, Inc.’s assets resulting from (a) the purchase of LLC Units from any of the Pre-IPO LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (b) redemptions or exchanges by the Pre-IPO LLC Members of LLC Units for shares of our Class A common stock or (c) payments under the tax receivable agreement and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed arising as a result of payments made under the tax receivable agreement. This payment obligation is an obligation of Goosehead Insurance, Inc. and not of Goosehead Financial, LLC. For purposes of the tax receivable agreement, the cash tax savings in income tax will be computed by comparing the actual income tax liability of Goosehead Insurance, Inc. (calculated with certain assumptions) to the amount of such taxes that Goosehead Insurance, Inc. would have been required to pay had there been no increase to the tax basis of the assets of Goosehead Financial, LLC as a result of the redemptions or exchanges and had Goosehead Insurance, Inc. not entered into the tax receivable agreement. Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the tax receivable agreement is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. While the actual increase in tax basis from future purchases, redemptions or exchanges, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the tax receivable agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions or exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the redemption or exchange, the extent to which such redemptions or exchanges are taxable and the amount and timing of our income. See "Item 13. Certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence". We historically accounted, and anticipate that we will continue to account for the effects of these increases in tax basis and associated payments under the tax receivable agreement arising from redemptions or exchanges as follows:
•we will record an increase in deferred tax assets for the estimated income tax effects of the increases in tax basis based on enacted federal and state tax rates at the date of the redemption or exchange;
•to the extent we estimate that we will not realize the full benefit represented by the deferred tax asset, based on an analysis that will consider, among other things, our expectation of future earnings, we will reduce the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance; and
•we will record 85% of the estimated realizable tax benefit (which is the recorded deferred tax asset less any recorded valuation allowance) as an increase to the liability due under the tax receivable agreement and the remaining 15% of the estimated realizable tax benefit as an increase to additional paid-in capital.
All of the effects of changes in any of our estimates after the date of the redemption or exchange will be included in net income. Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net income.
Contractual obligations, commitments and contingencies
The following table represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, aggregated by type.
(1)The Company leases its facilities under non-cancelable operating leases. In addition to monthly lease payments, the lease agreements require the Company to reimburse the lessors for its portion of operating costs each year. Rent expense was $4.8 million, $1.9 million, and $1.6 million for year ending December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
(2)The Company refinanced its credit facilities on July 21, 2021 in the form of a $100 million term loan and $50 million revolving credit facility, of which $25 million was drawn as of December 31, 2021.
(3)Interest payments on our outstanding debt obligations under our Credit Agreement. Our debt obligations have variable interest rates. We have calculated future interest obligations based on the interest rate for our debt obligations as of December 31, 2021.
(4)See "Item 7. Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation - Tax receivable agreement."
Critical accounting policies and estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In applying many of these accounting principles, we need to make assumptions, estimates or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These assumptions, estimates or judgments, however, are both subjective and subject to change, and actual results may differ from our assumptions and estimates. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. See “Item 8. Financial statements and supplementary data - Summary of significant accounting policies” for a summary of our significant accounting policies, and discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Revenue recognition
The adoption of the new revenue standard on January 1, 2019 has increased the significance of judgments and estimates management must make to apply the guidance. In particular, judgments related to the amount of variable revenue consideration to ultimately be received on commission revenue, royalty fees, and contingent commissions, which were previously recognized when the Company received notification from the insurance carrier, now require significant judgments and estimates. The Company adjusts its estimates of revenue recognized for commissions and royalty fees based on cash collections during the terms of the policies.
Under the new standard, certain costs to obtain or fulfill a contract that were previously expensed as incurred have been capitalized. The Company capitalizes the incremental costs to obtain contracts primarily related to commission payments. These deferred costs are amortized over the expected life of the underlying franchise fee, and are included in Other assets in the Company's consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Liabilities under Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the Offering we entered into a tax receivable agreement with the Pre-IPO LLC Members that will provide for the payment by us to the Pre-IPO LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in Goosehead Financial, LLC’s assets resulting from (a) the acquisition of LLC Units using the net proceeds from any future offering, (b) redemptions or exchanges by the Pre-IPO LLC Members of LLC Units and the corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock for shares of our Class A common stock or (c) payments under the tax receivable agreement, and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed arising as a result of payments made under the tax receivable agreement.
The actual increase in tax basis from future redemptions and exchanges, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the tax receivable agreement, will vary depending on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the timing of any future redemptions, exchanges or purchases of the LLC Units held by Pre-IPO LLC Members, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of the purchase, redemption or exchange, the extent to which redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of the taxable income that we generate in the future, the tax rates then applicable and the portion of our payments under the tax receivable agreement constituting imputed interest.
As of December 31, 2021, as a result of the prior redemptions of LLC Units, we recognized liabilities totaling $101.0 million relating to our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement.