Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ substantially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. The following discussion should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report.
This discussion and analysis generally covers our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, including year-over-year comparisons versus the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We are a leading provider of high-performance semiconductor memory solutions for in-place associative computing applications in high growth markets such as artificial intelligence (AI) and high-performance computing (HPC), including natural language processing and computer vision. Our initial associative processing unit (“APU”) products are focused on applications using similarity search. Similarity search is used in visual search queries for ecommerce, computer vision, drug discovery, cyber security and service markets such as NoSQL, Elasticsearch, and OpenSearch. We also design, develop and market static random access memories, or SRAMs, that operate at speeds of less than 10 nanoseconds, which we refer to as Very Fast SRAMs, primarily for the networking and telecommunications and the military/defense and aerospace markets. We are subject to the highly cyclical nature of the semiconductor industry, which has experienced significant fluctuations, often in connection with fluctuations in demand for the products in which semiconductor devices are used. Our revenues have been substantially impacted by significant fluctuations in sales to our largest customer, Nokia. We expect that future direct and indirect sales to Nokia will continue to fluctuate significantly on a quarterly basis. The networking and telecommunications market has accounted for a significant portion of our net revenues in the past and has declined during the past several years and is expected to continue to decline. In anticipation of the decline of the networking and telecommunications market, we have been using the revenue generated by the sales of high-speed synchronous SRAM products to finance the development of our new in-place associative computing solutions and the marketing and sale of new types of SRAM products such as radiation-hardened and radiation-tolerant SRAMs. However, with no debt and substantial liquidity, we believe we are in a better financial position than many other companies of our size.
Since 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has affected many of the countries in which we, our customers, our suppliers and our other business partners conduct business. Governments in affected regions have implemented, and may continue to implement, safety precautions which include quarantines, travel restrictions, business closures, cancellations of public gatherings and other measures as they deem necessary. Many organizations and individuals, including the Company and our employees, are taking additional steps to avoid or reduce infection, including limiting travel and working from home. These measures have disrupted normal business operations both in and outside of affected areas and have had significant negative impacts on businesses and financial markets worldwide. While originally expected to be temporary, these disruptions negatively impacted our revenue, results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity in fiscal years 2021 and 2022, and may continue to negatively impact us in fiscal 2023.
We continue to monitor our operations and government recommendations and have made modifications to our normal operations because of the COVID-19 global pandemic. We have instituted many preventative measures and are regularly evaluating those measures and others as we continue to better understand our current and future operating
environment. From March 2020 through April 2022, except for our employees located in Taiwan, the majority of our employees worked from home around the world. In May 2021, due to a surge in COVID-19 infections in Taiwan, our employees in Taiwan worked from home under alternating schedules, and returned to their offices in July 2021. During the pandemic we have been able to maintain a substantial portion of our manufacturing operational capacity at our primary manufacturing support facility located in Hsin Chu, Taiwan where our suppliers are located and all of our products are manufactured. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, aside from the lengthening of lead times for wafers and assembly services and some price increases, including a 20% increase in the cost of wafers received in early calendar 2022, we have experienced minimal impact, and continue to experience minimal impact, on our manufacturing operations in Taiwan. Final testing of our product is conducted in house. Shipping and receiving operations at our United States headquarters were maintained by a skeleton crew with minimal impact. Our revenues were impacted by changes in customer buying patterns and communication limitations related to COVID-19 restrictions that required a significant number of our customer contacts to work from home. Our results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2022 demonstrated the challenges that we have faced during the COVID-19 global pandemic, which restricted the activities of our sales force and distributors, reduced customer demand and caused the postponement of investment in certain customer sectors. These challenges impacted us as we entered new markets and engaged with target customers to sell our new APU product. Industry conferences and on-site training workshops, which are typically used for building a sales pipeline, were limited due to COVID-19 related restrictions. We adapted our sales strategies for the COVID-19 environment, where we could not have face-to-face meetings and conduct secure meetings with government and defense customers. In addition to the continuing COVID-19 global pandemic, the recent military conflict in Ukraine and the rapid rise in energy prices may have an adverse impact on our business and financial condition.
The disruption to the marketplace that resulted from the COVID-19 global pandemic and that we may continue to experience is unlike anything we have ever had to deal with. While we continue to monitor the business metrics that we have historically used to predict our financial performance, we are uncertain as to whether these metrics will operate consistently with our historical experience.
As of March 31, 2022, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term and long-term investments of $47.3 million, with no debt. We have a team in-place with tremendous depth and breadth of experience and knowledge, with a legacy business that is providing an ongoing source of funding for the development of new product lines. We have a strong balance sheet and liquidity position that we anticipate will provide financial flexibility and security in the current environment of economic uncertainty with no current expectations of additional cash infusions required. Generally, our primary source of liquidity is cash equivalents and short-term investments. Our level of cash equivalents and short-term investments has historically been sufficient to meet our current and longer term operating and capital needs. We believe that during the next 12 months the COVID-19 global pandemic will continue to impact general economic activity and demand in our end markets. In addition, supply chain constraints have had an impact on our ability to fulfill all of our orders. While there has been some improvement, the situation remains fluid, and we do not expect significant relief from these constraints before the end of calendar year 2022. Although it is difficult to estimate the length or gravity of the continued impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, it is expected to have an adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position, including potential impairments, and liquidity in fiscal year 2023.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to provide emergency economic stimulus in response to the COVID-19 global pandemic. The CARES Act, along with the Consolidated Appropriations Act (“CAA”) and the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (“ARPA”) is an emergency economic stimulus package passed in response to the COVID-19 global pandemic that includes aid to small businesses in the form of loans and grants and other efforts to stabilize the U.S. economy. Also included in the CARES Act are numerous income tax provisions including changes to the net operating loss rules. During fiscal year 2021, we recorded a $378,000 tax benefit resulting from the carryback of our fiscal year 2020 federal net operating loss to fiscal year 2018 due to the five-year
net operating loss carryback provision from the CARES Act. We have not filed for funding related to the CARES Act, CAA and ARPA due to our strong balance sheet and liquidity position.
Revenues. Our revenues are derived primarily from sales of our Very Fast SRAM products. Sales to networking and telecommunications OEMs accounted for 49% to 53% of our net revenues during our last three fiscal years. We also sell our products to OEMs that manufacture products for military and aerospace applications such as radar and guidance systems and satellites, for test and measurement applications such as high-speed testers, for automotive applications such as smart cruise control, and for medical applications such as ultrasound and CAT scan equipment.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, the selling prices of our products generally decline over the life of the product. Our ability to increase net revenues, therefore, is dependent upon our ability to increase unit sales volumes of existing products and to introduce and sell new products with higher average selling prices in quantities sufficient to compensate for the anticipated declines in selling prices of our more mature products. Although we expect the average selling prices of individual products to decline over time, we believe that, over the next several quarters, our overall average selling prices will increase due to a continuing shift in product mix to a higher percentage of higher price, higher density products, and to a lesser extent, recent price increases to our customers due to supply constraints. Our ability to increase unit sales volumes is dependent primarily upon increases in customer demand but, particularly in periods of increasing demand, can also be affected by our ability to increase production through the availability of increased wafer fabrication capacity from TSMC, our wafer supplier, and our ability to increase the number of good integrated circuit die produced from each wafer through die size reductions and yield enhancement activities.
We may experience fluctuations in quarterly net revenues for a number of reasons. Historically, orders on hand at the beginning of each quarter are insufficient to meet our revenue objectives for that quarter and are generally cancelable up to 30 days prior to scheduled delivery. Accordingly, we depend on obtaining and shipping orders in the same quarter to achieve our revenue objectives. In addition, the timing of product releases, purchase orders and product availability could result in significant product shipments at the end of a quarter. Failure to ship these products by the end of the quarter may adversely affect our operating results. Furthermore, our customers may delay scheduled delivery dates and/or cancel orders within specified timeframes without significant penalty.
We sell our products through our direct sales force, international and domestic sales representatives and distributors. Our revenues have been and are expected to continue to be impacted by changes in customer buying patterns and communication limitations related to COVID-19 restrictions that require a significant number of our customer contacts to work from home. The majority of our customer contracts, which may be in the form of purchase orders, contracts or purchase agreements, contain performance obligations for delivery of agreed upon products. Delivery of all performance obligations contained within a contract with a customer typically occurs at the same time (or within the same accounting period). Transfer of control typically occurs at the time of shipment or at the time the product is pulled from consignment as that is the point at which delivery has occurred, title and the risks and rewards of ownership have passed to the customer, and we have a right to payment. Thus, we will generally recognize revenue upon shipment of the product. Sales to consignment warehouses, who purchase products from us for use by contract manufacturers, are recorded upon delivery to the contract manufacturer.
Historically, a small number of OEM customers have accounted for a substantial portion of our net revenues, and we expect that significant customer concentration will continue for the foreseeable future. Many of our OEMs use contract manufacturers to manufacture their equipment. Accordingly, a significant percentage of our net revenues is derived from sales to these contract manufacturers and to consignment warehouses. In addition, a significant portion of our sales are made to foreign and domestic distributors who resell our products to OEMs, as well as their contract manufacturers. Direct sales to contract manufacturers and consignment warehouses accounted
for 31.0%, 43.7% and 33.7% of our net revenues for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sales to foreign and domestic distributors accounted for 66.8%, 54.7% and 61.3% of our net revenues for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following direct customers accounted for 10% or more of our net revenues in one or more of the following periods:
Nokia was our largest customer in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020. Nokia purchases products directly from us and through contract manufacturers and distributors. Based on information provided to us by its contract manufacturers and our distributors, purchases by Nokia represented approximately 29%, 39% and 38% of our net revenues in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our revenues have been substantially impacted by significant fluctuations in sales to Nokia, and we expect that future direct and indirect sales to Nokia will continue to fluctuate substantially on a quarterly basis and that such fluctuations may significantly affect our operating results in future periods. To our knowledge, none of our other OEM customers accounted for more than 10% of our net revenues in fiscal 2022, 2021 or 2020.
Cost of Revenues. Our cost of revenues consists primarily of wafer fabrication costs, wafer sort, assembly, test and burn-in expenses, the amortized cost of production mask sets, stock-based compensation and the cost of materials and overhead from operations. All of our wafer manufacturing and assembly operations, and a significant portion of our wafer sort testing operations, are outsourced. Accordingly, most of our cost of revenues consists of payments to TSMC and independent assembly and test houses. Because we do not have long-term, fixed-price supply contracts, our wafer fabrication, assembly and other outsourced manufacturing costs are subject to the cyclical fluctuations in demand for semiconductors. We have experienced increased costs as a result of supply chain constraints for wafers and outsourced assembly, burn-in and test operations. We expect these increased manufacturing costs will continue into fiscal 2023. Cost of revenues also includes expenses related to supply chain management, quality assurance, and final product testing and documentation control activities conducted at our headquarters in Sunnyvale, California and our branch operations in Taiwan.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit margins vary among our products and are generally greater on our radiation hardened and radiation tolerant SRAMS, on our higher density products and, within a particular density, greater on our higher speed and industrial temperature products. We expect that our overall gross margins will fluctuate from period to period as a result of shifts in product mix, changes in average selling prices and our ability to control our cost of revenues, including costs associated with outsourced wafer fabrication and product assembly and testing.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for design engineers and other technical personnel, the cost of developing prototypes, stock-based compensation and fees paid to consultants. We charge all research and development expenses to operations as incurred. We charge mask costs used in production to cost of revenues over a 12-month period. However, we charge costs related to pre-production mask sets, which are not used in production, to research and development expenses at the time they are incurred. These charges often arise as we transition to new process technologies and, accordingly, can cause research and development expenses to fluctuate on a quarterly basis. We believe that continued investment in research and development is critical to our long-term success, and we expect to continue to devote
significant resources to product development activities. In particular, we are devoting substantial resources to the development of a new category of in-place associative computing products. Accordingly, we expect that our research and development expenses will continue to be substantial in future periods and may lead to operating losses in some periods. Such expenses as a percentage of net revenues may fluctuate from period to period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of commissions paid to independent sales representatives, salaries, stock-based compensation and related expenses for personnel engaged in sales, marketing, administrative, finance and human resources activities, professional fees, costs associated with the promotion of our products and other corporate expenses. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods if we are able to grow and expand our sales force but that, to the extent our revenues increase in future periods, these expenses will generally decline as a percentage of net revenues. We also expect that, in support of any future growth that we are able to achieve, general and administrative expenses will generally increase in absolute dollars.
Acquisition
On November 23, 2015, we acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of privately held MikaMonu Group Ltd. (“MikaMonu”), a development-stage, Israel-based company that specialized in in-place associative computing for markets including big data, computer vision and cyber security. MikaMonu, located in Tel Aviv, held 12 United States patents and had a number of pending patent applications.
The acquisition was undertaken in order to gain access to the MikaMonu patents and the potential markets, and new customer base in those markets, that can be served by new products that we are developing using the in-place associative computing technology.
The acquisition has been accounted for as a purchase under authoritative guidance for business combinations. The purchase price of the acquisition was allocated to the intangible assets acquired, with the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired recorded as goodwill. We perform a goodwill impairment test near the end of each fiscal year.
Under the terms of the acquisition agreement, we paid the former MikaMonu shareholders initial cash consideration of approximately $4.9 million. We are also required to pay the former MikaMonu shareholders future contingent consideration consisting of retention payments and “earnout” payments, as described below.
We also made cash retention payments totaling $2.5 million to the three former MikaMonu shareholders, conditioned on the continued employment of Dr. Avidan Akerib, MikaMonu’s co-founder and chief technologist. Retention payments of $743,000, $750,000 and $1.0 million were paid to the former MikaMonu shareholders during the quarters ended December 31, 2017, 2018 and 2019, respectively. We are not required to make any further retention payments.
We will also make “earnout” payments to the former MikaMonu shareholders in cash or shares of our common stock, at our discretion, during a period of up to ten years following the closing if certain product development milestones and revenue targets for products based on the MikaMonu technology are achieved. Earnout amounts of $750,000 were paid in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019 based on the achievement of certain product development milestones. Earnout payments, up to a maximum of $30.0 million, equal to 5% of net revenues from the sale of qualifying products in excess of certain thresholds, will be made quarterly through December 31, 2025.
The portion of the retention payment made to Dr. Akerib (approximately $1.2 million) was recorded as compensation expense over the period that his services were provided to us. The portion of the retention payment made to the other former MikaMonu shareholders (approximately $1.3 million) plus the maximum amount of the
potential earnout payments totals approximately $30.0 million at March 31, 2022. We determined that the fair value of this contingent consideration liability was $5.8 million at the acquisition date. The contingent consideration liability is included in contingent consideration, non-current on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at March 31, 2021 and 2022 in the amount of $4.2 million and $2.7 million, respectively.
At each reporting period, the contingent consideration liability will be re-measured at then current fair value with changes recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Changes in any of the inputs may result in significant adjustments to the recorded fair value. Re-measurement of the contingent consideration liability at March 31, 2022 resulted in a decrease of the contingent consideration liability of $1.6 million.
The allocation of the purchase price to acquired identifiable intangible assets and goodwill was based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. The fair value allocated to patents was $3.5 million and the residual value allocated to goodwill was $8.0 million.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth statement of operations data as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated:
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021
Net Revenues. Net revenues increased by 20.4% from $27.7 million in fiscal 2021 to $33.4 million in fiscal 2022. The overall average selling price of all units shipped in fiscal 2022 increased by 12.3% in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Net revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2022 were impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic. In addition, supply chain constraints have had an impact on our ability to fulfill all of our orders. While there has been some improvement, the situation remains fluid, and we do not expect significant relief from these constraints before the end of calendar year 2022. Our net revenues continue to demonstrate the challenges that we have faced during the COVID-19 global pandemic, which has restricted the activities of our sales force and distributors, reduced customer demand and caused the postponement of investment in certain customer sectors. These challenges continue to impact us as we enter new markets and engage with target customers. Industry conferences and on-site training workshops, which are typically used for building a sales pipeline, have been limited due to COVID-19 related restrictions. We have adapted our sales strategies for the COVID-19 environment as there are limitations with both
in-person and virtual meetings. Requirements for secure videoconferencing has limited our interactions with government and defense customers.
Units shipped increased by 5.7% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The networking and telecommunications markets represented 49% and 53% of shipments in fiscal 2022 and in fiscal 2021, respectively. Direct and indirect sales to Nokia, currently our largest customer, decreased by $1.3 million from $10.9 million in fiscal 2021 to $9.6 million fiscal 2022. Shipments of our SigmaQuad product line accounted for 51.2% of total shipments in fiscal 2022 compared to 56.7% of total shipments in fiscal 2021.
We currently expect that net revenues will fluctuate in the future, from period-to-period, based on evolving customer demand for existing products, the pace of adoption of newer products, and macroeconomic conditions, including any impact related to the military conflict in Ukraine, the recent rapid rise in energy prices and the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic. Further, due to heightened volatility and uncertainty in customer demand resulting from the COVID-19 global pandemic, we may experience decreased sales and revenues. We believe such impact may in particular affect our direct and indirect sales of Very Fast SRAMs to Nokia and our other key OEM customers.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues increased by 2.3% from $14.5 million in fiscal 2021 to $14.8 million in fiscal 2022. Cost of revenues included a provision for excess and obsolete inventories of $466,000 in fiscal 2021 compared to $402,000 in fiscal 2022. Cost of revenues included stock-based compensation expense of $248,000 and $346,000, respectively, in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased by 40.3% from $13.2 million in fiscal 2021 to $18.5 million in fiscal 2022. Gross margin increased from 47.7% in fiscal 2021 to 55.5% in fiscal 2022. The change in gross profit is primarily related to the change in net revenues discussed above. The increase in gross margin was primarily related to changes in the mix of products and customers and, to a lesser extent, a 20% price increase effective in December 2021 for the majority of our products.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased 5.7% from $23.3 million in fiscal 2021 to $24.7 million in fiscal 2022. The increase in research and development spending was primarily related to an increase of $1.4 million in payroll related expenses and lesser increases in software maintenance expense, stock-based compensation expense and facilities related expenses partially offset by decreases in outside consulting expenses and other fees and patent related legal fees. Research and development expenses included stock-based compensation expense of $1.7 million and $1.5 million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 8.3% from $11.1 million in fiscal 2021 to $10.2 million in fiscal 2022. In fiscal 2022, the value of contingent consideration liability resulting from the MikaMonu acquisition was decreased by $1.6 million compared to an increase of $229,000 in fiscal 2021 as a result of re-measurement of contingent consideration liability in each year. The reduction in contingent consideration in fiscal 2022 was partially offset by increases in payroll related expenses, independent sales representative commissions and stock-based compensation expense. Selling, general and administrative expenses included stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million and $999,000, respectively, in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net. Interest and other income (expense), net decreased from income of $94,000 in fiscal 2021 to an expense of $60,000 in fiscal 2022. Interest income decreased by $224,000 due to lower interest rates received on cash and short-term and long-term investments and lower levels of short-term and long-term investments. The foreign currency exchange loss decreased from ($201,000) in fiscal 2021 to ($131,000) in fiscal 2022. The exchange loss in each period was primarily related to our Taiwan branch operations and operations in Israel.
Provision (benefit) for Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes was $335,000 in fiscal 2021 compared to a benefit from income taxes of ($45,000) in fiscal 2022. The tax provision in fiscal 2021 included a settlement of an income tax audit in Israel for fiscal years 2016 through fiscal 2019 which resulted in a discrete tax provision of $479,000, a tax benefit in the amount of $378,000 resulting from the carryback of the Company’s fiscal year 2020 federal net operating loss to fiscal year 2018 due to the five year net operating loss carryback provision from the March 2020 CARES Act, and to a lesser extent due to fluctuations in the relative mix of income among our operating jurisdictions. The benefit for income taxes in fiscal 2022 included a benefit of ($220,000) related to the approval by the Israel tax authorities of a “Preferred Company” tax rate that was retroactively applied to fiscal 2018 and subsequent fiscal years. Because we recorded a cumulative three-year loss on a U.S. tax basis for the year ended March 31, 2022 and the realization of our deferred tax assets is questionable, we recorded a tax provision reflecting a valuation allowance of $16.2 million in net deferred tax assets in fiscal 2022. Reductions in uncertain tax benefits due to lapses in the statute of limitations were not significant in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021.
Net Loss. Net loss was ($21.5) million in fiscal 2021 compared to a net loss of ($16.4) million in fiscal 2022. This decrease was primarily due to the changes in net revenues, gross profit and operating expenses discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $44.0 million compared to $54.0 million as of March 31, 2021. Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $26.2 million were held in foreign locations as of March 31, 2022. Net cash used in operating activities was $13.8 million and $15.3 million for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. The primary uses of cash in fiscal 2022 were the net loss of $16.4 million and increases in accounts receivable, inventory and accrued expenses and other liabilities. The primary sources of cash in fiscal 2022 were non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $3.0 million and depreciation and amortization expenses of $1.0 million. The primary use of cash in fiscal 2021 was the net loss of $21.5 million. The primary sources of cash in fiscal 2021 were non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $2.9 million and depreciation and amortization expenses of $1.2 million and a provision for excess and obsolete inventories of $466,000 and a decrease in accounts receivable of $2.6 million. Accounts receivable decreased primarily due to the decreased level of shipments during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year and the timing of shipments during the quarter.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $4.2 million and $3.3 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. Investment activities in fiscal 2022 primarily consisted of the maturity of certificates of deposit and agency bonds of $12.1 million partially offset by the purchase of certificates of deposit of $7.2 million. Investment activities in fiscal 2021 primarily consisted of the maturity of certificates of deposit, supranational obligations and agency bonds of $21.0 million partially offset by the purchase of certificates of deposit, supranational obligations and agency bonds of $17.5 million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $2.4 million and $4.7 million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively and consisted of the net proceeds from the sale of common stock pursuant to our employee stock plans.
At March 31, 2022, we had total minimum lease obligations of approximately $930,000 from April 1, 2022 through February 29, 2024, under non-cancelable operating leases for our facilities.
While the unprecedented public health and governmental efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have created significant uncertainty as to general economic and capital market conditions for the remainder of 2022 and beyond, we believe that our existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and cash flow expected to be generated from our future operations, will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months, although we could be required, or could elect, to seek
additional funding prior to that time. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the rate of revenue growth, if any, that we experience, any additional manufacturing cost increases resulting from supply constraints and the continuation of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the extent to which we utilize subcontractors, the levels of inventory and accounts receivable that we maintain, the timing and extent of spending to support our product development efforts and the expansion of our sales and marketing efforts. A material adverse impact from the COVID-19 global pandemic could result in a need to raise additional capital or incur additional indebtedness to fund strategic initiatives or operating activities, particularly if we pursue additional acquisitions of businesses, products or technologies. We cannot assure you that additional equity or debt financing, if required, will be available on terms that are acceptable or at all.
As of March 31, 2022, we had $4.1 million in purchase obligations for facility leases and software and test purchase obligations that are binding commitments, of which $3.2 million are payable in the next twelve months and $832,000 are committed in the long term.
As of March 31, 2022, the current portion of our unrecognized tax benefits was $0, and the long-term portion was $0.
In connection with the acquisition of MikaMonu on November 23, 2015, we are required to make contingent consideration payments to the former MikaMonu shareholders conditioned upon the achievement of certain revenue targets for products based on the MikaMonu technology. As of March 31, 2022, the accrual for potential payment of contingent consideration was $2.7 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates are inherent in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements and include estimates affecting revenue recognition, obsolete and excess inventory, the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, stock-based compensation expense, contingent consideration and the valuation of intangibles and goodwill. We believe that we consistently apply these judgments and estimates and that our financial statements and accompanying notes fairly represent our financial results for all periods presented. However, any errors in these judgments and estimates may have a material impact on our balance sheet and statement of operations. Critical accounting estimates, as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult and subjective judgments and estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting estimates include those regarding revenue recognition, the valuation of inventories, accounting for income taxes, stock-based compensation expense, contingent consideration and the valuation of intangibles and goodwill.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control which typically occurs at the point at which delivery has occurred, title and the risks and rewards of ownership have passed to the customer, and the Company has a right to payment. For all transactions apart from consignment sales, the Company will generally recognize revenue upon shipment of the product. For consignment sales, revenue is recognized at the time that the product is pulled from consignment warehouses.
We record revenue net of sales tax, value added tax, excise tax and other taxes collected concurrent with product sales. The impact of such taxes on products sales is immaterial. We have also elected to recognize the cost for freight and shipping when control over the products sold passes to customers and revenue is recognized.
There was no revenue in fiscal 2022 resulting from sales of software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications.
Valuation of Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, cost being determined on a weighted average basis. Our inventory write-down allowance is established when conditions indicate that the selling price of our products could be less than cost due to physical deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels, or other causes. We consider the need to establish the allowance for excess inventory generally based on inventory levels in excess of 12 months of forecasted demand for each specific product. At any point in time, some portion of our inventory is subject to the risk of being materially in excess of our projected demand. Additionally, our average selling prices could decline due to market or other conditions, which creates a risk that costs of manufacturing our inventory may not be recovered. These factors contribute to the risk that we may be required to record additional inventory write-downs in the future, which could be material. In addition, if actual market conditions are more favorable than expected, inventory previously written down may be sold to customers resulting in lower cost of sales and higher income from operations than expected in that period.
Accounting for Income Taxes. We account for income taxes under the liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. We make certain estimates and judgments in the calculation of tax liabilities and the determination of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between tax and financial statement recognition methods. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that management estimates is more likely than not to be realized. Due to historical losses in the U.S., we have a full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. If, in the future we determine that we are likely to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets, an adjustment to deferred tax assets would be added to earnings in the period such determination is made.
In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves inherent uncertainty in the application of complex tax laws. We record tax reserves for additional taxes that we estimate we may be required to pay as a result of future potential examinations by federal and state taxing authorities. If the payment ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of these tax reserves would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period we determine such reserves are no longer necessary. If an ultimate tax assessment exceeds our estimate of tax liabilities, an additional charge to provision for income taxes will result.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the statement of operations is based on options ultimately expected to vest, reduced by the amount of estimated forfeitures. We chose the straight-line method of allocating compensation cost over the requisite service period of the related award in accordance with the authoritative guidance. We calculated the expected term based on the historical average period of time that options were outstanding as adjusted for expected changes in future exercise patterns, which, for options granted in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, resulted in an expected term of approximately five years. We used our historical volatility to estimate expected volatility in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yields in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding to the expected life of the options. The dividend yield is 0% based on the fact that we have never paid dividends and have no present intention to pay dividends. Determining some of these assumptions requires significant judgment and changes to these assumptions could result in a significant change to the calculation of stock-based compensation in future periods.
Contingent Consideration. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability potentially payable in connection with our acquisition of MikaMonu was initially determined as of the acquisition date using unobservable inputs. These inputs included the estimated amount and timing of future cash flows, the probability of success (achievement of the various contingent events) and a risk-adjusted discount rate to adjust the probability-weighted cash flows to their present value. Subsequent to the acquisition date, at each reporting period, the contingent consideration liability will be re-measured at its then current fair value with changes recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Due to revisions to the amount of expected revenue, the timing of revenue to be recognized
prior to the end of the earnout period and the probability of achievement of the APU revenue forecast, the contingent consideration liability decreased by $1.5 million from March 31, 2021 to March 31, 2022. Future changes to any of the inputs, including forecasted revenues from a new product which are inherently difficult to estimate, may result in material adjustments to the recorded fair value.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles. Goodwill represents the difference between the purchase price and the estimated fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We test for goodwill impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset is more likely than not impaired. We have one reporting unit. We assess goodwill for impairment on an annual basis on the last day of February in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives, generally on a straight-line basis over five to fifteen years. We review identifiable amortizable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on the lowest level of identifiable estimated undiscounted cash flows resulting from use of the asset and its eventual disposition. Measurement of any impairment loss is based on the excess of the carrying value of the asset over its fair value. Based on the uncertainty of forecasts, events such as the failure to generate revenue from future product launches could result in impairment in the future. The Company identified a potential impairment indicator for the finite lived intangible assets and performed a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the asset group to the carrying amount as of March 31, 2022. The result of the recoverability test indicated that the sum of the expected future cash flows was greater than the carrying amount of the finite lived intangible assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II, Item 8 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact the Company.