ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “G Squared Ascend I Inc.,” “G Squared,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to G Squared Ascend I Inc. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"), and Section 21E of the Exchange Act (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 26, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is G Squared Ascend Management I, LLC, a Cayman Islands exempted limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on February 4, 2021. On February 9, 2021, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 units (each a “Unit” and collectively, the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345.0 million, and
incurring offering costs of approximately $19.8 million, of which approximately $12.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions (Note 5).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,100,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $9.2 million (Note 4).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $345.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and will be invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target business or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target business sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period (as defined in Note 1), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes that were paid by us or are payable by us, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
On September 20, 2021, the Company, Horizon Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), Transfix, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Target”), and Transfix Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Target (“Holdings”), entered into a business combination agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, (a) on the Closing Date (as defined below) but prior to the Initial Merger (as defined below), the Company will change its jurisdiction of incorporation from the Cayman Islands to the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”), (B) on the Closing Date immediately following the Domestication, the Company will merge with and into Holdings (the “Initial Merger”), with Holdings surviving the Initial Merger (Holdings, in its capacity as the surviving corporation of the Initial Merger, is sometimes referred to herein as the “Surviving Corporation”) and (c) on the Closing Date, following the Initial Merger, Merger Sub will merge with and into the Target (the “Acquisition Merger”, and together with the Initial Merger, the “Mergers”), with the Target surviving the Acquisition Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Surviving Corporation (the Target, in its capacity as the surviving corporation of the Acquisition Merger, is sometimes referred to herein as the “Surviving Subsidiary Corporation”). The Mergers, together with the other transactions related thereto, are referred to herein as the “Proposed Transactions.”
Refer to the Form 8-K, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 21, 2021 for additional information.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $26,000 in our operating bank account, which is not sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing.
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined in Note 4), and the loan of approximately $173,000 under the Note (as defined in Note 4). The Company repaid the Note in full on February 12, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account. On March 1, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $1.5 million to cover expenses pursuant to an unsecured promissory note (the “Sponsor Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of September 1, 2021 or the completion of the Initial Business Combination. On March 9, 2021, the Sponsor Note was converted into a Working Capital Loan Warrants (as defined in Note 4). As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding balance under the Working Capital Loans.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 9, 2023. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. Management plans to complete a business combination prior to the mandatory liquidation date.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering and since the Initial Public Offering, searching for a business combination target company. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $0.5 million, which consisted of approximately $4.8 million in non-operating gain resulting from the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $243,000 gain on conversion of working capital loan, and approximately $42,000 of income from investments held in trust account, offset by approximately $3.6 million in general and administrative expenses, $110,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, approximately $1.4 million in loss on Forward Purchase Agreement, and approximately $463,000 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $8,000 which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the New York Stock Exchange through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us. We incurred approximately $110,000 in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had accrued approximately $110,000, for services in connection with such agreement on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets
included in due to related party. For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, there were no expenses incurred under this agreement.
In addition, the Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on the Company’s behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. The Company’s audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to the Sponsor, officers or directors, or the Company’s or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Business Combination will be made from funds held outside the Trust Account. For the year ended December 31, 2021, an affiliate of the Company paid approximately $160,000 of expenses on behalf of the company which is included in due to related party in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. There were no such reimbursements for the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the Private Placement Warrants, warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and Forward Purchase Securities) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 9, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $6.9 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $12.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward Purchase Agreement
The Sponsor entered into a forward purchase agreement (the “Forward Purchase Agreement”) with the Company that provided for the purchase by the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor of 10,000,000 Class A ordinary shares and 2,000,000 redeemable warrants (each, a "Forward Purchase Warrant" and collectively, the “Forward Purchase Warrants”), for an aggregate purchase price of  $100,000,000, in each case, for $10.00 per one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one Forward Purchase Warrant (collectively, the “Forward Purchase Securities”), in a private placement to close substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. The obligations under the Forward Purchase Agreement will not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the holders of Public Shares. The Class A ordinary shares and Forward Purchase Warrants sold pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement will be identical to the Class A ordinary shares and Public Warrants included in the units being sold in the Initial Public Offering, respectively, except that the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, as applicable, will have certain registration rights. The capital from such private placement would be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the Business Combination, and any excess capital from such private placement would be used for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting
Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering have been estimated using Monte Carlo simulation model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrants’ listed price in an active market was used as the fair value. As the transfer of Private Placement Warrants and Working Capital Loan Warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the Private Placement Warrants and Working Capital Loan Warrants having substantially the same terms as the Public Warrants, the Company determined that the fair value of each Private Placement Warrant and Working Capital Loan Warrant is equivalent to that of each Public Warrant. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
The forward purchase agreement between the Company and the Sponsor, providing for the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor to purchase up to 10,000,000 Class A ordinary shares and 2,000,000 redeemable warrants (the “Forward Purchase Warrants”), for an aggregate purchase price of  $100,000,000, in each case, for $10.00 per one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one Forward Purchase Warrant (collectively, the “Forward Purchase Securities”), in a private placement to close substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination, is recognized as a derivative liability in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the instrument as a liability at fair value and with changes in fair value recognized in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the forward purchase agreement is determined as the estimated unit value less the net present value of the forward purchase agreement.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of Initial Public Offering, 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of our consolidated balance sheets. There were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the over-allotment option, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.