ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF GREENLAND TECHNOLOGIES HOLDING CORPORATION
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations relates to the operations and financial condition reported in the consolidated financial statements of the Company thereto, which appear elsewhere in this Report, and should be read in conjunction with such financial statements and related notes included in this Report. Except for the historical information contained herein, the following discussion, as well as other information in this Report, contain “forward-looking statements,” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, and are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections. Actual results and the timing of the events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to many factors, including those discussed in the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set forth elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
The Company was incorporated on December 28, 2017 as a British Virgin Islands Company with limited liability. The Company was incorporated as a blank check company for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. Following the Business Combination (as described below) in October 2019, the Company changed its name from Greenland Acquisition Corporation to Greenland Technologies Holding Corporation.
On July 27, 2018, we consummated our initial public offering of 4,400,000 units, including a partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 400,000 units. Each unit consists of one ordinary share, no par value, one warrant to purchase one-half of one ordinary share, and one right to receive one-tenth of one ordinary share upon the consummation of our initial business combination, pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1. Warrants must be exercised in multiples of two warrants, and each two warrants are exercisable for one ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The units were sold in our initial public offering at an offering price of $10.00 per unit, generated $44,000,000 (before underwriting discounts and offering expenses) in gross proceeds.
Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we completed a private placement of 282,000 units, issued to the Sponsor and Chardan, which generated $2,820,000 in gross proceeds. We also sold to Chardan (and its designees), for $100, an option to purchase up to 240,000 units exercisable at $11.50 per unit (or an aggregate exercise price of $2,760,000) commencing on consummation of the Business Combination. The unit purchase option may be exercised for cash or on a cashless basis, at the holder’s option, and expires on July 24, 2023. On February 18, 2021, Chardan exercised its option to purchase 120,000 units. As of the date of this Report, an option exercisable by Chardan for 120,000 units is outstanding.
On October 24, 2019, we consummated our Business Combination with Zhongchai Holding following a special meeting, where the shareholders of Greenland considered and approved, among other matters, a proposal to adopt and entered into the Share Exchange Agreement that allowed Greenland to acquire from the Seller all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Zhongchai Holding in exchange for 7,500,000 newly issued ordinary shares, no par value of Greenland, issued to the Seller. As a result, the Seller became the controlling shareholder of Greenland, and Zhongchai Holding became a directly and wholly owned subsidiary of Greenland. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse merger effected by a share exchange, wherein Zhongchai Holding is considered the acquirer for accounting and financial reporting purposes.
In connection with the Business Combination, all the outstanding rights of the Company were converted into 468,200 ordinary shares on a one-tenth (1/10) ordinary share per right basis if holders of the rights elected to convert their rights into the underlying ordinary shares.
On December 17, 2019, the Company’s warrants, which were trading under the ticker symbol “GTECW,” were delisted from the Nasdaq Capital Market by the Nasdaq Listing Qualifications Staff.
On January 14, 2020, Greenland Tech was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware. Greenland Tech is the 100% owned subsidiary of Greenland. Greenland Tech focuses on the production and sale of electric industrial vehicles for the North American market.
Greenland serves as the parent company to Zhongchai Holding. Through Zhongchai Holding and its subsidiaries, Greenland develops and manufactures traditional transmission products for material handling machineries and electric industrial vehicles.
Through its PRC subsidiaries, Greenland offers transmission products, which are key components for forklift trucks used in manufacturing and logistic applications, such as factories, workshops, warehouses, fulfilment centers, shipyards, and seaports. Forklifts play an important role in the logistic systems of many companies across different industries in China and globally. Generally, industries with the largest demand for forklifts include the transportation, warehousing logistics, electrical machinery, and automobile industries. Through Zhongchai Holding and other subsidiaries, Greenland has experienced an increase in demand for forklifts in the manufacturing and logistics industries in China, as its revenue increased from approximately $66.86 million in the fiscal year 2020 to $98.84 million in the fiscal year 2021. The increase in revenue was due primarily to a significant increase in our sales volume, driven by steady growth of domestic sales in China. Based on our revenues in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we believe that Greenland is one of the major developers and manufacturers of transmission products for small and medium-sized forklift trucks in China.
Greenland’s transmission products are used in 1-ton to 15-tons forklift trucks, some with mechanical shift and some with automatic shift. Greenland sells these transmission products directly to forklift-truck manufacturers. In the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Greenland sold an aggregate of 141,431 and 108,913 sets of transmission products, respectively, to more than 100 forklift manufacturers in the PRC.
There is increasing demand for electric industrial vehicles powered by sustainable energy in order to reduce air pollution and lower carbon emissions. In December 2020, Greenland launched a new division to focus on the production and sale of electric industrial vehicles-a division that Greenland intends to develop to diversify its product offerings. Greenland’s electric industrial vehicle products currently include GEF-series electric forklifts, a series of lithium powered forklifts with three models ranging in size from 1.8 tons to 3.5 tons, and GEL-1800, a 1.8 ton rated load lithium powered electric wheeled front loader. In February 2022, Greenland launched its GEX-8000 all-electric 8.0 ton rated load lithium powered wheeled excavator. These products have become available for purchase in the U.S. market. Greenland plans to establish an assembly site and an experience center in the United States in 2022 to support local sales, assembly and distribution.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations and Financial Performance
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely affected China and the rest of the world. In an effort to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, China and many other countries have taken precautionary measures, such as imposing travel restrictions, quarantining individuals infected with or suspected of being infected with COVID-19, encouraging or requiring people to work remotely, and canceling public activities, among others. These ongoing measures adversely affected our operations and financial performance in 2020.
Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected our revenue in the first half of 2020. For example, from February 3, 2020 to the end of February 2020, the Company closed all of its operating offices in Zhejiang Province, including manufactory, in response to the emergency measures imposed by local government. The pandemic also significantly limited suppliers’ ability to provide low-cost, high-quality merchandise to the Company on a timely basis.
Since late March 2020, the Company’s business operations have gradually recovered from the negative impacts due to lockdown, and the Company’s backlogged orders were mostly processed during the rest of fiscal year 2020, which contributed to an increase in its revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In 2021, a few waves of COVID-19 infections emerged in various regions of China, and in response, the Chinese government implemented certain anti-COVID measures and protocols. However, these scattered outbreaks were brought under control in a relatively short period of time, and the COVID-19 had limited impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced rising raw material costs, and we expect raw material costs to continue increasing in the foreseeable future due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operations and financial performance in the future will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Results of Operations
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Overview
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Greenland’s revenue increased by approximately $31.98 million, or approximately 47.82%, to approximately $98.84 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $66.86 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a significant increase in our sales volume resulting from the continuously growing market demand and our ability to boost supplies while some competitors faced challenges in handling material shortage and were unable to deliver. On a RMB basis, our revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately 38.61% compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Greenland’s cost of goods sold consists primarily of material costs, freight charges, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs, wages, employee compensation, amortization, depreciation and related costs, which are directly attributable to Greenland’s production activities. The write down of inventory using net realizable value impairment test is also recorded in cost of goods sold. The total cost of goods sold increased by approximately $25.20 million, or approximately 46.61%, to approximately $79.25 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $54.05 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of goods sold increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to an increase in our sales volume.
Gross Profit
Greenland’s gross profit increased by approximately $6.78 million, or 52.92%, to approximately $19.59 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $12.81 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Greenland’s gross margin was approximately 19.82% and 19.16%, respectively. The increase in gross margin in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to a shift in Greenland’s product mix towards higher value and more sophisticated products, such as hydraulic transmission products.
Operating Expense
Greenland’s operating expenses consist of selling expenses, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses. Greenland’s operating expenses were $11.3 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of 85.82% from $6.1 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to the increase in transportation expenses, consultancy fees, and research and development expenses in fiscal year 2021.
Selling Expense
Greenland’s selling expenses mainly include operating expenses such as sales staff payroll, traveling expenses and transportation expenses. Selling expenses increased by $0.28 million, or 17.62%, to approximately $1.87 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $1.59 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was mainly due to an increase in the unit price of transportation expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
Greenland’s general and administrative expenses include management and office staff salaries and employee benefits, depreciation for office facility and office furniture and equipment, travel and entertainment, legal and accounting, consulting fees and other office expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.82 million, or approximately 85.27%, to approximately $3.95 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $2.13 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The fundamental reasons for the rise in the general and administrative expenses were the following: (i) increased legal fees and consultancy fees on the Company’s business planning and projects for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 as the Company expanded its operations, compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020; and (ii) an increase in after-sales service fees resulted from the substantial increase in revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses consist of R&D personnel compensation, costs of materials used in R&D projects, and depreciation costs for research-related equipment. R&D expenses increased by approximately $3.15 million, or 131.73%, to approximately $5.53 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, from approximately $2.38 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Such increase was primarily attributable to an increase in the Company’s R&D investment in higher value and more sophisticated products and electrification products.
Income from Operations
As a result of the foregoing, income from operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $8.25 million, representing an increase of approximately $1.54 million, from approximately $6.71 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Income and Interest Expenses
Greenland’s interest income was approximately $0.07 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of approximately $0.07 million, or 2,482.04%, from approximately $0 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest income was because more cash was deposited in banks during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Greenland’s interest expenses were approximately $0.59 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of approximately $0.34 million, or 36.90%, as compared to approximately $0.93 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction of our short-term loans for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income
Greenland’s other income was approximately $1.38 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately $0.38 million, or 37.50%, as compared to approximately $1.00 million of other income for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in ancillary products and services offered by Zhejiang Zhongchai for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Remeasurement Gain from Change in Functional Currency
The Company incurred a one-time gain on remeasurement of foreign currency as the result of the Company changing the functional currency of its subsidiary Zhongchai Holding (Hong Kong) Limited from RMB to USD. The one-time gain, which amounted to approximately $1.94 million, significantly impacted the net result of operations for the Company during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Greenland’s income tax was approximately $1.84 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $2.27 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Zhejiang Zhongchai obtained a “high-tech enterprise” status near the end of the fiscal year of 2019. Such status allows Zhejiang Zhongchai to enjoy a reduced statutory income tax rate of 15%, rather than the standard PRC corporate income tax rate of 25%. The “high-tech enterprise” status is reevaluated by relevant Chinese government agencies every three years. Zhejiang Zhongchai’s current “high-tech enterprise” will be reevaluated near the end of 2022.
Greenland’s other PRC subsidiaries are subject to different income tax rates. Hengyu, the 62.5% owned subsidiary of Zhongchai Holding, is subject to the 25% standard income tax rate. Hangzhou Greenland, the wholly owned subsidiary of Zhongchai Holding, is subject to the 25% standard income tax rate.
Greenland is a holding company registered in the British Virgin Islands and is not subject to tax on income or capital gains under the current British Virgin Islands law. In addition, upon payment of dividends to its shareholders, the Company will not be subject to any British Virgin Islands withholding tax.
On January 14, 2020, Greenland established Greenland Tech, its wholly owned subsidiary in the state of Delaware. Greenland Tech promotes sales of sustainable alternative products for the heavy industrial equipment industry, including electric industrial vehicles, in the North American market. On December 22, 2017, the U.S. federal government enacted the 2017 Tax Act. The 2017 Tax Act includes a number of changes in existing tax law impacting businesses, including the transition tax, a one-time deemed repatriation of cumulative undistributed foreign earnings and a permanent reduction in the U.S. federal statutory rate from 35% to 21%, effective on January 1, 2018. ASC 740 requires companies to recognize the effect of tax law changes in the period of enactment, and accordingly, the effects must be recognized on companies’ calendar year-end financial statements, even though the effective date for most provisions is January 1, 2018. Since Greenland Tech was established in 2020, the one-time transition tax did not have any impact on the Company’s tax provision and there was no undistributed accumulated earnings and profits as of December 31, 2021.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing, Greenland’s net income was approximately $7.27 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of approximately $0.90 million, from the net income of approximately $6.37 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Greenland is a holding company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Current PRC regulations permit our PRC subsidiaries to pay dividends to us only out of their accumulated profits, if any, determined in accordance with PRC accounting standards and regulations. In addition, our PRC subsidiaries are required to set aside at least 10% of their respective accumulated profits each year, if any, to fund certain reserve funds until the total amount set aside reaches 50% of their respective registered capital. Our PRC subsidiaries may also allocate a portion of their after-tax profits based on PRC accounting standards to employee welfare and bonus funds at their discretion. These reserves are not distributable as cash dividends.
We have funded working capital and other capital requirements primarily by equity contributions, cash flow from operations, short-term bank loans and bank acceptance notes, and long-term bank loans. Cash is required primarily to purchase raw materials, repay debts and pay salaries, office expenses, income taxes and other operating expenses.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, our PRC subsidiary, Zhejiang Zhongchai, has paid off approximately $18.72 million in bank loan, approximately $4.05 million in related parties loan, approximately $0.31 million in third parties loan, and maintained $17.80 million cash on hand. We plan to maintain the current debt structure and rely on governmentally supported loans with lower cost, if necessary.
The government subsidy mainly consists of an incentive granted by the Chinese government to encourage transformation of fixed assets in China and other miscellaneous subsidy from the Chinese government. Government subsidies are recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the subsidy will be received and all conditions be completed. Total government subsidies recorded under long-term liabilities were $2.21 million and $2.34 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company currently plans to fund its operations mainly through cash flow from its operations, renewal of bank borrowings, additional equity financing, and continuation of financial support from its shareholders and affiliates controlled by its principal shareholders, if necessary. The Company might implement a stricter policy on sales to less creditworthy customers and plans to continue to improve its collection efforts on accounts with outstanding balances. The Company is actively working with customers and suppliers and expects to fully collect the remaining balance.
We believe that the Company has sufficient cash, even with uncertainty in the Company’s manufacturing and sale of electric industrial vehicles in the future and decline on sale of transmission products. However, our capital contribution from existing funding sources, to operate for the next 12 months will be sufficient. We remain confident and are expected to generate positive cash flow from our operations.
We may need additional cash resources in the future, if the Company experiences failure in collecting account receivables, changes in business condition, changes in financial condition, or other developments. We may also need additional cash resources, if the Company wishes to pursue opportunities for investment, acquisition, strategic cooperation, or other similar actions. If the Company’s management and its board of directors determine that the cash required for specific corporate activities exceed Greenland’s cash and cash equivalents on hand, the Company may issue debt or equity securities to raise cash.
Historically, we have expended considerable resources on building a new factory and paid off a considerable amount of debt, resulting in less available cash. However, we anticipate that our cash flow will continue to improve for the fiscal year 2022. In specific, Zhejiang Zhongchai has completed the construction of a new factory, and our PRC subsidiaries have received COVID-19 related government subsidies. Furthermore, Zhejiang Zhongchai pledged the deed of its new factory as a collateral to banks in order to obtain additional loans, refinance expiring loans, restructure short-term loans, and fund other working capital needs upon acceptable terms to Greenland.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash equivalents refers to all highly liquid investments purchased with original maturity of three months or less. As of December 31, 2021, Greenland had approximately $11.06 million of cash and cash equivalents, an increase of approximately $3.90 million, or 54.53%, as compared to approximately $7.16 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase of cash was mainly due to an increase in accounts payable and notes payable, as compared to that as of December 31, 2020.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash represents the amount held by a bank as security for bank acceptance notes and therefore is not available for use until the bank acceptance notes are fulfilled or expired, which typically takes less than twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, Greenland had approximately $6.74 million of restricted cash, an increase of approximately $4.50 million, or 200.28%, as compared to approximately $2.24 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase of restricted cash was due to an increase in mortgaged assets.
Accounts Receivable
As of December 31, 2021, Greenland had approximately $15.92 million of accounts receivables, an increase of approximately $3.51 million, or 28.26%, as compared to approximately $12.41 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in accounts receivable was due to our slowed-down efforts in receivables collections due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our increase in sales volume.
Greenland recorded approximately $0.86 million of provision for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2021. Greenland conducted an aging analysis of each customer’s delinquent payments to determine whether allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate. In establishing the allowance for doubtful accounts, Greenland considers historical experience, economic environment, and expected collectability of past due receivables. An estimate of doubtful accounts is recorded when collection of the full amount is no longer probable. When bad debts are identified, such debts are written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts. Greenland will continuously assess its potential losses based on the credit history of and relationships with its customers on a regular basis to determine whether its bad debt allowance on its accounts receivables is adequate. Greenland believes that its collection policies are generally in line with the transmissions industry’s standard in the PRC.
Due from Related Party
Due from related party was $39.68 million and $38.54 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The current portion of due from related party was $39.68 million as of December 31, 2021, the non-current portion of due from related party was $0 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect the amount due from our controlling shareholder, Cenntro Holding Limited, to be paid back based on certain payment schedules, with the last payment to be made by June 30, 2024, as the Company and Cenntro Holding Limited mutually agreed to an extension of repayment deadline from April 27, 2022.
However, there is no guarantee that such amount will be repaid in whole or in part before the end of June 2024, if at all. Such failure to pay back by Cenntro Holding Limited could have a material negative impact on our balance sheet.
Notes Receivable
As of December 31, 2021, Greenland had approximately $37.55 million of notes receivables, which will be collected by us within twelve months. The increase was approximately $6.75 million, or 21.90%, as compared to approximately $30.80 million as of December 31, 2020.
Working Capital
Our working capital was approximately $53.84 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $28.84 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital of $25.01 million in the fiscal year 2021 as compared with the fiscal year 2020 was primarily contributed to an increase in notes receivables and inventories.
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
Greenland’s net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $(5.76) million and $2.70 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the main sources of cash inflow from operating activities were net income of $7.27 million, changes in accounts payable of $6.46 million, and depreciation and amortization of $2.51 million. The main causes of changes in cash outflow were changes in notes receivable of approximately $5.95 million and changes in inventories of $9.97 million.
In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, the main sources of cash inflow from operating activities were net income of $6.37 million, changes in accounts payable of $5.94 million, and due to related parties of $4.77 million. The main causes of changes in cash outflow were changes in notes receivable of $12.79 million and changes in inventories of $4.33 million.
Investing Activities
Investing activities resulted a cash outflow of approximately $0.64 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was mainly due to $0.26 million in proceeds from government subsidies for Zhejiang Zhongchai’s construction activities, offset by approximately $0.90 million used for purchases of long-term assets.
Investing activities resulted a cash outflow of approximately $0.82 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly due to $0.25 million in proceeds from government grants for construction, offset by approximately $1.08 million used for purchases of long-term assets.
Financing Activities
Financing activities resulted a cash inflow of approximately $14.46 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, which was mainly attributable to approximately $8.67 million in proceeds from short-term bank loans, approximately $5.39 million in investment proceeds from an entity with non-controlling interests, and approximately $8.21 million in proceeds from equity and debt financing. Such amounts were further offset by repayment of loans due to third parties in the amount of approximately $4.05 million, and repayment of short-term bank loans in the amount of approximately $18.72 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities resulted a cash inflow of approximately $2.31 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which was mainly attributable to approximately $21.13 million in proceeds from short-term bank loans and approximately $4.38 million in proceeds from third parties. Such amounts were further offset by repayment of loans lent by third parties for approximately $5.72 million, and repayment of short-term bank loans for approximately $21.56 million.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is one of the most significant risks for Greenland’s business. Accounts receivable are typically unsecured and derived from revenues earned from customers, thereby exposing Greenland to credit risk. Credit risk is controlled by the application of credit approvals, limits, and monitoring procedures. Greenland identifies credit risk collectively based on industry, geography, and customer type. This information is monitored regularly by the Company’s management. In measuring the credit risk of sales to customers, Greenland mainly reflects the “probability of default” by the customer on its contractual obligations and considers the current financial position of the customer and the exposures to the customer and its future development.
Liquidity Risk
Greenland is exposed to liquidity risk when it is unable to provide sufficient capital resources and liquidity to meet its commitments and/or business needs. Liquidity risk is managed by the application of financial position analysis to test if Greenland is in danger of liquidity issues and also by application of monitoring procedures to constantly monitor its conditions and movements. When necessary, Greenland resorts to other financial institutions to obtain additional short-term funding to meet the liquidity shortage.
Inflation Risk
Greenland is also exposed to inflation risk. Inflationary factors, such as increases in raw material and overhead costs, could impair Greenland’s operating results. Although Greenland does not believe that inflation has had a material impact on its financial position or results of operations to date, a high rate of inflation in the future may have an adverse effect on its ability to maintain current levels of gross margin and operating expenses as a percentage of sales revenues if the selling prices of its products do not increase with such increased costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In applying accounting principles, it is often required to use estimates. These estimates consider the facts, circumstances and information available, and may be based on subjective inputs, assumptions and information known and unknown to us. Material changes in certain of the estimates that we use could potentially affect, by a material amount, our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Although results may vary, we believe our estimates are reasonable and appropriate. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a summary of our significant accounting policies. The following describes certain of our significant accounting policies that involve more subjective and complex judgments where the effect on our consolidated financial position and operating performance could be material.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” the Company recognizes revenues when goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In determining when and how revenues are recognized from contracts with customers, the Company performs the following five-step analysis: (i) identification of contract with customer; (ii) determination of performance obligations; (iii) measurement of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognition of revenues when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company derives revenues from the processing, distribution and sale of its products. The Company recognizes its revenues net of VAT. The Company is subject to VAT which had been levied at the rate of 17% on the invoiced value of sales until April 30, 2018, after which date the rate was reduced to 16%. VAT rate was further reduced to 13% starting from April 1, 2019. Output VAT is borne by customers in addition to the invoiced value of sales and input VAT is borne by the Company in addition to the invoiced value of purchases to the extent not refunded for export sales.
Revenues are recognized at a point in time once the Company has determined that the customer has obtained control over the product. Control is typically deemed to have been transferred to the customer when the performance obligation is fulfilled, usually at the time of customers’ acceptance or consumption, at the net sales price (transaction price) and each of the criteria under ASC 606 have been met. Contract terms may require the Company to deliver the finished goods to the customers’ location or the customer may pick up the finished goods at the Company’s factory. International sales are recognized when shipment clears customs and leaves the port.
The Company has adopted ASC 606 on January 1, 2018, using the transition method of Modified-Retrospective Method (“MRM”). The adoption of ASC 606 had no impact on the Company’s beginning balance of retained earnings.
The Company’s contracts are all short-term in nature with a contract term of one year or less. Receivables are recorded when the Company has an unconditional right to consideration.
Business Combination
On October 24, 2019, we consummated our Business Combination with Zhongchai Holding following a special meeting, where the shareholders of Greenland considered and approved, among other matters, a proposal to adopt and entered into the Share Exchange Agreement, dated as of July 12, 2019, among (i) Greenland, (ii) Zhongchai Holding, (iii) the Sponsor in the capacity as the Purchaser Representative, and (iv) Cenntro Holding Limited, the sole member of Zhongchai Holding.
Pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement, Greenland acquired from the Seller all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Zhongchai Holding in exchange for 7,500,000 newly issued ordinary shares, no par value of Greenland, to the Seller. As a result, the Seller became the controlling shareholder of Greenland, and Zhongchai Holding became a directly and wholly owned subsidiary of Greenland. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse merger effected by a share exchange, wherein Zhongchai Holding is considered the acquirer for accounting and financial reporting purposes.
Pursuant to the Finder Agreement, 50,000 newly issued ordinary shares issued to Zhou Hanyi is the finder fee for the Business Combination.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which is based on estimated selling prices less any further costs expected to be incurred for completion and disposal. Cost of raw materials is calculated using the weighted average method and is based on purchase cost. Work-in-progress and finished goods costs are determined using the weighted average method and comprise direct materials, direct labor and an appropriate proportion of overhead.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes following the liability method pursuant to FASB ASC 740 “Income Taxes”. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that will be in effect in the period in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to offset deferred tax assets if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rate is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company also follows FASB ASC 740, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. ASC 740 also provides guidance on recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have a liability for unrecognized tax benefits. It is the Company’s policy to include penalties and interest expense related to income taxes as a component of other expense and interest expense, respectively, as necessary. The Company’s historical tax years will remain open for examination by the local authorities until the statute of limitations has passed.
Emerging Growth Company
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by FASB or the SEC either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We intend to continue to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies. We also intend to continue to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.