Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 21, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination with one or more target businesses. We completed our Public Offering on March 16, 2021.
We presently have no revenue, have had losses since inception from incurring formation costs and have had no operations other than the active solicitation of a target business with which to complete a business combination.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of ($7,399,030), of which $4,588,000 is a non-cash expense item related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability. Our business activities during the year mainly consisted of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates for a Business Combination. We believe that we have sufficient funds available to complete our efforts to effect a Business Combination with an operating business by March 16, 2023. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination.
As indicated in the accompanying unaudited financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $101,238 in cash and deferred offering costs of $16,100,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure investors that our plans to complete our Business Combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 21, 2021, the Sponsor purchased 11,500,000 Founder Shares for $25,000, or approximately $0.002 per share. The number of Founder Shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares upon completion of the Public Offering. On March 11, 2021, the Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of the independent directors at their original purchase price.
On March 16, 2021, the Company consummated its Public Offering of 46,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, including 6,000,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $460,000,000. On the IPO Closing Date, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 5,600,000 Private Placement Warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at $11.50 per share, to our Sponsor, at a price of $2.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $11,200,000. After deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions (excluding the Deferred Discount, which amount will be payable upon consummation of the Business Combination, if consummated) and the estimated offering expenses, the total net proceeds from our Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were $462,000,000, of which $460,000,000 (or $10.00 per share sold in the Public Offering) was placed in the Trust Account. The amount of proceeds not deposited in the Trust Account was $2,000,000 at the closing of our Public Offering. Interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
Prior to the completion of the Public Offering, the Sponsor loaned the Company an aggregate of $300,000 by the issuance of an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”) issued by the Company in favor of the Sponsor to cover organization expenses and expenses related to the Public Offering. The Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the
earlier of January 31, 2022 or the completion of the Public Offering. The Note was repaid upon completion of the Public Offering.
On April 9, 2021, the Sponsor made available to the Company a loan of up to $4,000,000 pursuant to a promissory note issued by the Company to the Sponsor. The proceeds from the note will be used for ongoing operational expenses and certain other expenses in connection with the Business Combination. The note is unsecured, non-interest bearing and matures on the earlier of: (i) March 2, 2023 or (ii) the date on which the Company consummates the Business Combination. As of December 31, 2021, the amount advanced by Sponsor to the Company was $925,000.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash held outside of the Trust Account of $101,238 and $0, respectively, which is available to fund our working capital requirements. Additionally, interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to fund our Regulatory Withdrawals, for a maximum of 24 months and/or additional amounts necessary to pay our franchise and income taxes.
In addition, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had current liabilities of $21,399,854 and $450 and working capital of ($20,110,827) and ($450), respectively, the balances of which are primarily related to warrants we have recorded as liabilities as described in Notes 2 and 3. Other amounts are related to accrued expenses owed to professionals, consultants, advisors and others who are working on seeking a Business Combination as described in Note 1. Such work is continuing after December 31, 2021 and amounts are continuing to accrue. Additionally, the warrant liability will not impact the Company’s liquidity until a Business Combination has been consummated, as they do not require cash settlement until such event has occurred.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of Regulatory Withdrawals and taxes payable) to consummate our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of shares of our Class A Common Stock upon completion of a Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to consummate our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in our Trust Account, if any, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategy. Following the closing of a Business Combination, we do not expect there to be remaining proceeds in our Trust Account.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, we did not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities. In connection with the Public Offering, we entered into an administrative services agreement to pay monthly recurring expenses of $20,000 to The Gores Group for office space, utilities and secretarial support. The administrative services agreement terminates upon the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
The underwriters are entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5% ($25,300,000), of which 2.0% ($9,200,000) was paid at the IPO Closing Date, and 3.5% ($16,100,000) was deferred. The Deferred Discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the Deferred Discount.
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the accounting and disclosure rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), and reflect all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair presentation of the financial position as of December 31, 2021 and the results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented. Operating results for the period ended December 31, 2021 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for the full year or any other period.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of the Accounting Standards Codification (the “ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that related to our Public Offering and were charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of our Public Offering. Accordingly, offering costs totaling $25,713,752 (including $25,300,000 in underwriters’ fees), and were charged to stockholders’ temporary equity.
Net loss per common share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A Common Stock and the Founders Shares. Net income/(loss) per common share is computed utilizing the two-class method. The two-class method is an earnings allocation formula that determines earnings per share separately for each class of common stock based on an allocation of undistributed earnings per the rights of each class. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income/(loss) per common share is the same as basic net income/(loss) per common share for the period.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
For those liabilities or benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax liabilities as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties at December 31, 2021.
The Company may be subject to potential examination by U.S. federal, states or foreign jurisdiction authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income amounts in various tax jurisdictions and compliance with U.S. federal, states or foreign tax laws.
The Company is incorporated in the State of Delaware and is required to pay franchise taxes to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a business combination is completed where the impact could be material.
Going Concern Consideration
If the Company does not complete its Business Combination by March 16, 2023, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the common stock sold as part of the units in the Public Offering, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of franchise and income taxes payable and less up to $100,000 of such net interest which may be distributed to the Company to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining stockholders and the Company’s Board of Directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the initial public offering price per unit in the Public Offering. In addition, if the Company fails to complete its Business Combination by March 16, 2023, there will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless.
In addition, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had current liabilities of $21,399,854 and $450 and working capital of ($20,110,827) and ($450), respectively, the balances of which are primarily related to warrants we have recorded as liabilities as described in Notes 2 and 3. Other amounts are related to accrued expenses owed to professionals, consultants, advisors and others who are working on seeking a Business Combination as described in Note 1. Such work is continuing after December 31, 2021 and amounts are continuing to accrue. Additionally, the warrant liability will not impact the Company’s liquidity until a Business Combination has been consummated, as they do not require cash settlement until such event has occurred.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Company utilizes a Monte Carlo simulation methodology to value the warrants at each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations. The key assumptions in the option pricing model utilized are assumptions related to expected share-price volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The expected volatility as of the IPO Closing Date was derived from observable public warrant pricing on comparable ‘blank-check’ companies that went public in 2020 and 2021. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interpolated U.S. Constant Maturity Treasury yield. The expected term of the warrants is assumed to be six months until the closing of a Business Combination, and the contractual five
year term subsequently. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.