ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Guerrilla RF is a fabless semiconductor company based in Greensboro, N.C. Guerrilla RF was founded in 2013 with a mission to employ RF semiconductor technology to deliver RF solutions to customers in underserved markets. Over the past several years, Guerrilla RF has become a leader in developing high-performance MMIC products for wireless connectivity. It continues to target underserved markets and customers, delivering a range of high-performance MMIC products and associated technical support to a diverse set of customers that enable a more connected world. Guerrilla RF is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Guerrilla RF holds all material assets and conducts all business activities and operations of the Company. Accordingly, throughout this discussion and analysis, there are frequent references to Guerrilla RF.
Guerrilla RF possesses in-house design, applications, sales, and customer support functions as a fabless semiconductor company. We outsource the manufacture and production of our MMIC products to subcontractors located overseas, providing access to multiple semiconductor process technologies. Guerrilla RF’s primary external wafer foundries are in Taiwan and Singapore, and our primary assembly and test suppliers are located in Malaysia and the Philippines.
The current COVID-19 pandemic and resulting safety protocols have prompted a significant shift towards increased electronic information communication and transmission and we believe such information communication and transmission will remain an important part of information communication even after the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also required some modifications to how we conduct our business. Inclusive of our outsourced manufacturing and testing operations, local shelter in place orders have required some employees to work from home and some employees have voluntarily requested such working arrangements. We and our outsourced operational vendors will continue a feasible work from home model if, and as, required by local conditions and regulations. We instituted additional system controls to ensure compliance with our privacy practices.
Highlights from 2021
In 2021, we achieved a number of critical successes in what was a challenging time for Guerrilla RF and our industry, generally. We shipped over 30 million units in 2021, a 65% increase over 2020. Our customer base grew as more customers chose Guerrilla RF for its RF solutions. We also achieved record sales of $10.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. Organic product sales increased 63% finishing out the year at $9.8 million. Despite COVID-19 headwinds, the automotive category experienced 43% growth and finished 2021 with $4.3 million in sales.
Merger Agreement
On October 22, 2021, the Company (formerly known as Laffin Acquisition Corp.), Guerrilla RF Acquisition Corp., and Guerrilla RF entered into a merger agreement (the 'Merger Agreement') pursuant to which Guerrilla RF Acquisition Corp. merged with and into Guerrilla RF, with Guerrilla RF continuing as the surviving corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
As a result of the Merger, on October 22, 2021, the Company acquired the business of Guerrilla RF, a fabless semiconductor company based in Greensboro, N.C. See “Description of Business.” At the effective time, October 22, 2021, each of Guerrilla RF’s shares of capital stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger was converted into the right to receive approximately 2.95 shares of the Company's common stock. Immediately prior to the effective time, an aggregate of 2,025,000 shares of common stock owned by the original stockholders of the Company were forfeited and cancelled, leaving only 2,975,000 shares outstanding immediately prior to the Merger.
In addition, pursuant to the Merger Agreement, options to purchase 1,065,067 shares of Guerrilla RF’s common stock under the 2014 Plan were assumed by the Company and converted into options to purchase 3,146,366 shares of the Company's common stock.
Private Placement Offering
Following the Merger, we sold 5,766,550 shares of our common stock pursuant to a private placement offering at a price of $2.00 per share. Also in connection with the private placement, the placement agent and its affiliates received 275,000 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 331,580 shares at an exercise price of $2.00 per share and a term of five years.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In light of the uncertain and rapidly evolving situation relating to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and in compliance with government orders, we have taken measures intended to help minimize the risk of transmitting the virus to our employees, our customers, and the communities in which we participate, which could negatively impact our business. While we have a distributed workforce and our employees are accustomed to working remotely or working with other remote employees, our workforce is not fully remote. Under normal conditions, our employees travel frequently to establish and maintain relationships with one another and with our customers, partners and investors.
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted revenue for six months for the year ended December 31, 2021, as we experienced lower revenues due a significant number of customers experiencing supply chain challenges during 2021. We implemented cost reduction actions across our functional disciplines. We believe our cost reduction actions and current liquidity provide us with operating and financial flexibility to assist us in navigating through what continues to be an uncertain environment.
Our management team has, and will likely continue, to spend time, attention, and resources monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and seeking to manage its effects on our business and workforce. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and our precautionary measures may impact our business will depend on future developments, which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Key metrics
We regularly review the following key metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, make strategic business decisions, and assess working capital needs.
Number of products released: The total quantity of distinct new products released into production (products that have completed design, quality, and supply chain readiness) for the period.
Number of total products: The cumulative number of production-released products since Guerrilla RF's inception through the end of the period.
Number of products with lifetime revenue exceeding $100 thousand: The number of products that have achieved the threshold of cumulative sales of $100,000 during the period, i.e., a product achieved cumulative lifetime sales exceeding $100 thousand since we released the product at any prior point in time.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We derive our revenue from sales of high-performance RF semiconductor products. We design, integrate, and package differentiated, semiconductor-based products that we sell to customers through our direct sales organization, our network of independent sales representatives, and our distributors. We generate revenue from customers located within and outside the U.S. In addition to sales to customers, we generate royalty revenue under a royalty agreement with one semiconductor manufacturer.
Direct Product Costs and Gross Profit
Direct Product Costs. Our direct product costs primarily consist of salaries and related expenses, overhead, third party services vendors, and depreciation expense related to the equipment and information technology costs incurred directly in the Company’s revenue-generating activities.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is calculated by subtracting our cost of revenues from revenues. Gross margin is expressed as a percentage of total revenues. Our gross profit may fluctuate from period to period as revenues fluctuate due to the mix of products we sell to customers, royalty revenue volume, operational efficiencies, and changes to our technology expenses and customer support.
We plan to focus on and grow the sales volume of new and existing products with the highest gross margin. We intend to continue investing additional resources in our engineering and design capabilities, which drives our research and development efforts and, in turn, drives additional revenue streams and enables us to improve our gross margin over time. The level and timing of investment in these areas could affect our cost of revenues in the future.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist primarily of research and development expenses, sales and marketing expenses, and employee compensation costs for operations management, finance, accounting, information technology, compliance, and human resources personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as facilities, legal, accounting, and other professional fees, and other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to other departments. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, but we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percent of revenues in the coming years.
Research and development expenses consist of costs for the design, development, testing, and enhancement of our products and are generally expensed as incurred. These costs consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and share-based compensation for our product development personnel. Research and development expenses also include training costs, product management, third-party partner fees, and third-party consulting fees. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, but as a percent of revenues, R&D expenses are expected to decrease.
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs related to sales and marketing, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and share-based compensation, costs of general marketing activities and promotional activities, travel-related expenses, and allocated overhead. Sales and marketing expenses also include costs for advertising and other marketing activities. Advertising is expensed as incurred. We expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of the interest incurred on our debt obligations, our factoring arrangement expense, the non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of warrants issued to certain of our debtholders that have a contingent beneficial conversion feature related to certain convertible notes payable, and lease expense related to our capital leases.
PPP Loan Forgiveness
On April 30, 2020, Guerrilla RF received loan proceeds of $535,800 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). Established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). PPP loans and accrued interest are forgivable after a “covered period” (24 weeks) as long as the borrower maintains its payroll levels and uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent, and utilities. As of December 31, 2020, Guerrilla RF had $535,800 of principal outstanding on the PPP loan together with accrued interest of $3,611 as accounts payable and accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheet. On February 17, 2021, Guerrilla RF received approval from the SBA that the $535,800 PPP loan was forgiven, including all accrued interest.
On February 19, 2021, Guerrilla RF received loan proceeds of $833,300 (the “2021 PPP Loan”) also under the same CARES Act. Guerrilla RF used the 2021 PPP Loan to retain current employees, maintain payroll, and make lease and utility payments. On August 18, 2021, Guerrilla RF received confirmation from the SBA that the 2021 PPP Loan, including accrued interest, had been forgiven.
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods presented:
Comparison for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues increased $2.4 million to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was driven by the growth of product sales to our automotive supplier customers and our wireless infrastructure customers over a wide breadth of applications and customers. Sales to our large automotive supplier customers grew approximately 42% from the previous year. New and established catalog products also contributed over 71% in revenue growth. Our overall number of product offerings and the number of customers we ship to in volume continue to contribute to increased sales. Our increased sales were driven by market share increases and rebounding volumes in markets recovering from supply chain difficulties that have impacted sales of our products.
We generate revenue from customers located within and outside the U.S. While we have several large customers, we define major customers as those responsible for more than 10% of Guerrilla RF’s annual product shipment revenue. Using this definition, Guerrilla RF had one major customer, Richardson RFPD, Inc. ("RFPD"), during the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020. RFPD, a large product distributor serving numerous end customers, generated 81% of product shipment revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Royalty revenues decreased 69% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, as our customer with which we have a royalty agreement experienced a decline in sales of wireless infrastructure products licensed under our proprietary designs.
International shipments amounted to $5.6 million (approximately 59% of product revenue) and $3.4 million (approximately 43
% of product revenue) for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Direct Product Costs and Gross Profit
Direct Product Costs increased $1.4 million to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 49% increase in direct product cost was driven by a product sales volume increase of 64% (excluding royalty revenue), which was partially offset by greater absorption of fixed overhead costs and product mix improvements year over year. Year over year gross profit was negatively impacted by reduced royalty revenues of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1.0 million to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to $0.3 million of employee additions in our engineering department, and $0.7 million was attributable research a lab and equipment expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $0.6 million to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The moderate increase year over year was driven by increases in a variety of sales and marketing expenses including sales commissions, information technology support, and customer support.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and Administrative expenses increased $1.5 million to $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to increases in wages and benefits ($1.0 million) and $0.3 million of professional fees. The increase in wages, benefits, and professional fees was driven by headcount additions within our information technology and accounting departments, and expenses incurred as we prepared for and evolved into being a public company. The remaining increase of general and administrative expenses ($0.2 million) is related to share-based compensation.
Other Income (Expenses)
Interest expense increased approximately $0.1 million to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to increased factoring fees.
Other income increased to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to both PPP loans being forgiven in 2021. There was no PPP loan forgiveness in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash raised from our private placement offering, which are further described below. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash resources of $5.3 million. As described in Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements, we have incurred recurring losses, and negative cash flows from operations since inception and have an accumulated deficit at December 31, 2021, of $15.0 million. We have relied on debt and equity financing to fund operations to date. We expect losses and negative cash flows to continue, primarily due to continued research, development, and marketing efforts as well as increased administration expenses as our Company grows. We raised $11.5 million of gross proceeds through four closings of our private placement in October and November 2021. As our fiscal year 2022 progresses and we use the private placement proceeds to catalyze the implementation of our long-term strategic plan, additional debt or equity financing may be required if we do not generate sufficient revenue from new and existing products. Based upon our current financial projection models, we anticipate that the private placement proceeds will continue to help fund our ongoing operations through 2022. We anticipate that we will require additional funding in the future and we are actively evaluating alternative funding sources as part of our ongoing strategic planning. If we need additional funds in the future, there is no assurance that appropriate financing will be available on terms, which are acceptable to us, or at all. This requirement for additional funding raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Cash (used in) provided by:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $4.8 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 principally resulted from our net loss of $2.8 million, which included PPP loan forgiveness of $1.4 million for a total net loss, excluding PPP loan forgiveness, of $4.2 million. There was also $1.1 million used for prepaid expenses and an offset of $0.4 million for the increase in our accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, principally resulted from our net loss of $2.0 million. Moderate increases in our accounts receivable and inventories were partially offset by moderate increases in accounts payable and a small decrease in our prepaid expenses.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0.4 and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities resulted from capital expenditures on property and equipment for all periods presented.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $10.1 million was principally attributable to $8.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of our common stock. The other $1.7 million was the net of notes payable, PPP loan, payment on capital leases, and our factoring advance.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, of $1.8 million principally resulted from proceeds from the issuance of notes payable ($0.4 million), the use of our factoring agreement totaling $0.9 million, and government-subsidized debt ($0.5 million).
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021; however, the following table does not include any contractual obligations or commitments that will develop as we continue the preparation, planning, and asset financing negotiations associated with the planned move of our business headquarters in 2022. We anticipate approximately $4.0 million of new headquarter building asset additions, and an annual lease expense to be approximately $1.1 million upon occupancy.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the balance sheet date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our most significant estimates and judgments involve the valuation of our share-based compensation, including the underlying estimated fair value of our preferred and common stock. Accordingly, actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future consolidated financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
Other than as described under Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements, the Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates included in our Current Report on Form 8-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on October 27, 2021, have not materially changed.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we think are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Share-Based Compensation
We recognize the grant-date fair value of share-based awards issued as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. To date, we have not issued awards where vesting is subject to performance or market conditions. The fair value of stock options is estimated at the time of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the use of inputs and assumptions such as the estimated fair value of the underlying common stock, exercise price of the option, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected volatility and dividend yield, the most critical of which is the estimated fair value of our common stock.
The estimated fair value of each grant and modification of stock options awarded during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was determined using the following methods and assumptions:
●
Estimated fair value of common stock. As our common stock has not historically been publicly traded, our Board of Directors periodically estimates the fair value of our common stock considering, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our preferred and common stock prepared by an independent third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
●
Expected term. Due to the lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and the lack of sufficient company-specific historical data, the expected term of employee stock options is determined using the “simplified” method, as prescribed in SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) No.107 (SAB 107), Share-Based Payment, whereby the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
●
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected term.
●
Expected volatility. The expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of peer companies within our industry which were commensurate with the expected term assumption, as described in SAB 107.
●
Dividend yield. We assume a dividend yield of 0% because we have never paid, and for the foreseeable future do not expect to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
The inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and management uses different inputs and assumptions, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different for future awards.
In valuing our common and preferred stock, our Board of Directors determined the equity value of our business by taking a combination of the income and market approaches.
The income approach estimates the fair value of a company based on the present value of its future estimated cash flows and the residual value of the company beyond the forecast period. These future values are discounted to their present values using a discount rate which is derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly-traded companies in the same industry or similar lines of business as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in us achieving these estimated cash flows. For the market approach, we utilized the guideline company method by analyzing a population of comparable companies and selected those semiconductor companies that we considered to be the most comparable to us in terms of product offerings, revenue, margins, and growth. We then used these guideline companies to develop relevant market multiples and ratios, which are then applied to our corresponding financial metrics to estimate our equity value.
The enterprise values determined by the income and market approaches were then allocated to our common stock using the Option Pricing Method, or OPM.
The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on a company’s enterprise value, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences of the preferred stock. Therefore, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to the stockholders exceed the value of the liquidation preference at the time of an assumed liquidity event such as a merger, sale or initial public offering. The common stock is modeled as a call option with a claim on the enterprise at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the preferred stock is liquidated. The OPM uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the price of the call option. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is so difficult to predict that forecasts would be highly speculative.
Given the absence of a public trading market for our capital stock as of December 31, 2021, our Board of Directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including:
●
our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations;
●
the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or the sale of the Company, given prevailing market conditions;
●
the lack of marketability of our preferred and common stock;
●
the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and,
●
U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions and outlook.
As our common stock is not yet quoted on an OTC Markets Group trading platform, or any exchange, it will be necessary to use estimates to determine the fair value of the common stock for our year ended December 31, 2022. In addition, as all of Guerrilla RF's preferred stock was converted into common stock in October 2021, we will no longer need to estimate the fair value of preferred stock as there was no issued or outstanding preferred stock as of December 31, 2021.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we are no longer an emerging growth company, or affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. We have not elected to early adopt certain new accounting standards, as described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.