ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
We are a leading provider of professional and technical engineering, staffing services and simulation software to clients in the power and process industries. We provide customers with simulation, engineering and plant services that help clients reduce risks associated with operating their plants, increase revenue through improved plant and employee performance, and lower costs through improved operational efficiency. In addition, we provide professional services that help clients fill key vacancies in their respective organizations, primarily in procedures, engineering, technical support and training focused on regulatory compliance and certification in the nuclear power industry. Our operations also include interactive computer-based tutorials and simulation software for the refining, chemical, and petrochemical industries.
Early in 2020 as the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded, the end markets that we serve, namely the power industries, delayed certain essential services and dramatically cut back on non-essential services. Although these delays and reductions impacted us, as an essential services provider to an essential industrial base, we benefited from maintaining a baseline of business to continue and align itself to the realities of the pandemic. Additionally, staffing shortages have resulted in new opportunities for our Workforce Solutions segment. In 2021, the effects of the pandemic still impacted the end markets we serve, but those effects have been mitigated by a number of factors, including the following: the pandemic largely has had a targeted effect on the population; a number of vaccines in the market being distributed and, despite logistical challenges, making substantial progress for those in most need; the economy of the United States has not had as much disruption as was initially feared, which has benefited our end markets; and most importantly our end markets seem poised to contract with us for essential services that had been delayed as a result of the pandemic. As we end 2021 and begin 2022, we have had a number of significant contract wins that have been publicly announced, which we hope will be a harbinger of a more attractive business environment for the power industries we serve.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have sought and obtained support through various business assistance programs. We applied for and, on April 23, 2020, received the PPP Loan under the CARES Act, as administered by the SBA. The application for receipt of the PPP Loan required us to certify, in good faith, that the attendant economic uncertainty made the loan necessary to support our ongoing operations. The PPP Loan bore interest at a rate of 1% per annum and would mature on April 23, 2022, with the first payment deferred until September 2021. We used the proceeds of the PPP Loan for payroll and related costs, rent and utilities. Pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the SBA, in order to request forgiveness of the PPP Loan, we were required to submit an application to the Lender substantiating that we were entitled to the PPP Loan and used the proceeds of the PPP Loan as permitted under the CARES Act. The Lender reviewed our application for forgiveness and associated documentation, and on February 26, 2021 forwarded our application to the SBA with the Lender’s determination that the loan is fully forgivable. On August 5, 2021, we received notice that full principal amount and all accrued interest thereon of the PPP Loan was formally forgiven by the SBA.
During the second quarter of 2021, we performed analysis to determine our first quarter 2021 eligibility for the Employee Retention Credit available under the CARES Act . We amended certain payroll tax filings and applied for a refund of $2.4 million dollars in April 2021. For the second quarter of 2021, we have applied for a refund of $1.8 million dollars from the IRS with the timely filing of Form 941 and have already recognized a benefit of $900,000 in value from unremitted payroll taxes as allowable. For the third quarter of 2021, we have applied for a refund of $1.0 million from the IRS with the timely filing of Form 941 and have recognized a benefit of $1.4 million in value from unremitted payroll taxes as allowable. Subsequent to the year end, we received refunds of $1.1 million, which was included in the other current assets balance at December 31, 2021.
We entered into a contract with a subcontractor to purchase large equipment from Siemens in order to build a simulator for project Slovenske Elektrarne Mochovce Full Scope Simulator Upgrade in December 2018. The total contract price was about $2.7 million and included VAT taxes of approximately $450,000. We paid the VAT taxes and had pursued the collection of this VAT refund for a couple of years. In May 2021, we were informed that this VAT refund was no longer collectable. As a result, we wrote off this VAT receivable during 2021.
On September 9, 2021, President Biden released the COVID-19 Action Plan, Path Out of the Pandemic (the “Plan”), with the stated goal of getting more people vaccinated. As part of the Plan, Executive Order 14042, Ensuring Adequate COVID Safety Protocols for Federal Contractors (the “Order”), creates the Safer Federal Workforce Task Force (the “Task Force”), which released guidance for U.S. Government contractors and their subcontractors. This guidance included mandatory vaccination of all employees working on or for a government contract, either directly or indirectly, by January 4, 2022 (subject to medical and religious exemptions). As a part of the Plan and Order, President Biden also directed, the Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) to issue an Emergency Temporary Standard (“ETS”) requiring that all employers with at least 100 employees ensure that their U.S.-based employees are fully vaccinated for COVID-19 or obtain a negative COVID-19 test at least once a week. On November 4, 2021, OSHA issued this ETS, however the implementation of the ETS was blocked by federal appeals courts, pending resolution of ongoing litigation challenging the constitutionality of the ETS, and the ETS was withdrawn by OSHA on January 25, 2022. OSHA, however has not withdrawn the proposed rule that would effectuate the same mandate, and it cannot be known whether OSHA may reissue the ETS or otherwise issue new emergency temporary standards imposing similar mandates. We have already received notice by both government customers and prime contractors serving government customers regarding the vaccination requirement and its application to our business with those customers. As an employer of more than 100 employees, we would also be subject to the ETS or a similar mandate should it become effective. It is possible that additional jurisdictions where we do business may impose similar mandates that would apply to our employees. In addition, certain of our customers may require vaccines for those of our employees who provide on-site service at their facilities. We will continue to monitor the status of these or other mandates or regulations and their application to us and our business.
Results of Operations.
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the periods presented expressed as a percentage of revenue.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $55.2 million, which was 4.2% less than the $57.6 million of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Performance Improvement Solutions revenue decreased 14.2% from $32.8 million to $28.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The decrease of revenue was primarily due to several significant projects ending in the prior fiscal year. We recorded total Performance Improvement Solutions orders of $30.0 million and $26.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Workforce Solutions revenue increased 8.9% to $27.0 million compared to revenue of $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due a significant new customer obtained in Q1 2021. We recorded total new orders of $26.5 million and $19.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, our backlog was $41.3 million, $31.8 million was attributed to the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and $9.5 million was attributed to the Workforce Solutions segment. As of December 31, 2020, our backlog was $40.4 million with $30.3 million attributed to the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and $10.1 million attributed to the Workforce Solutions segment. The increase in our backlog over fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to higher orders in the Performance Improvement Solutions during fiscal year 2021.
Gross profit. Gross profit was $11.9 million, or 21.5% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $14.8 million, or 25.7% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Performance Improvement Solutions segment's gross profit decreased by $3.3 million during fiscal year 2021 over fiscal year 2020. The decrease is primarily related to lower revenue and several significant projects completed in the prior year.
The Workforce Solutions segment's gross profit increased by $0.3 million during fiscal year 2021 over fiscal year 2020. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by an increase in revenue in the Workforce Solutions segment.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses totaled $14.9 million and $15.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Fluctuations in the components of SG&A spending were as follows:
Corporate charges decreased $0.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction of external legal, audit, and consultants fees of $0.8 million. Additionally, the Company saw a reduction in realized foreign exchange rate loss of $0.3 million during the fiscal year 2021.
Business development charges decreased $0.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower headcount in 2021.
Facility O&M expenses decreased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease during the fiscal year 2021 was mainly due to lease terminations in the first half of 2020.
Provision for loss on legal settlement. On August 17, 2020, Absolute entered into a Settlement Agreement with the plaintiffs (Joyce), which resulted a final settlement cost, including plaintiff's attorney fees of approximately $1.4 million. On September 29, 2020, the Company received $952 thousand from a general escrow account, originally set up as part of the Company's purchase of Absolute during fiscal 2017. The Company presented the loss on Joyce legal settlement and the benefit from the proceeds from the release of escrow from the Absolute transaction in selling, general and administrative expenses, in the amount of $477 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no similar transactions during the same period of 2021.
Bad debt expense. We recorded bad debt expense of $691 thousand and $103 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. GSE's bad debt allowance is based on historical trends of past due accounts, write-offs, and specific identification and review of customer accounts. Included in the current year provision is an impairment of unbilled receivables of $824 thousand related to a customer contract with our GSE Beijing entity offset by $133 thousand recovery of bad debt from previously written off balances.
As of December 31, 2021, management considered the following factors when assessing the unbilled receivable balance in question for impairment: the overall geopolitical environment, the Company’s inability to travel to China to meet with the customer to resolve their concerns, and the restrictions on restarting the project due to both regulatory constraints and our ability to meet future milestones. Based on these factors we determined that the unbilled was impaired and a reserve for unbilled was recorded resulting in bad debt expense of $824 thousand. We will continue to pursue billing and collections of this balance.
Research and development. Research and development costs consist primarily of software engineering personnel and other related costs. Research and development costs, net of capitalized software, totaled $0.6 million and $0.7 million for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Restructuring charges. Restructuring charges totaled $0.8 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. On December 27, 2017, the Board of GSE Systems, Inc. approved an international restructuring plan to streamline and optimize the Company’s global operations. Under this international restructuring plan, we have incurred cumulative restructuring charges of $3.9 million. The Company expects no future charges relating to the international restructuring plan, excluding any tax impacts and cumulative translation adjustments from the final disposal of foreign entities. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2019, the Company implemented a restructuring plan as a result of the work suspension of DP Engineering’s largest customer and subsequent notification on August 6, 2019 that the EOC contract was being terminated. This plan was put in place to align the workforce with the expected level of business moving forward. Under this restructuring plan, we have incurred total restructuring of $2.6 million. In the twelve months ending December 31, 2020, we recorded $1.0 million to international restructuring, and $0.2 million of related employee termination benefits. The decrease in our 2021 restructuring plan charges was mainly due to final charges related to the liquidation of our Sweden operations during the period, pursuant to our foreign restructuring plan.
Loss on impairment of goodwill and definite-lived intangible assets. We recognized a $3 thousand ROU asset impairment during the fiscal year 2021. We recognized a $4.3 million intangible asset impairment during the fiscal year 2020.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense totaled $0.3 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Amortization of definite-lived intangible assets. Amortization expense related to definite-lived intangible assets totaled $1.2 million and $1.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in amortization expense was primarily due to the reduction in the carrying value of DP Engineering’s intangible assets, due to the $4.3 million impairment in Q1 2020. Additionally, certain intangible assets such as Customer Contracts & Relationships have larger amortization the earlier they are in their useful lives.
Interest expense. Interest expense totaled $0.2 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The decrease was due to a reduction in total indebtedness during the fiscal year 2021.
Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net. The Company periodically enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to manage market risks associated with the fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates on foreign-denominated trade receivables. The Company had not designated the contracts as hedges and recognized a loss on the change in the estimated fair value of the contracts of $17 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020. We had no foreign exchange contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
The foreign currency denominated trade receivables, unbilled receivables, billings in excess of revenue earned and subcontractor accruals that are related to the outstanding foreign exchange contracts are remeasured at the end of each period into the functional currency using the current exchange rate at the end of the period. The gain or loss resulting from such remeasurement is also included in gain (loss) on derivative instruments net in the consolidated statements of operations. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred a gain of $19 thousand and $15 thousand, respectively, related to the remeasurement of such assets and liabilities.
Other income (expense), net. The Company recognized $16.9 million of other income, net and $(4) thousand of other expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the recording of $10.1 million PPP loan forgiveness by SBA and $7.2 million Employee Retention Credit during the period, offset by VAT write-off of $0.5 million, We paid VAT taxes for a subcontractor equipment purchase and had pursued the collection of this VAT refund for a couple of years. In May 2021, we were informed that this VAT refund was no longer collectable.
Provision for Income Taxes. The Company files tax returns in the United States federal jurisdiction and in several state and foreign jurisdictions. Because of the net operating loss carryforwards, the Company is subject to U.S. federal and state income tax examinations for tax years 2000, and forward, and is subject to foreign tax examinations by tax authorities for the years 2016 and forward. Open tax years related to state and foreign jurisdictions remain subject to examination but are not considered material to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s tax expense in 2021 was $0.2 million, representing an annual effective tax rate of 1.5%, and consisted of $0.1 million of current tax provision and $0.1 million of deferred tax liability related to the portion of goodwill which cannot be offset by deferred tax assets. The Company’s tax expense in 2020 was $0.4 million, representing an annual effective rate of (3.5)% and consisted of $0.4 million of current tax provision.
The significant change of $0.8 million in net operating loss carryforwards was primarily driven by the release of the U.S. uncertain tax position on the U.K. worthless stock deduction which originally offset the federal and state net operating losses.
The difference between the effective rate and statutory rate primarily resulted from a change in valuation allowance, permanent differences, including PPP loan forgiveness and foreign restructuring, accruals related to uncertain tax positions, the tax impact of stock compensation forfeitures, foreign tax expense, and state tax expense. Please see Note 15 for additional information.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act
On March 27, 2020, the United States enacted the Cares Act. The Cares Act is an emergency economic stimulus package that includes spending and tax breaks to strengthen the United States economy and fund a nationwide effort to curtail the effect of COVID-19. While the CARES Act provides sweeping tax changes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, some of the more significant provisions which are expected to impact our consolidated financial statements include removal of certain limitations on utilization of net operating losses and increasing the ability to deduct interest expense, as well as amending certain provisions of the previously enacted Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. On April 23, 2020, we received $10 million in funds under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), a part of the CARES Act. On August 5, 2021, the Company was notified that the Small Business Administration ("SBA") had forgiven the PPP loan including all accrued interest thereon was forgiven. Employee retention tax credits, made available under the CARES Act, allow eligible employers to claim a refundable tax credit against the employer share of Social Security tax equal to 70% of the qualified wages they pay to employees.
Consolidated Appropriations Act
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA) was signed into law. The CAA included additional funding through tax credits as part of its economic package for 2021. We evaluated these items in our tax computation as of December 31, 2021 and determined that the items do not have a material benefit on our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, management makes several estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Those accounting estimates that have the most significant impact on our operating results and place the most significant demands on management’s judgment are discussed below. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and the best estimates may require adjustment.
Revenue Recognition. We derive our revenue through three broad revenue streams: 1) System Design and Build (“SDB”), 2) software, and 3) training and consulting services. We recognize revenue from SDB and software contracts mainly through the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and revenue from training and consulting services through both the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and Workforce Solutions segment.
The SDB contracts are typically fixed-price and consist of initial design, engineering, assembly and installation of training simulators which include hardware, software, labor, and post contract support (“PCS”) on the software. We generally have two main performance obligations for an SDB contract: the training simulator build and PCS period. The training simulator build performance obligation generally includes hardware, software, and labor. The transaction price under the SDB contracts is allocated to each performance obligation based on its standalone selling price. We recognize the training simulator build revenue over the construction and installation period using the cost-to-cost input method as our performance creates or enhances assets with no alternative use to us, and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Cost-to-cost input method best measures the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. PCS revenue is recognized ratably over the service period, as PCS is deemed as a stand-ready obligation.
In applying the cost-to-cost input method, we use the actual costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs to measure the work progress toward the completion of the performance obligation and recognize revenue accordingly. Estimated contract costs are reviewed and revised periodically as the work progresses, and the cumulative effect of any change in estimates is recognized in the period in which the change is identified. Estimated losses are recognized in the period such losses are identified. Uncertainties inherent in the performance of contracts include labor availability and productivity, material costs, change order scope and pricing, software modification and customer acceptance issues. The reliability of these cost estimates is critical to our revenue recognition as a significant change in the estimates can cause the our revenue and related margins to change significantly from the amounts estimated in the early stages of the project.
The SDB contracts generally provide a one-year base warranty on the systems. The base warranty is not accounted for as a separate performance obligation under the contract because it does not provide the customer with a service in addition to the assurance that the completed project complies with agreed-upon specifications. Warranties extended beyond our typical one-year period, if any, are evaluated on a case by case basis to determine if it provides more than just assurance that the product operates as intended, which would require carve-out as a separate performance obligation.
Revenue from the sale of perpetual standalone and term software licenses, which do not require significant modification or customization, is recognized upon its delivery to the customer. Revenue from the sale of cloud-based subscription-based software licenses is recognized ratably over the term of such licenses following delivery to the customer. Delivery is considered to have occurred when the customer receives a copy of the software and is able to use and benefit from the software.
A software license sale contract with multiple performance obligations typically includes the following elements: license, installation and training services and PCS. The total transaction price of a software license sale contract is typically fixed and is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. Revenue is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied. Specifically, license revenue is recognized when the software license is delivered to the customer; installation and training revenue is recognized when the installation and training is completed without regard to a detailed evaluation of the point in time criteria due to the short-term nature of the installation and training services (one to two days on average); and PCS revenue is recognized ratably over the service period, as PCS is deemed as a stand-ready obligation.
The contracts within the training and consulting services revenue stream are either time and materials (“T&M”) based or fixed-price based. Under a typical T&M contract, we are compensated based on the number of hours of approved time provided by workers and the bill rates which are fixed per type of work, as well as approved expenses incurred. Our customers are billed on a regular basis, such as weekly, biweekly or monthly. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606-10-55-18, we elected to apply the “right to invoice” practical expedient, under which we recognize revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. The invoice amount represents the number of hours of approved time worked by each worker multiplied by the bill rate for the type of work, as well as approved expenses incurred. Under a typical fixed-price contract, we recognize the revenue on a percentage of completion basis as it relates to construction contracts with revenue recognized based on project delivery over time. Revenue from the sale of short-term contracts with a delivery period of one month or less is recognized in the month completed.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers.
Impairment of Intangible Assets, including Goodwill. Our intangible assets impairment analysis includes the use of undiscounted cash flow and discounted cash flow models that require management to make assumptions regarding estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates and future economic factors that may impact each asset group. We review goodwill and intangible assets for impairment annually as of December 31 and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. We test goodwill at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment, as defined by U.S. GAAP (See Note 7).
Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2011-08, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Testing Goodwill for Impairment (“ASU 2011-08”). ASU 2011-08 permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test. An entity is not required to perform step one of the goodwill impairment test for a reporting unit if it is more likely than not that its fair value is greater than its carrying amount (Step 0). If the Step 0 test indicates the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then additional impairment testing is required in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other.
ASU 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment by eliminating Step 2 of the current goodwill impairment test, which required a hypothetical purchase price allocation. Goodwill impairment will now be the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, limited to the carrying value of the goodwill.
As of December 31, 2020, we performed a quantitative step 1 analysis and have concluded that the estimated fair values of each of our reporting units as of December 31, 2020, is more likely than not, greater than their respective carrying values.
Our goodwill impairment analysis includes the use of a discounted cash flow model that requires management to make assumptions regarding estimates of growth rates used to forecast revenue, operating margin and terminal value as well as determining the appropriate risk-adjusted discount rates and other factors that impact fair value determinations. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparable. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. The timing and frequency of our goodwill impairment tests are based on an ongoing assessment of events and circumstances that would indicate a possible impairment. We will continue to monitor our goodwill and intangible assets for impairment and conduct formal tests when impairment indicators are present.
Capitalization of Computer Software Development Costs. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we capitalize computer software development costs incurred after technological feasibility has been established, but prior to the release of the software product for sale to customers. Once the product is available to be sold, we amortize the costs, on a straight-line method, over the estimated useful life of the product, which is typically three years. As of December 31, 2021, we have net capitalized software development costs of $0.5 million. On an annual basis, and more frequently as conditions indicate, we assess the recovery of the unamortized software development costs by estimating the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the sale of the product. If the undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized software costs, we will write-down the investment to its estimated fair value based on future discounted cash flows. The excess of any unamortized computer software costs over the related net realizable value is written down and charged to operations. Included in capitalized software development costs are certain expenses associated with the development software services. These are similarly capitalized, although not subjected to the same recoverability considerations. Significant changes in the sales projections could result in an impairment with respect to the capitalized software that is reported on our consolidated balance sheets.
Deferred Income Tax Valuation Allowance. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. Management makes a regular assessment of the ability to realize our deferred tax assets. In making this assessment, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of our deferred tax liabilities and projected future taxable income in making this assessment. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the total deferred income tax asset to its realizable value. As of December 31, 2021, our largest deferred tax asset was $6.2 million of net operating losses. It primarily relates to a U.S. net operating loss carryforward of $6.2 million; $4.5 million of the net operating loss carryforward expires in various amounts between 2023 and 2037; $1.7 million of the net operating loss carryforward is an indefinite-lived deferred tax asset. We do not believe that it is more likely than not that we will be able to realize our deferred tax assets for our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021, and therefore we have recorded a $9.4 million valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets. The Company has a deferred tax liability in the amount of $0.1 million at December 31, 2021 related to the portion of goodwill which cannot be offset by deferred tax assets
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $3.6 million compared to $6.7 million at December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $0.2 million and provided by operating activities was $1.1 million, respectively. The year over year decrease in cash provided by operating activities was largely driven by:
•
A $6.2 million decrease in net inflows from changes in net working capital was primarily driven by increased collections due to large milestone payments of large projects in the prior year.
•
A $2.1 million decrease in operating expenses (excluding non-cash operating expenses) mainly driven by a reduction of external legal and audit fees in 2021.
•
A $2.9 million decrease in gross profit, primarily driven by lower revenue due to COVID-19.
Net cash used in investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $0.8 million compared to net cash of $0.3 million used in investing activities in the prior year. The increase in cash outflow in 2021 was primarily related to the systems implementation, see note 10 for further details.
Net cash used in financing activities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in financing activities totaled $2.2 million and $6.1 million, respectively. The decrease in cash used in financing activities of $3.8 million was driven by a $2.0 million repayment of line of credit in 2021 compared to a repayment on term loans of $18.5 million offset by proceeds of the PPP Loan of $10 million.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan (“PPP Loan”)
We applied for and, on April 23, 2020, received a payroll protection program loan in the amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”) under the CARES Act, as administered by the SBA. The application for receipt of the PPP Loan required us to certify, in good faith, that the attendant economic uncertainty made the loan necessary to support our ongoing operations. The PPP Loan bore interest at a rate of 1% per annum and would mature on April 23, 2022, with the first payment deferred until September 2021. We used the proceeds of the PPP Loan for payroll and related costs, rent and utilities. Pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the SBA, in order to request forgiveness of the PPP Loan, we were required to submit an application to the Lender substantiating that we were entitled to the PPP Loan and used the proceeds of the PPP Loan as permitted under the CARES Act. The Lender reviewed our application for forgiveness and associated documentation, and on February 26, 2021 forwarded our application to the SBA with the Lender’s determination that the loan is fully forgivable. On August 5, 2021, we received notice that full principal amount and all accrued interest thereon of the PPP Loan was formally forgiven by the SBA.
Credit Facilities
On December 29, 2016, we entered a 3-year $5.0 million revolving line of credit facility (“RLOC”) with the Citizens Bank, N.A. (the “Bank”) to fund general working capital needs and acquisitions. On May 11, 2018, we entered into the Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement” or the “Credit Facility”) to (a) expand the RLOC to include a letter of credit sub-facility and not be subject to a borrowing base and (b) to add a $25.0 million term loan facility, available to finance permitted acquisitions over the following 18 months. The credit facility was subject to certain financial covenants and reporting requirements and was scheduled to mature on May 11, 2023 and accrue interest at the USD LIBOR, plus a margin that varies depending on our overall leverage ratio. We subsequently amended and ratified the Credit Agreement a number of times, and as a part of the Eighth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement, we repaid the entire outstanding balance on the term loan facility. Due to a projected violation of the leverage ratio at the end of the first quarter of 2021, we signed the Ninth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement with an effective date of March 29, 2021 (See FN 13).
Following the Ninth Amendment, we experienced continued delays in commencing new projects and thus our ability to recognize revenue was delayed for some contracts. Reductions in orders and other negative changes to orders experienced at the beginning of the pandemic started to reverse in 2021, but not at the level expected as ongoing COVID concerns continue to hinder the pace of recovery. This deterioration in the recovery plan resulted in breaching the Minimum Liquidity ratio subsequent to both June 30, 2021 and at September 30, 2021 as well as projected breaching of the Leverage and Fixed Charges ratio covenant. On November 12, 2021, due to these covenant violations, we signed the Tenth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement with an effective date of November 12, 2021 to adjust the thresholds for future covenants to ease the risk of non-compliance. Per the Tenth Amendment, we received a waiver for the fixed charge coverage ratio and leverage ratio for the quarters ending September 30 and December 31, 2021, and we agreed, (i) interest on the outstanding principal amount of the RLOC shall accrue at the interest rate in effect for the RLOC from time to time, but the interest due and payable on the RLOC on each Interest Payment Date shall be determined by subtracting seventy-five (75) basis points from the Applicable Margin and (ii) the seventy-five (75) basis points of accrued interest on the RLOC not paid on any Interest Payment Date pursuant to clause (i) above shall be due and payable on the Termination Date or the date of payment in full of the RLOC. RLOC Amount” means (i) $3,500,000 (ii) on each date a payment in the amount of $250,000 is made pursuant to Subsection 2.1.5(d), the RLOC Amount immediately prior to such payment reduced by $250,000 and (iii) on March 31, 2022 and on each June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31 thereafter, the RLOC Amount immediately prior to each such date reduced by $37,500. In addition, we agreed, by December 31, 2021, we will pay the Bank $250,000 to be applied to the principal amount outstanding under the RLOC. Commencing on March 31, 2022 and on each June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31 thereafter, we will pay the Bank $75,000 to be applied to the principal amount outstanding under the RLOC. In addition, within the fifth (5th) Business Day after we have received, subsequent to November 1, 2021, Employee Retention Credits in an aggregate amount not less than $500,000, we will pay the Bank $250,000 to be applied to the principal amount outstanding under the RLOC. We are also required to maintain a minimum of $2.25 million in aggregate USA liquidity. We incurred $15 thousand of amendment fee related to this amendment.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repaid for $2 million and had a draw of $0.8 million on our RLOC. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $1.8 million under the RLOC and four letters of credit totaling $1.1 million outstanding to certain of our customers. The total borrowing capacity under RLOC was $3.25 million as of December 31, 2021. After consideration of letters of credit and the $0.5 million reserved for issuance of new letters of credit, there was no amount available for borrowing under the RLOC.
Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued a Convertible Note (further described in Note 24 to Consolidated Financial Statements). The proceed received from this Note were used to repay in full, all outstanding indebtedness owed to Citizens, and the Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement between us, our subsidiaries, and Citizens has been terminated. We will continue to maintain a cash management account and certain letters of credit with Citizens and, accordingly, have entered into a certain Cash Management Agreement with Citizens, as well as certain Cash Pledge Agreements in amounts corresponding to the current outstanding letters of credits with customers (as further described in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Foreign Exchange
A portion of our international sales revenue has been and may be received in a currency other than the currency in which the expenses relating to such revenue are paid. Accordingly, we periodically enter into forward foreign exchange contracts to manage the market risks associated with the fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. As of December 31, 2021, we did not hold a position in forward foreign exchange contracts.
Other Matters
Management believes inflation has not had a material impact on our operations.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation (in thousands)
References to “EBITDA” mean net (loss) income, before taking into account interest expense (income), provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization. References to Adjusted EBITDA exclude the impact of litigation, loss on impairment, employee retention credit, PPP loan forgiveness, restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of derivative instruments, and VAT write-off. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, in addition to operating profit, net income and other GAAP measures, are useful to investors to evaluate our results because it excludes certain items that are not directly related to our core operating performance that may, or could, have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our results for any particular period. Investors should recognize that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA might not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies. This measure should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, any measure of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of non-GAAP EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure in accordance with SEC Regulation G follows:
Adjusted Net (Loss) Income and Adjusted EPS Reconciliation (in thousands, except per share amounts)
References to Adjusted net (loss) income exclude the impact of litigation, loss on impairment, employee retention credit, PPP loan forgiveness, restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of derivative instruments, acquisition-related
expenses, VAT write-off, amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions, release of valuation allowance, and income tax expense impact of adjustments. Adjusted Net Income and adjusted earnings per share (adjusted EPS) are not measures of financial performance under GAAP. Management believes adjusted net income and adjusted EPS, in addition to other GAAP measures, are useful to investors to evaluate our results because they exclude certain items that are not directly related to our core operating performance and non-cash items that may, or could, have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our results for any particular period. These measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, any measure of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of non-GAAP adjusted net income and adjusted EPS to GAAP net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is as follows: