ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
ESS is a long-duration energy storage company specializing in iron flow battery technology. We design and produce long-duration batteries predominantly using earth-abundant materials that can be cycled over 20,000 times without capacity fade. Because we designed our batteries to operate using an electrolyte of primarily salt, iron and water, they are non-toxic and substantially recyclable. Our batteries provide flexibility to grid operators and energy assurance for commercial and industrial customers. Our technology addresses energy delivery, duration and cycle-life in a single battery platform that compares favorably to lithium-ion batteries, the most widely deployed alternative technology. Using our iron flow battery technology, we are developing two products, each of which is able to provide reliable, safe, long-duration energy storage. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any second-generation products fully deployed and we had not yet met revenue recognition criteria, but we began shipping our second-generation Energy Warehouses in the third quarter of 2021 and were in the process of installing and commissioning such units. With each battery deployed, we will further our mission to accelerate the transition to a zero-carbon energy future with increased grid reliability.
Our long-duration iron flow batteries are the product of nearly 50 years of scientific advancement. Our founders, Craig Evans and Dr. Julia Song, began advancing this technology in 2011 and formed ESS. Our team has significantly enhanced the technology, improved the round-trip efficiency and developed an innovative and patented solution to the hydroxide build-up problem that plagued previous researchers developing iron flow batteries. Our proprietary solution to eliminate the hydroxide formation is known as the Proton Pump, and it works by utilizing hydrogen generated by side reactions on the negative electrode. The Proton Pump converts the hydrogen back into protons in the positive electrolyte. This process eliminates the hydroxide and stabilizes the electrolytes’ pH levels. The Proton Pump allows the electrolyte to be used for over 20,000 cycles without any capacity fade.
Our first energy storage product, the Energy Warehouse, is our “behind-the-meter” solution (referring to solutions that are located on the customers’ premise, behind the service demarcation with the utility) that offers energy storage ranging from four to 12-hour duration. Our second, larger scale energy storage product, the Energy Center, is designed for “front-of-the-meter” (referring to solutions that are located outside the customer’s premise, typically by the utility or by third-party
- 48 -
providers who sell energy into the grid, often known as independent power producers) deployments specifically for utility and large commercial and industrial consumers.
The Business Combination
On October 8, 2021, ESS consummated the Business Combination. As a result, Legacy ESS merged with Merger Sub, with Legacy ESS surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of STWO, which changed its name to “ESS Tech, Inc.” The increase in cash resulting from the Business Combination will be used to fund our corporate growth strategy related to the commercial sale of our second-generation energy storage solution and the scaling of our manufacturing operations to meet customer demand. The cash raised from the Business Combination will also be used to fund investments in personnel and research and development as well as provide liquidity for the funding of our ongoing operating expenses.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Legacy ESS was deemed the accounting predecessor and the combined entity is the successor SEC registrant, meaning that Legacy ESS’ financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in our future periodic reports filed with the SEC. Under this method of accounting, STWO was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes
As a result of the Business Combination, Legacy ESS became the successor to an SEC-registered and publicly traded company, which has required, and may further require, us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal, and administrative resources, including increased personnel costs, audit and other professional service fees.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Business
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
We believe we have the opportunity to establish high margin unit economics when operating at scale. Our future performance will depend on our ability to deliver on these economies of scale with lower product costs to enable profitable growth. We believe our business model is positioned for scalability due to the ability to leverage the same product platform across our customer base. Further, the manufacturing model is a capital light model and does not require significant capital expenditures when compared to alternative technologies. Significant improvements in manufacturing scale are expected to decrease the cost of materials and direct labor. However, in the near term, we expect our operating expenses to increase as we ramp up our research and development and manufacturing activities including with respect to our supply chain, parts and launch of our second-generation Energy Warehouses as well as higher general and administrative expenses related to public company readiness. Achievement of margin targets and cash flow generation is dependent on finalizing development and manufacturing of Energy Centers.
Our near- and medium-term revenue is expected to be generated from our second-generation Energy Warehouses. We believe our unique technology provides a compelling value proposition for favorable margins and unit economics in the energy storage industry in the future.
COVID-19
The rapid global spread of the COVID-19 pandemic since December 2019 has disrupted supply chains and affected production and sales across a range of industries, and continues to impact the United States and other countries throughout the world. There have already been multiple waves of the COVID-19 pandemic and COVID-19 cases continue to surge in certain areas of the world, including in certain countries that were initially successful at containing the virus. The evolution of the disease, the extent of its economic impact and the results of steps taken and yet to be taken by governments and financial institutions are still unknown. Due to the number of variables involved, the significance and the duration of the pandemic’s financial impact are difficult to determine. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the virus, and the impact on our customers, employees and vendors. The ultimate outcome of these matters is uncertain and, accordingly, the impact on our financial condition or results of operations is also uncertain.
To support the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities, in March 2020, we temporarily suspended operations at our Wilsonville, Oregon manufacturing facility, and also required all of our non-essential employees to work remotely. This represented approximately 20% of our workforce at the time. While we resumed operations in the manufacturing facility within several weeks, we instituted a split schedule shift, staggered workdays, and significant limitations on various areas of our physical building. Currently, we continue to evaluate our ability to operate in light of recent resurgences of COVID-19, including the emergence of new variant strains of COVID-19 (such as the omicron variant), which have and may in the future necessitate renewed government restrictions, and the
- 49 -
advisability of continuing operations, based on federal, state and local guidance, evolving data concerning the pandemic and the best interests of our employees, customers and stockholders. We have issued several force majeure notices to customers as a result of delays caused by COVID-19 and the impact of COVID-19 on such agreements, or the applicable agreements’ termination provisions, is uncertain and could result in the termination of such agreements.
Components of Results of Operations
As the Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, the operating results included in this discussion reflect the historical operating results of Legacy ESS prior to the Business Combination and the combined results of ESS following the closing of the Business Combination. The assets and liabilities of the Company are stated at their historical cost.
Revenue
We expect to earn revenue from the sale of our energy storage products and from service contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any second-generation products fully deployed and we had not yet met revenue recognition criteria, but we began shipping our second-generation Energy Warehouses in the third quarter of 2021 and were in the process of installing and commissioning such units. Revenue recognition will be deferred until customer acceptance has been received for each unit and customer required testing is complete, if applicable, or until we establish a history of successfully obtaining acceptance from each customer. In the near term, as our products are new, this is likely to be a longer process than when our products are more mature and we have more of a history with customer acceptance.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Costs related to research and development consist of direct product development material costs and product development personnel-related expenses, depreciation charges, overhead related costs, consulting services and other direct expenses. Personnel-related expenses consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. We expect our research and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities to achieve our product roadmap.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation for marketing and sales personnel and related support teams. To a lesser extent sales and marketing expenses also includes professional services costs and trade show sponsorships. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase over time as we continue to hire additional personnel to scale our business.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses for our corporate, executive, finance, and other administrative functions, as well as expenses for outside professional services and insurance costs. Personnel-related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. To a lesser extent, general and administrative expense includes depreciation and other allocated costs, such as facility-related expenses, and supplies. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense, net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our notes payable. Interest income consists primarily of earned income on our cash equivalents and restricted cash. These amounts will vary based on our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash balances, and with market rates.
Loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities
The loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities consists of periodic fair value adjustments related to Legacy ESS’ Series B and C warrants outstanding prior to the Business Combination and the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants.
Loss on revaluation of derivative liabilities
The loss on revaluation of derivative liability consists of periodic fair value adjustments associated with our derivative liability for the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Convertible Preferred Stock issuance right liability and contingently issuable warrants.
- 50 -
Loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities
The loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities represents the change in fair value associated with the Earnout Shares (defined below) from the date of the Business Combination through November 9, 2021, the date that the Earnout Milestone Events were achieved. Additionally, the loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities includes periodic fair value adjustments related to the Earnout Warrants.
Other income (expense)
Other income and expense consists of various other income and expense items but primarily consists of gain or loss on extinguishment of debt.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2021 to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth ESS’ operating results for the periods indicated:
__________________
N/M = Not meaningful
Revenue
No revenue was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any second-generation products fully deployed and we had not yet met revenue recognition criteria, but we began shipping our second-generation Energy Warehouses in the third quarter of 2021 and were in the process of installing and commissioning such units. Revenue recognition will be deferred until customer acceptance has been received for each unit and customer required testing is complete, if applicable, or until we establish a history of successfully obtaining acceptance from each customer. In the near term, as our products are new, this is likely to be a longer process than when our products are more mature and we have more of a history with customer acceptance. We expect to recognize revenue on the first three units shipped in 2021 during the first quarter of 2022.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $17,379 thousand or 135% from $12,896 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $30,275 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase resulted primarily from increased personnel-related expenses due to significant effort on the development of the second-generation Energy Warehouse as well as efforts to create an efficient manufacturing process for our products and an increase in material purchase costs.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $1,883 thousand or 163% from $1,158 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3,041 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily due to costs incurred for marketing related activities to build awareness of our products’ capabilities and increased personnel-related expenses.
- 51 -
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $23,948 thousand or 717% from $3,338 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27,286 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily due to fees paid to outside service providers including external banking fees, legal fees covering a variety of corporate matters, accounting fees and external audit fees as well as increased personnel-related expenses including recruiting expenses as we expanded headcount and increased insurance fees.
Other expense, net
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $1,754 thousand from $132 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1,886 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The net increase in interest expense resulted primarily from the previously outstanding Bridge Loan that was repaid in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination, including a final payment of $1.3 million in addition to accrued interest.
Loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities
The loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities increased $36,288 thousand from $1,296 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $37,584 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities increased as a result of a change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities due to ESS’ increased equity value.
Loss on revaluation of derivative liabilities
The loss on revaluation of the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Convertible Preferred Stock Issuance Right increased $211,633 thousand from $11,532 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $223,165 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of ESS increased equity value.
Loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities
The loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities was $154,806 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of the change in the value of Common Stock between the Closing of the Business Combination and November 9, 2021, the date that the Earnout Milestone Events were achieved. Additionally, the loss on revaluation of earnout liabilities includes periodic fair value adjustments related to the Earnout Warrants.
Other income (expense)
Other expenses were $67 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income of $926 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The other income recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021 is due to the gain on extinguishment recognized upon the forgiveness of the promissory note under the Payroll Protection Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance of and sale of equity and debt securities and loan agreements.
Legacy ESS’ Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing agreement provided additional committed funding of up to $80 million, through the purchase of up to 39,971,716 shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock based on the completion of certain milestones at a predetermined price of $2.00, to certain Series C-1 investors, and collectively referred to as the Series C-2 Purchase Right. In March 2021, Legacy ESS entered into the Series C-2 preferred stock purchase agreement and amendment to the Legacy ESS Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing agreement, pursuant to which we issued 5,746,003 shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock for $2.00 per share, totaling $11.5 million.
On May 6, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement. In conjunction with the Merger Agreement, we entered into an amendment to the Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing agreement with the two holders of the remaining Series C-2 Purchase Right pursuant to which such holders agreed to waive the milestone conditions and reduce their remaining Series C-2 Purchase Right from 33,726,549 shares of ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock to 7,994,442 shares in exchange for warrants to purchase up to 21,159,364 shares of ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock with an exercise price of $0.0001 per share and the ability to participate in the PIPE Financing. The C-2 warrants and purchase rights were exercised in conjunction with the Business Combination, which closed on October 8, 2021, resulting in proceeds of approximately $16 million.
During 2020, Legacy ESS entered into an unsecured promissory note with a bank under the PPP administered by the United States Small Business Administration and authorized by the Keeping American Workers Employed and Paid Act, which is part of the CARES Act, enacted on March 27, 2020. The principal amount of the PPP loan was $936 thousand and
- 52 -
bore interest of 1.0% per year. Principal payments were deferred until August 2021. In July 2021, Legacy ESS applied for and received forgiveness for this PPP loan.
We have a $1 million note payable with Silicon Valley Bank that is secured by significantly all of our property, except for our intellectual property. The note principal is due in monthly installments of $28 thousand beginning in March 2019 with an original maturity date of July 1, 2021; however, the maturity date was modified and extended to January 1, 2023. In March 2020, we amended the note payable and borrowed an additional $4 million. The $4 million note payable’s original maturity date was on January 1, 2023; however, the maturity date was modified and extended to January 1, 2024. The note bears interest at 0.50% below the bank’s prime rate (2.75% rate at December 31, 2021).
In July 2021, we entered into an agreement with Silicon Valley Bank providing for a $20.0 million bridge loan, which was fully drawn and matured on the earlier of January 13, 2022 or consummation of the Business Combination, which ultimately closed on October 8, 2021. The bridge loan bore interest at 9.0%, of which 2.25% was payable monthly and 6.75% paid-in-kind interest was due upon maturity. At maturity, a final payment of $1.3 million was due in addition to all outstanding principal and accrued interest, all of which was repaid in connection with the Business Combination.
The following table summarizes cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented.
Cash flows from operating activities:
Our cash flows used in operating activities to date have been primarily comprised of costs related to research and development, manufacturing of our energy storage products, building awareness of our products’ capabilities and other general and administrative activities. We expect our expenses related to personnel, manufacturing, research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative activities to increase.
Net cash used in operating activities was $51,849 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is comprised of net loss of $477,117 thousand, offset by noncash changes in the fair value of derivative liabilities of $223,165 thousand, earnout liabilities of $154,806 thousand, warrant liabilities of $37,584 thousand, and stock-based compensation of $7,922 thousand. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,087 thousand of cash driven by an increase in accounts payable and accrued and other current liabilities partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Net cash used in operating activities was $16,645 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is comprised of net loss of $30,419 thousand, offset by noncash changes in derivative liabilities of $11,532 thousand, warrant liabilities of $1,296 thousand, depreciation of $436 thousand and stock-based compensation of $310 thousand. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $47 thousand of cash driven by a decrease in accrued and other current liabilities and customer deposits partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and increase in prepaid expenses.
Cash flows from investing activities:
Our cash flows from investing activities have been comprised primarily of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,767 thousand and $502 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which relates to purchases of property and equipment.
Cash flows from financing activities:
Through December 31, 2021, we have raised capital from the Business Combination and financed our operations through the issuance of debt and equity securities and loan agreements.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $288,454 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and included $258,730 thousand in net cash contributions from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, $15,559 thousand in proceeds from the exercise of Legacy ESS Series C-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock purchase rights and C-2 warrants upon completion of the Business Combination and $10,995 thousand in proceeds from warrants exercised. Prior to the Business Combination, we additionally received $11,461 thousand in proceeds from the sale of Legacy ESS Series C-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock. These cash inflows were partially offset by payments made towards offering costs of $7,895 thousand.
- 53 -
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,722 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 and included proceeds from the issuance of notes payable reduced by principal payments on borrowings.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021 consist of operating lease commitments and notes payable. We also have a standby letter of credit that serves as security for certain operating leases for office and manufacturing space. The letter of credit is fully secured by restricted certificate of deposit accounts. There was no draw against the letter of credit during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, we are committed to non-cancellable purchase commitments of $10,160 thousand as of December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, including guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests, or unconsolidated variable interest entities that either have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the statements. The following accounting policies represent those that management believes are particularly important to the consolidated financial statements and that require the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments to determine matters that are inherently uncertain.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize the cost of stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. For awards that vest solely based on a service condition, the cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. For awards that vest based on service, performance and market conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense when the performance conditions are probable of being achieved. The compensation cost related to awards with market conditions is recognized regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied, if the requisite service is provided. We recognize stock-based compensation costs and reverse previously recognized costs for unvested options in the period forfeitures occur.
We determine the fair value of stock options that vest solely based on a service condition using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•Expected term-We determine the expected term based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding, generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options’ vesting term and contractual expiration period, as we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
•Expected volatility-The expected volatility rate is based on an average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies in the industry group as there has been no public market for our shares to date.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
•Expected dividend yield-We have not paid and do not expect to pay dividends. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Fair Value of ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock Issuance Right
The Legacy ESS Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing agreement provided additional committed funding of up to approximately $80 million, through the purchase of up to 39,971,716 shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock based on the completion of certain operational milestones at a predetermined price of $2.00, to certain Series C-1 investors. On May 6, 2021, Legacy ESS entered into an amendment to the Legacy ESS Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing agreement with the two holders of the remaining Legacy ESS Series C-2 Purchase Right. Under the terms of the amended agreement, in conjunction with a successful Business Combination with STWO, two existing investors purchased 7,994,442 additional shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock and received warrants to purchase 21,159,364 shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock with an exercise price of $.00007 per share. The Legacy ESS Series C-2 Purchase Right was eliminated with the consummation of the Business Combination.
We determined that our obligation to issue, and our investors’ obligation to purchase, shares of Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock at a fixed price represents a freestanding derivative financial instrument and was initially recorded at fair
- 54 -
value. Subsequent changes in fair value at each reporting date are recorded as a component of other income and expense. The value of the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock Issuance Right is determined based on significant inputs not observed in the market. Through the third quarter of 2020, the fair value of the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock Issuance Right was determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Beginning December 31, 2020 and thereafter the fair value of the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock Issuance Right was determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model with consideration for a remain private scenario and a SPAC transaction scenario as described above. We utilized key assumptions, such as the fair value of the Legacy ESS Series C-2 Preferred Stock, the volatility of peer companies’ stock prices, the risk-free interest rate based on the U.S. treasury yield, and the expected term (based on the shorter of remaining term to a significant event or expiration date of the purchase right).
Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liabilities
Through the consummation of the Business Combination, we accounted for warrants to purchase shares of Legacy ESS Series B Preferred Stock and Legacy ESS Series C Preferred Stock as liabilities at their estimated fair values because these warrants may obligate us to transfer assets to the holders at a future date under certain circumstances, such as a merger, acquisition, reorganization, sale of all or substantially all of our assets, each a change of control event. The warrants were recorded at fair value upon issuance and are subject to remeasurement to fair value at each period end, with any fair value adjustments recognized in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Through the third quarter of 2020, Legacy ESS measured the fair value of its warrant liabilities using unobservable inputs within the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Beginning December 31, 2020 and thereafter, the fair value of the warrant liabilities was determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model with consideration for a remain private scenario and a SPAC transaction scenario as described above. We utilized various key assumptions, such as the fair value of the Legacy ESS Series B Preferred Stock and Legacy ESS Series C Preferred Stock, the volatility of peer companies’ stock prices, the risk-free interest rate based on the U.S. treasury yield, and the expected term (based on remaining term to a significant event).
All warrants were exercised prior to the consummation of the Business Combination.
Earnout Liabilities
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company was permitted to issue to eligible Legacy ESS securityholders, on a pro rata basis, up to 16,500,000 shares of additional common stock (the “Earnout Shares”) less any RSUs issued pursuant to the Incentive RSU Pool, issuable in two equal tranches upon the occurrence of the respective Earnout Milestone Events. The initial fair value of the Earnout Shares was estimated using a model based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporated into the valuation the possibility that the market condition targets may not be satisfied. The Earnout Milestone Events were achieved on November 9, 2021 and Legacy ESS issued 15,674,965 shares to securityholders.
Research and Development
The Company is in the research and development phase. Our product offering relies heavily on new technology currently undergoing development and does not yet meet standard specifications to be sold commercially. Therefore, all related costs are currently accounted for as part of research and development expense in the consolidated statement of operations. The criteria established by the Company to determine when commercialization has been reached includes the length of time the units have been operational in the field and the level of performance at which those units operate. As the Company transitions from the research and development phase and into a full commercial phase, all inventoriable costs will be capitalized. As of December 31, 2021, the criteria for commercialization has not yet been met.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is earned from the sales of energy storage systems and is derived from customer contracts. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods and/or services to the customer, when or as the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied. For product sales of energy storage systems, the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at the point in time when the customer obtains control of the system (i.e. after customer acceptance). Payment terms generally include advance payments to reserve capacity and/or upon issuance of the customer’s purchase order, shipment readiness, with the remainder due upon delivery and commissioning of system.
In instances where there are multiple performance obligations in a single contract, we allocate the consideration to the various obligations in the contract based on the relative stand-alone selling price method. When the stand-alone selling price is not observable, revenue is determined based on a best estimate of selling price using cost plus a reasonable margin or by using market data for comparable products.
- 55 -
Revenue recognition will be deferred until customer acceptance has been received for each unit and customer required testing is complete, if applicable, or until we establish a history of successfully obtaining acceptance from each customer. In the near term, as our products are new, this is likely to be a longer process than when our products are more mature and we have more of a history with customer acceptance.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. We expect to remain an emerging growth company at least during the 2022 fiscal year and expect to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although we may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.