ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of Global Water Resources, Inc.'s (the "Company", "GWRI", "we", or "us") financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) relate to the year ended December 31, 2021 and should be read together with the condensed consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a water resource management company that owns, operates, and manages water, wastewater, and recycled water utilities in strategically located communities, principally in metropolitan Phoenix, Arizona. GWRI seeks to deploy an integrated approach, which the Company refers to as “Total Water Management". Total Water Management is a comprehensive approach to water utility management that reduces demand on scarce non-renewable water sources and costly renewable water supplies, in a manner that ensures sustainability and greatly benefits communities both environmentally and economically. This approach employs a series of principles and practices that can be tailored to each community:
•Reuse of recycled water, either directly or to non-potable uses, through aquifer recharge, or direct potable reuse;
•Regional planning;
•Use of advanced technology and data;
•Employing respected subject matter experts and retaining thought and application leaders;
•Leading outreach and educational initiatives to ensure all stakeholders including customers, development partners, regulators, and utility staff are knowledgeable on the principles and practices of our Total Water Management approach; and
•Establishing partnerships with communities, developers, and industry stakeholders to gain support of our Total Water Management principles and practices.
COVID-19 Update
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. Since that time, government authorities around the world implemented numerous measures to try to reduce the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place, stay-at-home, or total lock-down (or similar) orders and business limitations and shutdowns. Throughout 2021, states and localities were in the midst of a vaccine distribution program; however, the rate of vaccination has been slowed by vaccine hesitancy in some areas. More recently, new variants of COVID-19, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, that are more contagious than previous strains have emerged. The spread of these new strains have caused many government authorities to reimplement the aforementioned measures to try to reduce the spread that had become less prevalent.
Our water and wastewater services are essential services and we intend to continue to provide those services for our customers. As a result of the economic hardships caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we voluntarily agreed not to disconnect customers or charge late fees during the year ended December 31, 2020.
However, we resumed disconnections starting February 9, 2021. In 2020, we also expanded our customer assistance program to include a larger customer base, while increasing the annual maximum benefit and including additional qualifying categories to include disabled veterans, deployed service members, furloughed workers, and customers with a medical hardship. As of December 31, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material impact on uncollectible accounts. However, we continue to face various uncertainties related to the impact of the continuing COVID-19 pandemic on the overall economy and our business, including whether we will continue to be able to sustain our level of bad debt expense.
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including how it will impact our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners. While the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material effect on our business operations, results of operations, cash flows, and financial position for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we are unable to predict the ultimate extent to which our business operations, results of operations, cash flows, and financial position will be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our
business operations, results of operations, cash flows, and financial position will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted. This includes, but is not limited to, the duration and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic; its severity; the emergence and severity of its variants; the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, such as the availability and efficacy of vaccines (particularly with respect to emerging strains of the virus) and potential hesitancy to utilize them; general economic factors, such as increased inflation; supply chain constraints; labor supply issues; restrictions on travel and transportation; and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Further, our current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends. Refer to “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for additional risks we face due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Business Outlook
2020 and 2021 continued the trend of positive growth in new connections. According to the 2020 U.S. Census Data, the Phoenix metropolitan statistical area (“MSA”) is the 11th largest MSA in the U.S. and had a population of 4.8 million, an increase of 14% over the 4.2 million people reported in the 2010 Census. Metropolitan Phoenix continues to grow due to its low-cost housing, excellent weather, large and growing universities, a diverse employment base, and low taxes. The Employment and Population Statistics Department of the State of Arizona predicts that the Phoenix Metropolitan area will have a population of 5.7 million people by 2030 and 6.5 million by 2040. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, even though Arizona’s unemployment rate decreased by 5.1%, the state ranked in the top fifteen nationally for job growth.
According to the W.P. Carey School of Business Greater Phoenix Blue Chip Real Estate Consensus Panel ("Greater Phoenix Blue Chip Panel", the single family market experienced a period of very rapid growth in 2021 with approximately 31,000 building permits issued. Strong underlying demand and an extreme shortage of existing inventory pushed prices up rapidly. The Greater Phoenix Blue Chip Panel expects this to continue but at a slower pace as lack of product and affordability issues slow demand. Building permits are forecasted to increase to 35,000 and 36,000 in 2022 and 2023, respectively.
We believe that our utilities and service areas are directly in the anticipated path of growth primarily in the metropolitan Phoenix area. Market data indicates that our service areas currently incorporate a large portion of the final platted lots, partially finished lots, and finished lots in metropolitan Phoenix. Management believes that we are well-positioned to benefit from the near-term growth in metropolitan Phoenix due to the availability of lots and existing infrastructure in place within our services areas.
Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
Our financial condition and results of operations are influenced by a variety of industry-wide factors, including but not limited to:
•population and community growth;
•economic and environmental utility regulation;
•economic environment;
•the need for infrastructure investment;
•production and treatment costs;
•weather and seasonality; and
•access to and quality of water supply.
The COVID-19 pandemic may impact the degree to which these factors affect our financial condition and results of operations as discussed above under "COVID-19 Update."
We are subject to economic regulation by the state regulator, the Arizona Corporation Commission (“ACC”). The U.S. federal and state governments also regulate environmental, health and safety, and water quality matters. We continue to execute on our strategy to optimize and focus the Company in order to provide greater value to our customers and shareholders by aiming to deliver predictable financial results, making prudent capital investments, and focusing our efforts on earning an appropriate rate of return on our investments.
Population and Community Growth
Population and community growth in the metropolitan Phoenix area served by our utilities have a direct impact on our earnings. An increase or decrease in our active service connections will affect our revenues and variable expenses in a corresponding manner. Our total service connections, including both active service connections and connections to vacant homes, increased 5,024 connections, or 10.2%, from a total of 49,158 as of December 31, 2020 to 54,182 as of December 31, 2021. This increase was due primarily to organic growth in new connections combined with the acquisition of Global Water - Las Quintas Serenas Company, Inc. ("Las Quintas").
As of December 31, 2021, we have 53,882 active service connections compared to 48,899 active service connections as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 4,983, or 10.2%. As with the increase in total service connections, the increase is due primarily to the organic growth in new connections. Approximately 90.9% of the 53,882 active service connections are serviced by our Global Water - Santa Cruz Water Company, Inc. (“Santa Cruz”) and Global Water - Palo Verde Utilities Company, Inc. (“Palo Verde”) utilities as of December 31, 2021.
The graph below presents the historical change in active and total connections for our ongoing operations, adjusting for the July 2015 condemnation of the assets and operations of Valencia Water Company ("Valencia") and the May 2016 sale of Willow Valley.
Economic and Environmental Utility Regulation
We are subject to extensive regulation of our rates by the ACC, which is charged with establishing rates based on the provision of reliable service at a reasonable cost while also providing an opportunity to earn a fair rate of return on rate base for investors of utilities. The ACC uses a historical test year to evaluate whether the plant in service is used and useful, to assess whether costs were prudently incurred, and to set “just and reasonable” rates. Rate base is typically the depreciated original cost of the plant in service (net of contributions in aid of construction (“CIAC”) and advances in aid of construction (“AIAC”) which are funds or property provided to a utility under the terms of a main extension agreement, the value of which may be refundable), that has been determined to have been “prudently invested” and “used and useful”, although the reconstruction cost of the utility plant may also be considered in determining the rate base. The ACC also decides on an applicable capital structure based on actual or hypothetical analyses. The ACC determines a “rate of return” on that rate base, which includes the approved capital
structure and the actual cost of debt and a fair and reasonable cost of equity based on the ACC's judgment. The overall revenue requirement for rate making purposes is established by multiplying the rate of return by the rate base and adding “prudently” incurred operating expenses for the test year, depreciation, and any applicable pro forma adjustments.
To ensure an optimal combination of access to water and water conservation balanced with a fair rate of return for investors, our water utility operating revenue is based on two components: a fixed fee and a consumption or volumetric fee. For our water utilities, the fixed fee, or “basic service charge,” provides access to water for residential usage and has generally been set at a level to produce 50% of total revenue. The volumetric fee is based on the total volume of water supplied to a given customer after the minimum number of gallons, if any, covered by the basic service charge, multiplied by a price per gallon set by a tariff approved by the ACC. A discount to the volumetric rate applies for customers that use less than an amount specified by the ACC. For all investor-owned water utilities, the ACC requires the establishment of inverted tier conservation oriented rates, meaning that the price of water increases as consumption increases. For wastewater utilities, wastewater collection, and treatment can be based on volumetric or fixed fees. Our wastewater utility services are billed based solely on a fixed fee, determined by the size of the water meter installed. Recycled water is sold on a volumetric basis with no fixed fee component.
We are required to file rate cases with the ACC to obtain approval for a change in rates. Rate cases and other rate-related proceedings can take a year or more to complete. As a result, there is frequently a delay, or regulatory lag, between the time of a capital investment or incurrence of an operating expense increase and when those costs are reflected in rates. In normal conditions, it would not be uncommon to see us file for a rate increase every three years based on year one being the test year, year two being the rate case filing year, and year three being the rate case award year. However, based on our settlement with the ACC in 2014 and extended new rate phase-in period, we did not initiate the next rate case on this timeline. On August 28, 2020, 12 of our 18 regulated utilities each filed a rate case application with the ACC for water, wastewater, and recycled water rates, as well as the consolidation of water and/or wastewater rates for certain of the utilities, using the year ending December 31, 2019 as the test year for the rate case. Refer to “-Rate Case Activity” and “-Corporate Transactions-ACC Rate Case” for additional information.
Our water and wastewater operations are also subject to extensive United States federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the protection of the environment, health and safety, the quality of the water we deliver to our customers, water allocation rights, and the manner in which we collect, treat, and discharge wastewater. We are also required to obtain various environmental permits from regulatory agencies for our operations. The ACC also sets conditions and standards for the water and wastewater services we deliver. We incur substantial costs associated with compliance with environmental, health and safety, and water quality regulation.
Environmental, health and safety, and water quality regulations are complex and change frequently, and they have tended to become more stringent over time. As newer or stricter standards are introduced, they could increase our operating expenses. We would generally expect to recover expenses associated with compliance for environmental and health and safety standards through rate increases, but this recovery may be affected by regulatory lag.
Economic Environment
The growth of our customer base depends almost entirely on the success of developers in developing residential and commercial properties within our service areas. Real estate development is a cyclical industry and development in our service areas is contingent upon construction or acquisition of major public improvements, such as arterial streets, drainage facilities, telephone and electrical facilities, recreational facilities, street lighting, and local in-tract improvements (e.g., site grading). Many of these improvements are built by municipalities with public financing, and municipal resources and access to capital may not be sufficient to support development in areas of rapid population growth. For additional information and risks associated with the economic environment, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Infrastructure Investment
Capital expenditures for infrastructure investment are a component of the rate base on which our regulated utility subsidiaries are allowed to earn an equity return. Capital expenditures for infrastructure provide a basis for earnings growth by expanding our “used and useful” rate base, which is a component of our permitted return on investment and revenue requirement. We are generally able to recover a rate of return on these capital expenditures (return on equity and debt), together with debt service and certain operating costs, through the rates we charge.
We have an established capital improvement plan to make targeted capital investments to repair and replace existing infrastructure as needed, address operating redundancy requirements, improve our overall financial performance and expand our infrastructure in areas where growth is occurring.
Additionally, to reduce our deferred tax liability of approximately $19.4 million resulting from the gain on the condemnation of the operations and assets of Valencia, we completed in 2020 the planned investments within our capital improvement plan that we determined would qualify under the Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") §1033 re-investment criteria pursuant to a favorable Private Letter Ruling with the Internal Revenue Service (the "IRS"). Refer to “-Corporate Transactions-Private Letter Ruling” for additional information.
Production and Treatment Costs
Our water and wastewater services require significant production resources and therefore result in significant production costs. Although we are permitted to recover these costs through the rates we charge, regulatory lag can decrease our margins and earnings if production costs or other operating expenses increase significantly before we are able to recover them through increased rates. Our most significant costs include labor, chemicals used to treat water and wastewater, and power used to operate pumps and other equipment. Power and chemical costs can be volatile. However, we employ a variety of technologies and methodologies to minimize costs and maximize operational efficiencies. Additionally, with our Total Water Management approach, whereby we maximize the direct beneficial reuse of recycled water, we can realize significant treatment costs and power savings because smaller volumes of water are required for potable use. Many utilities require that all water be treated to potable standards irrespective of use. Total Water Management focuses on the right water for the right use. Potable water is needed for consumption and recycled water is acceptable for non-potable uses such as irrigation. Non-potable water does not need to be treated for commonly occurring and regulated constituents such as arsenic, or for other current or future human consumption health-based contaminants.
Weather and Seasonality
Our ability to meet the existing and future water demands of our customers depends on an adequate supply of water. Drought, overuse of sources of water, the protection of threatened species or habitats, or other factors may limit the availability of ground and surface water. Also, customer usage of water and recycled water is affected by weather conditions, particularly during the summer. Our water systems generally experience higher demand in the summer due to the warmer temperatures and increased usage by customers for irrigation and other outdoor uses. However, summer weather that is cooler or wetter than average generally suppresses customer water demand and can have a downward effect on our operating revenue and operating income. Conversely, when weather conditions are extremely dry, our business may be affected by government-issued drought-related warnings and/or water usage restrictions that would artificially lower customer demand and reduce our operating revenue. For additional information and risks associated with weather and seasonality, see “Risk Factors,” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. The limited geographic diversity of our service areas makes the results of our operations more sensitive to the effect of local weather extremes. The second and third quarters of the year are generally those in which water services revenue and wastewater services revenues are highest. Accordingly, interim results should not be considered representative of the results of a full year.
Access to and Quality of Water Supply
In many areas of Arizona (including certain areas that we service), water supplies are limited and, in some cases, current usage rates exceed sustainable levels for certain water resources. We currently rely predominantly (and are likely to continue to rely) on the pumping of groundwater and the generation and delivery of recycled water for non-potable uses to meet future demands in our service areas. At present, groundwater (and recycled water derived from groundwater) is the primary water supply available to us. In addition, regulatory restrictions on the use of groundwater and the development of groundwater wells, lack of available water rights, drought, overuse of local or regional sources of water, protection of threatened species or habitats, or other factors, including climate change, may limit the availability of ground or surface water. For additional information and risks associated with the access to and quality of water supply, see “Risk Factors,” included in Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Rate Case Activity
On July 9, 2012, we filed rate applications with the ACC to adjust the revenue requirements for seven utilities. In August 2013, we entered into a settlement agreement with the ACC staff, the Residential Utility Consumers Office, the City of Maricopa, and other parties to the rate case. The settlement required approval by the ACC before it could take effect. In February 2014, the rate case proceedings were completed and the ACC issued Rate Decision No. 74364, approving the settlement agreement. The collective rate increase included a 9.5% return on common equity which contributed to a 15% increase over revenue in 2011.
For our utilities, adjusting for the condemnation of the operations and assets of Valencia and the sale of Willow Valley, the settlement provided for a collective aggregate revenue requirement increase of $3.6 million based on 2011 test year service connections, phased-in over time, with the first increase in January 2015 as follows (in thousands, not updated for the Federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”), refer to "-Corporate Transactions-ACC Tax Docket" for further details):
Whereas this phase-in of additional revenues was determined using a 2011 test year, to the extent that the number of active service connections increases from 2011 levels, the additional revenues may be greater than the amounts set forth above. On the other hand, if active connections decrease or we experience declining usage per customer, we may not realize all of the anticipated revenues.
On September 20, 2018, the ACC issued Rate Decision No. 76901, which set forth the reductions in revenue for our Santa Cruz, Palo Verde, Greater Tonopah, and Northern Scottsdale utilities due to the TCJA. Rate Decision No. 76901 adopted the phase-in approach for the reductions to match the phase-in of our revenue requirement under Rate Decision No. 74364. Refer to "- Corporate Transactions - ACC Tax Docket" for details regarding Decision No. 76901.
On August 28, 2020, 12 of our 18 regulated utilities each filed a rate case application with the ACC for water, wastewater, and recycled water rates, as well as the consolidation of water and/or wastewater rates for certain of the utilities, using the year ending December 31, 2019 as the test year for the rate case. Refer to “- Corporate Transactions - ACC Rate Case” for additional information.
ICFA Treatment
From 2003 to 2008, we entered into approximately 154 infrastructure coordination and financing agreements (“ICFAs”) with developers and landowners covering approximately 275 square miles. Under these agreements, we have a contractual obligation to the developers and landowners to ensure that amongst other things, physical capacity exists through our regulated utilities for water and wastewater to the landowner/developer when needed. We receive fees from the landowner/developer for undertaking these obligations that typically are a negotiated amount per planned equivalent dwelling unit for the specified development or parcel of land. Payments are generally due to us from the landowner/developer based on progress of the development, with a portion due upon signing of the agreement, a portion due upon completion of certain milestones and the final payment due upon final plat approval or sale of the subdivision. The payments are non-refundable. Our investment can be considerable, as we may phase-in the construction of facilities in accordance with a regional master plan, as opposed to a single development.
With the issuance of Rate Decision No. 74364, in February 2014, the ACC changed how ICFA funds would be characterized and accounted for going forward. Most notably, the ACC changed the rate treatment of ICFA funds. ICFA funds already received or which had become due prior to the date of Rate Decision No. 74364 were accounted for in accordance with our ICFA revenue recognition policy that had been in place prior to the 2010 Regulatory Rate Decision, wherein the funds received are recognized as revenue once the obligations specified in the ICFA were met. Rate Decision No. 74364 prescribes that of the ICFA funds which come due and are paid subsequent to December 31, 2013, 70% of the ICFA funds will be recorded in the associated utility subsidiary as a hook-up fee (“HUF”) liability, with the remaining 30% to be recorded as deferred revenue, until such time that the HUF tariff is fully funded, after which the remaining funds will be recorded as deferred revenue in accordance with our ICFA revenue recognition policy. A HUF tariff, specifying the dollar value of a HUF for each utility, was approved by the ACC as part of Rate Decision No. 74364. We are responsible for assuring the full HUF value is paid from ICFA proceeds, and recorded in its full amount by predetermined milestones in Rate Decision No. 74364, even if it results in recording less than 30% of the ICFA fee as deferred revenue.
We account for the portion of future payments received under these agreements allocated to HUF liability as CIAC. However, from the regulator’s perspective, HUFs do not impact rate base until the related funds are expended. These funds are segregated in a separate bank account and used to construct plant assets. The HUF liability is to be relieved once the funds are used for the construction of plant. For facilities required under a hook-up fee or ICFA, we must first use the HUF funds received, after which we may use debt or equity financing for the remainder of construction. The deferred revenue portion of these fees is recognized as revenue once the obligations specified within the applicable ICFA are met, including construction of sufficient operating capacity to serve the customers for which revenue was deferred.
Pursuant to Rate Decision No. 74364, we have agreed not to enter into any new ICFAs, and instead would utilize HUF tariffs, which have become an acceptable industry practice in Arizona. As part of the settlement, a HUF tariff was established for each utility. Existing ICFAs will remain in place, with 70% of future ICFA payments to be recorded as HUFs until the HUF liability is fully funded. The HUF liability is relieved as funds are expended to construct plant, at which time a corresponding amount is recorded to CIAC. The portion of ICFA proceeds not recorded as HUF will be recorded as revenue or deferred revenue, in accordance with our ICFA revenue recognition policy.
In addition to ICFAs, we have various line extension agreements with developers and builders, through which funds, water line extensions or wastewater line extensions are provided to us by the developers and are considered refundable advances for construction. These AIACs are subject to refund by us to the developers through annual payments that are computed as a percentage of the total annual gross revenue earned from customers connected to utility services constructed under the agreement over a specified period. Upon the expiration of the agreements’ refunding period, the remaining balance of the AIAC becomes nonrefundable and at that time is considered CIAC. CIAC is amortized as a reduction of depreciation expense over the estimated remaining life of the related utility plant. For rate-making purposes, a utility plant funded by AIAC and CIAC is excluded from rate base. The taxability of AIAC and CIAC was changed with the enactment of the TCJA. Previously, the majority of AIAC and CIAC that we collected were not taxable; however, with the enactment of the TCJA, they are taxable going forward. On November 27, 2018, the ACC ruled that the utility may require that the contributor pay a gross-up to the utility consisting of 55% of the income tax expense with the utility covering the remaining 45% of the income tax expense. Effective January 1, 2021, CIAC and AIAC for regulated water and sewage disposal facility companies will be excluded from income under IRC Section 118. Due to the 2021 IRC Section 118 amendment, the Company refunded $1.4 million in developer taxes paid for contributions made after December 31, 2020. For more details regarding the ruling, refer to "-Corporate Transactions - ACC Tax Docket."
Corporate Transactions
Stipulated Condemnation of the Operations and Assets of Valencia
On July 14, 2015, we closed the stipulated condemnation to transfer the operations and assets of Valencia to the City of Buckeye. Terms of the condemnation were agreed upon through a settlement agreement and stipulated final judgment of condemnation wherein the City of Buckeye acquired all the operations and assets of Valencia and assumed operation of the utility upon close. The City of Buckeye paid the Company $55.0 million at close, plus an additional $0.1 million in working capital adjustments. The City of Buckeye is obligated to pay the Company a growth premium equal to $3,000 for each new water meter installed within Valencia’s prior service areas in the City of Buckeye, for a 20-year period ending December 31, 2034, subject to a maximum payout of $45.0 million over the term of the agreement.
Private Letter Ruling
On June 2, 2016, we received a Private Letter Ruling from the IRS that, for purposes of deferring the approximately $19.4 million gain realized from the condemnation of the operations and assets of Valencia, determined that the assets converted upon the condemnation of such assets could be replaced through certain reclamation facility improvements contemplated by the Company under IRC §1033 as property similar or related in service or use.
Pursuant to IRC §1033, as of December 31, 2020 the Company fully deferred the remaining tax liability.
ACC Tax Docket
On December 20, 2017, the ACC opened a docket to address the utility ratemaking implications of the TCJA. The ACC subsequently approved an order in February 2018 requiring Arizona utilities to apply regulatory accounting treatment, which includes the use of regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities, to address all impacts from the enactment of the TCJA.
On September 20, 2018, the ACC issued Rate Decision No. 76901, which set forth the reductions in revenue for our Santa Cruz, Palo Verde, Greater Tonopah, and Northern Scottsdale utilities due to lower corporate tax rates under the TCJA. Rate Decision No. 76901 adopted a phase-in approach for the reductions to match the phase-in of our revenue requirement under Rate Decision No. 74364 enacted in February 2014. In 2021, the final year of the phase-in, the annual reductions in revenue for our Santa Cruz, Palo Verde, Greater Tonopah, and Northern Scottsdale utilities were approximately $415,000, $669,000, $16,000, and $5,000, respectively. The ACC also approved a carrying cost of 4.25% on regulatory liabilities resulting from the difference of the fully phased-in rates to be applied in 2021 versus the years leading up to 2021 (i.e., 2018 through 2020).
Rate Decision No. 76901, however, did not address the impacts of the TCJA on accumulated deferred income taxes (“ADIT”), including excess ADIT (“EADIT”). Following the ACC's request for a proposal, the Company made its proposal in filings on December 19, 2018 and July 1, 2019. ACC Staff reviewed the Company's filing and requested that the Company defer tariff revisions until such revisions can be considered in the next rate case. ACC Staff also requested that the Company defer consideration of the regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities associated with 2018 EADIT amortization. On July 18, 2019, the Company made a filing proposing these items be deferred to the next rate case. Refer to " - Corporate Transactions - ACC Rate Case" for additional information regarding the Company's next rate case.
On November 27, 2018, February 20, 2019, February 28, 2019, and January 23, 2020, the ACC adopted orders relating to the funding for income taxes on CIAC and AIAC (which became taxable for our regulated utilities under the TCJA). Those orders 1) require that under the hybrid sharing method, a contributor will pay a gross-up to the utility consisting of 55% of the income tax expense with the utility covering the remaining 45% of the income tax expense; 2) remove the full gross-up method option for Class A and B utilities and their affiliates (which includes all of our utilities); 3) ensure proper ratemaking treatment of a utility using the self-pay method; 4) clarify that pass-through entities that are owned by a “C” corporation can recover tax expense according to methods allowed; and 5) require Class A and B utilities to self-pay the taxes associated with hook-up fee contributions but permit using a portion of the hook-up fees to fund these taxes. The Company's utilities have adopted the hybrid sharing method for income tax on CIAC and AIAC.
Effective January 1, 2021, contributions made in aid of construction and advances made in aid of construction for regulated water and sewage disposal facility companies will be excluded from income under IRC section 118.
2020 Common Stock Offering
On January 21, 2020, we completed a public offering of 870,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price per share of $12.50, for gross proceeds of $10.9 million. On January 30, 2020, we issued an additional 130,000 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $12.50 per share, for gross proceeds of $1.6 million, resulting in total proceeds from the offering of approximately $12.5 million. The issuance of the additional shares was completed pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter's over-allotment option. We received net proceeds of approximately $11.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us, which collectively totaled approximately $1.0 million.
ACC Rate Case
On August 28, 2020, 12 of our 18 regulated utilities each filed a rate case application with the ACC for water, wastewater, and recycled water rates, which proposed a collective revenue requirement increase of $4.6 million (relative to expected revenues in 2021, which is the final year of the rate phase-in from the last rate case) based on a 2019 test year. On August 2, 2021, we filed rejoinder testimony with the ACC updating our collective revenue increase to approximately $3.0 million. An evidentiary hearing was conducted beginning August 9, 2021. Certain of our utilities, including Santa Cruz and Palo Verde, have also requested that the rate increases be phased in over three years, beginning January 1, 2022. A final decision is not expected until the second quarter of 2022; therefore, any phase-in will not begin as requested on January 1, 2022 and may be shorter or longer than three years, if a revenue increase is approved.
We also requested the consolidation of water and/or wastewater rates for our Red Rock, Santa Cruz, Palo Verde, Picacho Water, and Picacho Utilities located in Pinal County. Of our utilities filing a rate case, these utilities make up approximately 96% of the Company's active service connections; provide or will provide water, wastewater, and recycled water services; and are expected to create economies of scale that are beneficial to all customers if consolidated.
There can be no assurance, however, that the ACC will approve the requested rate increase or any increase or the consolidation of water and wastewater rates described above, and the ACC could take other actions as a result of the rate case. Further, it is possible that the ACC may determine to decrease future rates. There can also be no assurance as to the timing of when an approved rate increase (if any) would go into effect.
Revolving Credit Line
On April 30, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with The Northern Trust Company, an Illinois banking corporation, for a two-year revolving line of credit up to $10.0 million with an initial maturity date of April 30, 2022. This credit facility, which may be used to refinance existing indebtedness, to acquire assets to use in and/or expand the Company’s business, and for general corporate purposes, bears an interest rate equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus 2.00% and has no unused line fee. This credit facility replaced the previous revolving line of credit with MidFirst Bank, which was terminated in April 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under this credit line.
On April 30, 2021, the Company and The Northern Trust Company entered into an amendment to the loan agreement pursuant to which, among other things, the maturity date for the Company’s revolving line of credit was extended to April 30, 2024.
Recent Events
Acquisition of Rincon Water Company, Inc.
On January 20, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Rincon Water Company, Inc. ("Rincon"), an operator of a water utility with service area in Pima County, Arizona. The acquisition added an additional 73 connections and approximately 8.6 square miles of service area at the time of acquisition.
Acquisition of Twin Hawks Utility, Inc
On January 13, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Twin Hawks Water Utility, Inc. ("Twin Hawks"), an operator of a water utility with service area in Pinal County, Arizona. The acquisition added an additional 18 connections and approximately 0.5 square miles of service area at the time of acquisition.
Acquisition of Las Quintas Serenas Water Company
On November 3, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of Las Quintas Serenas Water Company ("Las Quintas"), an operator of a water utility with service area in Pima County, Arizona. The acquisition added over 1,100 connections with approximately 2.5 square miles of service area.
Sale of Wireless Communication Tower
On April 9, 2021, the Company sold a wireless communication tower and related easement rights which resulted in a $1.5 million gain recorded as other income.
Segment Reporting
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing operating performance. In consideration of the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification 280, Segment Reporting, we are not organized around specific products and services, geographic regions, or regulatory environments. We currently operate in one geographic region within the State of Arizona, wherein each operating utility operates within the same regulatory environment.
While we report revenue, disaggregated by service type, on the face of our statement of operations, we do not manage the business based on any performance measure at the individual revenue stream level. We do not have any customers that contribute more than 10% to our revenues or revenue streams. Additionally, the chief operating decision maker uses consolidated financial information to evaluate our performance, which is the same basis on which he communicates our results and performance to our board of directors. It is upon this consolidated basis from which he bases all significant decisions regarding the allocation of our resources on a consolidated level. Based on the information described above and in accordance with the applicable literature, management has concluded that we are currently organized and operated as one operating and reportable segment.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenues - The following table summarizes our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Total revenues increased $3.3 million, or 8.5%, to $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by increased rates and organic growth in connection. Also, the increase was attributable to the recognition of $0.7 million of ICFA revenue related to funds received during 2021 for an area where the Company had completed all obligations under the ICFA related agreement, including water and wastewater services. Refer to Note 2 - "Regulatory Decision and Related Accounting and Policy Changes" for additional information about our ICFAs.
Water Services - Water services revenue increased $0.9 million, or 4.8%, to $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in water services revenue was primarily due to increased rates and organic growth.
Water services revenue based on consumption decreased $0.2 million, or 1.9%, to $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the decrease in consumption resulting from higher precipitation for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in residential, construction and commercial consumption due to new connections added during the year.
Active water connections increased 12.4% to 28,594 as of December 31, 2021 from 25,449 as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to growth in new connections.
Water consumption decreased 2.3% to 3.2 billion gallons for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 3.3 billion gallons for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in consumption was primarily related to a decrease in consumption resulting from higher precipitation, partially offset by an increase in residential, construction and commercial consumption due to new connections added during the year.
Water services revenue associated with the basic service charge, excluding miscellaneous charges, increased $0.8 million, or 8.8%, to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in active water connections, combined with an increase in rates related to Rate Decision No. 74364.
Wastewater and Recycled Water Services - Wastewater and recycled water services revenue increased $1.8 million, or 9.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in wastewater and recycled water services revenue was primarily driven by a $1.9 million increase in wastewater services revenue. The increase in wastewater services revenue was attributable to the increase in rates related to Rate Decision No. 74364, as well as the increase in active wastewater connections, which increased 7.8% to 25,288 as of December 31, 2021 from 23,450 as of December 31, 2020.
Recycled water services revenue, which is based on the number of gallons delivered, decreased by less than $0.1 million or 3.8%, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in recycled water services revenue was primarily driven higher precipitation partly offset by an increase in rates. The volume of recycled water delivered decreased 85 million gallons, or 11.1%, to 683 million gallons for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 768 million gallons for the year ended December 31, 2020. Recycled water rates increased 7.9% per Rate Decision No. 74364 compared to 2020.
Operating Expenses - The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operations and Maintenance - Operations and maintenance costs, consisting of personnel costs, production costs (primarily chemicals and purchased electrical power), maintenance costs, and property tax, increased $0.8 million, or 8.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total personnel expenses increased $0.5 million, or 16.2%, to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in personnel expenses was primarily related to an increase in medical expenses, employee hiring costs and salary and wage increases.
Repairs and maintenance expense increased $0.1 million, or 37.3%, to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased plant equipment maintenance costs.
Property tax expense increased $0.1 million, or 4.3%, to $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Property taxes are calculated using a centrally valued property calculation, which derives property values based upon three-year historical average revenues, which have been increasing.
General and Administrative - General and administrative costs include the day-to-day expenses of office operations, personnel costs, legal and other professional fees, insurance, rent, and regulatory fees. These costs increased $2.4 million, or 19.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Personnel related costs increased $0.7 million, or 13.3%, to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to an increase in medical expenses, employee hiring costs and salary and wage increases for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Deferred compensation expense increased $0.5 million, or 26.9%, to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the year over year change in our stock price, which increased $2.69 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an increase of $1.26 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 14 - “Deferred Compensation Awards” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Depreciation and amortization - Depreciation and amortization expense increased $0.5 million, or 5.1%, to $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased depreciation due to the increase in fixed assets, offset by a reduction in amortization of intangible assets.
Other Expense - Other expense totaled $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement of $3.2 million in other expense was primarily attributable to the $1.5 million gain from the sale of a wireless communication tower and related easement rights, $1.2 million increase in Buckeye growth premiums, and a lower loss in 2021 compared to 2020 of $0.5 million on disposal of assets.
Income Tax Expense - Income tax expense of $1.2 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in pre-tax net income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Income - Our net income totaled $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net income of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.5 million increase was primarily attributable to organic growth, the $1.5 million gain on the sale of a wireless communications tower and related easement rights, $1.2 million increase in growth premiums, offset by a $0.5 million loss on disposal of assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Outstanding Share Data
As of March 10, 2022, there were 22,649,242 shares of our common stock outstanding and stock based awards to acquire an additional 520,481 shares of our common stock outstanding.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our capital resources are provided by internally generated cash flows from operations as well as debt and equity financing. Additionally, our regulated utility subsidiaries receive advances and contributions from customers, home builders, and real estate developers to partially fund construction necessary to extend service to new areas. We use our capital resources to:
•fund operating costs;
•fund capital requirements, including construction expenditures;
•pay dividends;
•fund acquisitions;
•make debt and interest payments; and
•invest in new and existing ventures.
Our utility subsidiaries operate in rate-regulated environments in which the amount of new investment recovery may be limited. Such recovery will take place over an extended period of time because recovery through rate increases is subject to regulatory lag.
As of December 31, 2021, other than expenditures within the normal course of business, we have no notable near-term cash expenditures, other than the two principal payments for our Series B senior secured notes in the amount of $1.9 million due in each of June and December of 2022. While specific facts and circumstances could change, we believe that we have sufficient cash on hand, the ability to draw on our $10.0 million revolving credit line, and the ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet our operating cash flow requirements and capital expenditure plan as well as remain in compliance with our debt covenants for at least the next twelve months. However, our near term cash flow may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Refer to “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for additional risks we face due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In March 2014, we initiated a dividend program to declare and pay a monthly dividend. On November 30, 2021, we announced a monthly dividend increase from $0.02434 per share ($0.29208 per share annually) to $0.02458 per share ($0.29496 per share annually). Although we expect monthly dividends will be declared and paid for the foreseeable future, the declaration of any dividends is at the discretion of our board of directors and is subject to legal requirements and debt service ratio covenant requirements (refer to “-Senior Secured Notes" and "-Revolving Credit Line").
Cash from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities are used for operating needs and to meet capital expenditure requirements. Our future cash flows from operating activities will be affected by economic utility regulation, infrastructure investment, growth in service connections, customer usage of water, compliance with environmental health and safety standards, production costs, weather, and seasonality.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash provided by operating activities totaled $20.4 million compared to $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $5.8 million increase in cash from operating activities was primarily driven by the increase in net income of $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 over the year ended December 31, 2020 coupled with a $2.5 million increase in other non-current liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 over the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash from Investing Activities
Our net cash used in investing activities totaled $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $10.9 million change in cash used in investing activities was driven by the increases in capital expenditures of $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in capital expenditures is tied to our capital expenditure program which is causing us to spend more on capex compared to the prior year.
We continue to invest capital prudently in our existing, core service areas where we are able to deploy our Total Water Management model as this includes any required maintenance capital expenditures and the construction of new water and wastewater treatment and delivery facilities. Our projected capital expenditures and other investments are subject to periodic review and revision to reflect changes in economic conditions and other factors. In particular, we continue to monitor the rapidly evolving COVID-19 pandemic. We may reduce capital expenditures in the future, but will, in any event, continue to invest in maintenance related capital expenditures and perform those projects that are necessary to continue providing services.
Cash from Financing Activities
Our net cash used in financing activities totaled $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a $15.0 million change as compared to the $7.1 million in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily driven by the $11.5 million in net proceeds received from our public offering of stock in January 2020, coupled with an increase of $0.5 million in AIAC cash payments received from developers for their portion of the taxes due for conveyances (refer to "-Corporate Transactions-ACC Tax Docket" for more information) for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in financing activities was slightly higher due to an an increase in dividends paid of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Senior Secured Notes
On June 24, 2016, we issued two series of senior secured notes with a total principal balance of $115.0 million at a blended interest rate of 4.55%. Series A carries a principal balance of $28.8 million and bears an interest rate of 4.38% over a twelve-year term, with the principal payment due on June 15, 2028. Series B carries a principal balance of $86.3 million and bears an interest rate of 4.58% over a 20-year term. Series B is interest only for the first five years, with $1.9 million principal payments paid semiannually thereafter beginning December 2021. The proceeds of the senior secured notes were primarily used to refinance our long-term tax exempt bonds, pursuant to an early redemption option at 103%, plus accrued interest, as a result of the initial public offering of our common stock in May 2016.
The senior secured notes require the Company to maintain a debt service coverage ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated debt service of at least 1.10 to 1.00. Consolidated debt service is calculated as interest expense, principal payments, and dividend or stock repurchases. The senior secured notes also contain a provision limiting the payment of dividends if the Company falls below a debt service ratio of 1.25. However, for the quarter ended June 30, 2021 through the quarter ending March 31, 2024, the ratio drops to 1.20. The debt service ratio increases to 1.25 for any fiscal quarter during the period from and after June 30, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with its financial debt covenants.
Debt issuance costs as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $0.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively.
Revolving Credit Line
On April 30, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with The Northern Trust Company, an Illinois banking corporation (the “Northern Trust Loan Agreement”), for a two-year revolving line of credit up to $10.0 million with a maturity date of April 30, 2022. This credit facility, which may be used to refinance existing indebtedness, to acquire assets to use in and/or expand the Company’s business, and for general corporate purposes, bears an interest rate equal to LIBOR plus 2.00% and has no unused line fee. This credit facility replaced the previous revolving line of credit with MidFirst Bank, which was terminated in April 2020. On April 30, 2021, the Northern Trust Loan Agreement was amended to, among other things, extend the maturity date from April 30, 2022 to April 30, 2024.
Similar to the senior secured notes, the Northern Trust Loan Agreement requires the Company to maintain a debt service coverage ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated debt service of at least 1.10 to 1.00. The Northern Trust Loan Agreement also contains a provision limiting the payment of dividends if the Company falls below a debt service ratio of 1.25. However, for the quarter ending June 30, 2021 through the quarter ending March 31, 2024, the ratio drops to 1.20. Additionally, the Northern Trust Loan Agreement contains certain restrictive covenants that limit, among other things, the Company’s ability to: create liens and other encumbrances; incur additional indebtedness; merge, liquidate or consolidate with another entity; dispose of or transfer assets; make distributions or other restricted payments (including dividends); engage in certain affiliate transactions; and change the nature of the business. The foregoing covenants were subject to various qualifications and limitations as set forth in the Northern Trust Loan Agreement. Pursuant to the Northern Trust Loan Agreement, the revolving credit facility is subject to certain customary events of default after which the revolving credit facility could be declared due and payable if not cured within the grace period or, in certain circumstances, could be declared due and payable immediately. Refer to Note 11 - "Debt" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with its financial debt covenants.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under this credit line with The Northern Trust Company. The company incurred $95,000 and $73,000 in debt issuance costs relating to the Northern Trust Loan Agreement as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Contractual Obligations
In the course of normal business activities, the Company enters into a variety of contractual obligations and commitments. Some result in direct obligations on the Company's balance sheet while others are commitments, some firm and some based on uncertainties and undetermined execution times.
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Interest on the long-term debt is based on the fixed rates of the Company’s senior secured notes.
(2) In addition to these obligations, the Company pays annual refunds on AIAC over a specific period of time based on operating revenues generated from developer-installed infrastructure. The refund amounts are considered an investment in infrastructure and eligible for inclusion in future rate base. These refund amounts are not included in the above table because the refund amounts and timing are dependent upon several variables, including new customer connections, customer consumption levels, and future rate increases, which cannot be accurately estimated. Portions of these refund amounts are payable annually over the next two decades, and amounts not paid by the contract expiration dates become nonrefundable and are transferred to CIAC.
Insurance Coverage
We carry various property, casualty, and financial insurance policies with limits, deductibles, and exclusions consistent with industry standards. However, insurance coverage may not be adequate or available to cover unanticipated losses or claims. We are self-insured to the extent that losses are within the policy deductible or exceed the amount of insurance maintained. Such losses could have a material adverse effect on our short-term and long-term financial condition and the results of operations and cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments, and Estimates
The application of critical accounting policies is particularly important to our financial condition and results of operations and provides a framework for management to make significant estimates, assumptions, and other judgments. Additionally, our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow are impacted by the methods, assumptions, and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. Although our management believes that these estimates, assumptions, and other judgments are appropriate, they relate to matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Accordingly, changes in the estimates, assumptions, and other judgments applied to these accounting policies could have a significant impact on our financial condition and results of operations as reflected in our financial statements.
Accounting for Rate Regulation
Because the Company’s subsidiaries are regulated businesses, the Company is subject to the authoritative guidance for accounting for the effects of certain types of regulation. Application of this guidance requires accounting for certain transactions in accordance with regulations adopted by the ACC. Utility companies defer costs and credits on the balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabilities when it is probable that those costs and credits will be recognized in the ratemaking process in a period different from the period in which they would have been reflected in income by an unregulated company. These deferred regulatory assets and liabilities are then reflected in the income statement in the period in which the same amounts are reflected in the rates charged for service.
When our regulated subsidiaries file rate cases, their capital assets, operating costs and other matters are subject to review, and disallowances may occur, and the Company may be required to write-off related regulatory assets that are not specifically recoverable and determine if other assets might be impaired. See Note 2 to our Financial Statements for more information regarding our rate proceedings. Management continually evaluates the anticipated recovery, settlement or refund of regulatory assets, liabilities, and revenues subject to refund and provides for allowances and/or reserves that it believes to be necessary. In the event that management’s assessment as to the probability of the inclusion in the ratemaking process is incorrect, the associated regulatory asset or liability will be adjusted to reflect the change in assessment or the impact of regulatory approval of rates.
Income Taxes
Estimation of income taxes includes an evaluation of the recoverability of deferred tax assets based on an assessment of the Company’s ability to utilize the underlying future tax deductions against future taxable income before they expire. The Company’s assessment is based upon existing tax laws and estimates of future taxable income. If the assessment of the Company’s ability to utilize the underlying future tax deductions changes, the Company would be required to recognize fewer of the tax deductions as assets, which would increase the income tax expense in the period in which the determination is made. Additionally, an evaluation of the recoverability of deferred tax gains is based on an assessment of the Company's ability to fully utilize the deferred tax gain before it expires. The Company's assessment is based upon the ability to acquire qualifying properties. If the assessment of the Company's ability to fully utilize the deferred tax gain changes, the Company would be required to recognize income tax expense in the period in which the deferred tax gain expires.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recently issued and recently issued but not yet adopted accounting pronouncements is included footnote 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.