Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 24, 2020 for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses in connection with our search for targets for our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $10,096,611, which consists of a gain on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $12,076,667, a gain on the change in fair value of over-allotment option of $138,932, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $16,667, offset by operational costs of $1,391,322 and warrant transaction costs of $744,333.
For the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,450, which consists of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 22, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,666,667 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Company’s sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,500,000. We incurred transaction costs of $17,025,820, consisting of $6,000,000 of underwriting fees, $10,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $525,820 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,272,765. Net income of $10,096,611 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $12,076,667, the change in fair value of over-allotment option $138,932, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $16,667, and warrant transaction costs of $744,333. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $118,557 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $540. Net loss of $1,450 was affected by the changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $910 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $300,016,667 (including $16,667 of interest income) consisting of a money market fund invested in U.S. Treasury Bills. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $725,875. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through March 22, 2023, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern one year from the date that these financial statements are issued.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a total of $20,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on March 17, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination or our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $10,500,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We have entered into an advisory agreement with BTIG, LLC (“BTIG”), pursuant to which we will pay BTIG a total of $2,000,000 for advisory services relating to our search for and consummation of an initial business combination. Such payment shall be paid immediately upon the consummation by the Company of an initial business combination. If an initial business combination is not consummated, BTIG will not be entitled to the fee.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the private placement warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach. The fair value of the public warrants was estimated using the close price of the public warrants at December 31, 2021.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) initial public offering and (ii) the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,666,667 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.