Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see “Risks Associated with Forward-Looking Statements in this Form 10-K” for a discussion of some of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
Hallmark is an insurance holding company which, through its subsidiaries, engages in the sale of property/casualty insurance products to businesses and individuals. Our business involves marketing, distributing, underwriting and servicing our insurance products, as well as providing other insurance related services. We pursue our business activities primarily through subsidiaries whose operations are organized into business units and are supported by our insurance carrier subsidiaries.
Our insurance activities are organized by business units into the following reportable segments:
● Specialty Commercial Segment. Our Specialty Commercial Segment includes our Commercial Auto business unit which offers primary and excess commercial vehicle insurance products and services; our E&S Casualty business unit which offers primary and excess liability, excess public entity liability and E&S package and garage liability insurance products and services; our E&S Property business unit which offers primary and excess commercial property insurance for both catastrophe and non-catastrophe exposures; our Professional Liability business unit which offers healthcare and financial lines professional liability insurance products and services primarily for businesses, medical professionals, medical facilities and senior care facilities; and our Aerospace & Programs business unit which offers general aviation and satellite launch property/casualty insurance products and services, as well as certain specialty programs. Effective January 1, 2021, our Professional Liability business unit discontinued the program to offer medical professional liability to senior care facilities. During 2020, our Aerospace & Programs business unit discontinued the programs to offer satellite launch insurance products.
● Standard Commercial Segment. Our Standard Commercial Segment includes the package and monoline property/casualty and occupational accident insurance products and services handled by our Commercial Accounts business unit and the runoff of workers compensation insurance products handled by our former Workers Compensation operating unit. Effective June 1, 2016, we ceased marketing new or renewal occupational accident policies. Effective July 1, 2015, the former Workers Compensation operating unit ceased retaining any risk on new or renewal policies.
● Personal Segment. Our Personal Segment includes the non-standard personal automobile and renters insurance products and services handled by our Specialty Personal Lines business unit.
The retained premium produced by these reportable segments is supported by our American Hallmark Insurance Company of Texas, Hallmark Specialty Insurance Company, Hallmark Insurance Company, Hallmark National Insurance Company and Texas Builders Insurance Company insurance subsidiaries. In addition, control and management of Hallmark County Mutual is maintained through our wholly owned subsidiary, CYR Insurance Management Company (“CYR”). CYR has as its primary asset a management agreement with HCM which provides for CYR to have management and control of HCM. HCM is used to front certain lines of business in our Specialty Commercial and Personal Segments in Texas. HCM does not retain any business.
AHIC, HIC, HSIC and HNIC have entered into a pooling arrangement pursuant to which AHIC retains 32% of the net premiums written by any of them, HIC retains 32% of the net premiums written by any of them, HSIC retains 26% of the net premiums written by any of them and HNIC retains 10% of the net premiums written by any of them. Neither HCM nor TBIC is a party to the intercompany pooling arrangement.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments
Certain significant accounting policies requiring our estimates and judgments are discussed below. Such estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, changes in laws and regulations, observation of industry trends and information received from third parties. While the estimates and judgments associated with the application of these accounting policies may be affected by different assumptions or conditions, we believe the estimates and judgments associated with the reported consolidated financial statement amounts are appropriate in the circumstances. For additional discussion of our accounting policies, see Note 1 to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Reserves for unpaid losses and LAE. Reserves for unpaid losses and LAE are established for claims that have already been incurred by the policyholder but which we have not yet paid. Unpaid losses and LAE represent the estimated ultimate net cost of all reported and unreported losses incurred through each balance sheet date. The reserves for unpaid losses and LAE are estimated using individual case-basis valuations and statistical analyses. These reserves are revised periodically and are subject to the effects of trends in loss severity and frequency. (See “Item 1. Business - Analysis of Losses and LAE” and Note 6 to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this report.)
Although considerable variability is inherent in such estimates, we believe that our reserves for unpaid losses and LAE are adequate. Due to the inherent uncertainty in estimating unpaid losses and LAE, the actual ultimate amounts may differ from the recorded amounts. A small percentage change could result in a material effect on reported earnings. For example, a 1% change in December 31, 2021 reserves for unpaid losses and LAE would have produced a $8.2 million change to pretax earnings. The estimates are reviewed as part of a regular, ongoing process, and adjusted as experience develops or new information becomes known. Such adjustments are included in current operations.
Our actuaries estimate claim liabilities by considering a variety of reserving methods, each of which reflects a level of uncertainty. The estimated range derived from the various methods is used to assess the reasonableness of management’s estimates. There is no exclusive method for determining this range, and judgment enters into the process. The primary actuarial technique utilized is a loss development analysis in which ultimate losses are projected based upon historical development patterns. The primary assumption underlying this loss development analysis is that the historical development patterns will be a reasonable predictor of the future development of losses for accident years which are less mature. An alternate actuarial technique, known as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, combines an analysis of loss development patterns with an initial estimate of expected losses or loss ratios. This approach is most useful for recent accident years. In addition to assuming the stability of loss development patterns, this technique is heavily dependent on the accuracy of the initial estimate of expected losses or loss ratios. Consequently, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is primarily used to confirm the results derived from the loss development analysis.
The range of unpaid losses and LAE estimated by our actuary as of December 31, 2021 was $747.3 million to $956.3 million. Our best estimate of unpaid losses and LAE as of December 31, 2021 is $816.7 million. Our carried reserve for unpaid losses and LAE as of December 31, 2021 is comprised of $442.3 million in case reserves and $374.4 million in incurred but not reported reserves. In setting this estimate of unpaid losses and LAE, we have assumed, among other things, that current trends in loss frequency and severity will continue and that the actuarial analysis was empirically valid. We have established a best estimate of unpaid losses and LAE which is $35.1 million below the midpoint, or 85.4% of the high end, of the actuarial range at December 31, 2021 as compared to $29.2 million below the midpoint, or 86.0% of the high end, of the actuarial range at December 31, 2020. We expect our best estimate to move within the actuarial range from year to year due to changes in our operations and changes within the marketplace. Due to the inherent uncertainty in reserve estimates, there can be no assurance that the actual losses ultimately experienced will fall within the actuarial range. However, because of the breadth of the actuarial range, we believe that it is reasonably likely that actual losses will fall within such range.
Our reserve requirements are also interrelated with product pricing and profitability. We must price our products at a level sufficient to fund our policyholder benefits and still remain profitable. Because claim expenses represent the single largest category of our expenses, inaccuracies in the assumptions used to estimate the amount of such benefits can result in our failing to price our products appropriately and to generate sufficient premiums to fund our operations.
Our recorded reserves represent management’s best estimate of the provision for unpaid losses and LAE as of the balance sheet date, and establishing them involves a process that includes collaboration with various relevant parties in the Company. While we believe that our reserves for unpaid losses and LAE at December 31, 2021 are adequate, new information or emerging trends that differ from our assumptions may lead to future development of losses and loss expenses that is significantly greater or less than the recorded reserve, which could have a material effect on future operating results. Our best estimate of required loss reserves for most of our lines of business is selected for each accident year using management’s judgment, after considering the results from a number of reserving methods and is not a purely mechanical process. Therefore, it is difficult to convey, in a simple and quantitative manner, the impact that a change to a single assumption will have on our best estimate.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities. We file a consolidated federal income tax return. Deferred federal income taxes reflect the future tax consequences of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each year end. Deferred taxes are recognized using the liability method, whereby tax rates are applied to cumulative temporary differences based on when and how they are expected to affect the tax return. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for tax rate changes. The realization of deferred tax assets depends upon the existence of sufficient taxable income within the carryback or carryforward periods under the tax law in the applicable tax jurisdiction. At each balance sheet date, management assesses the need to establish a valuation allowance that reduces deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that all, or some portion, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the need for a valuation allowance is based on all available information including projections of future taxable income, principally derived from business plans and where appropriate available tax planning strategies. Projections of future taxable income incorporate assumptions of future business and operations that are apt to differ from actual experience. If our assumptions and estimates that resulted in our forecast of future taxable income prove to be incorrect, an additional valuation allowance could become necessary, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity.
Impairment of investments. We complete a detailed analysis each quarter to assess whether any decline in the fair value of any debt investment below cost is deemed other-than-temporary. All debt securities with an unrealized loss are reviewed. We recognize an impairment loss when a debt investment’s value declines below cost, adjusted for accretion, amortization and previous other-than-temporary impairments, and it is determined that the decline is other-than-temporary.
Debt Investments: We assess whether we intend to sell, or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell, a fixed maturity investment before recovery of its amortized cost basis less any current period credit losses. For fixed maturity investments that are considered other-than-temporarily impaired and that we do not intend to sell and will not be required to sell, we separate the amount of the impairment into the amount that is credit related (credit loss component) and the amount due to all other factors. The credit loss component is recognized in earnings and is the difference between the investment’s amortized cost basis and the present value of its expected future cash flows. The remaining difference between the investment’s fair value and the present value of future expected cash flows is recognized in other comprehensive income. The fair value at the time of impairment is the new cost basis for the impaired security.
The fair value of our fixed income securities as of December 31, 2021 was $290.1 million. If market interest rates were to increase 1%, the fair value of our fixed-income securities would decrease by approximately $1.7 million as of December 31, 2021. The calculated change in fair value was determined using the duration modeling assuming no prepayments.
Equity Investments: ASU 2016-01, “Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities” requires equity investments that are not consolidated or accounted for under the equity method of accounting to be measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net income each reporting period. As a result of this standard, equity securities with readily determinable fair values are not required to be evaluated for other-than-temporary-impairment.
Fair values of financial instruments. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 defines fair value, establishes a consistent framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure requirements about fair value measurements. ASC 820, among other things, requires us to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. In addition, ASC 820 precludes the use of block discounts when measuring the fair value of instruments traded in an active market, which were previously applied to large holdings of publicly traded equity securities.
We determine the fair value of our financial instruments based on the fair value hierarchy established in ASC 820. In accordance with ASC 820, we utilize the following fair value hierarchy:
● Level 1: quoted prices in active markets for identical assets;
● Level 2: inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, inputs of identical assets for less active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the instrument; and
● Level 3: inputs to the valuation methodology that are unobservable for the asset or liability.
This hierarchy requires the use of observable market data when available.
Under ASC 820, we determine fair value based on the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. It is our policy to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when developing fair value measurements, in accordance with the fair value hierarchy described above. Fair value measurements for assets and liabilities where there exists limited or no observable market data are calculated based upon our pricing policy, the economic and competitive environment, the characteristics of the asset or liability and other factors as appropriate. These estimated fair values may not be realized upon actual sale or immediate settlement of the asset or liability.
Where quoted prices are available on active exchanges for identical instruments, investment securities are classified within Level 1 of the valuation hierarchy. Level 1 investment securities include common stock, preferred stock and the equity warrant classified as Other Investments.
Level 2 investment securities include corporate bonds, corporate bank loans, municipal bonds, U.S. Treasury securities, other obligations of the U.S. Government and mortgage-backed securities for which quoted prices are not available on active exchanges for identical instruments. We use a third party pricing service to determine fair values for each Level 2 investment security in all asset classes. Since quoted prices in active markets for identical assets are not available, these prices are determined using observable market information such as quotes from less active markets and/or quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics, among other things. We have reviewed the processes used by the pricing service and have determined that they result in fair values consistent with the requirements of ASC 820 for Level 2 investment securities. We have not adjusted any prices received from third-party pricing sources.
In cases where there is limited activity or less transparency around inputs to the valuation, investment securities are classified within Level 3 of the valuation hierarchy. Level 3 investments are valued based on the best available data in order to approximate fair value. This data may be internally developed and consider risk premiums that a market participant would require. Investment securities classified within Level 3 include other less liquid investment securities.
Deferred policy acquisition costs. Policy acquisition costs (mainly commission, premium taxes, underwriting and marketing expenses and ceding commissions) that vary with and are primarily related to the successful acquisition of new and renewal insurance contracts are deferred and charged to operations over periods in which the related premiums are earned. Ceding commissions from reinsurers, which include expense allowances, are deferred and recognized over the period premiums are earned for the underlying policies reinsured.
The method followed in computing deferred policy acquisition costs limits the amount of such deferred costs to their estimated realizable value. A premium deficiency exists if the sum of expected claim costs and claim adjustment expenses, unamortized acquisition costs, and maintenance costs exceeds related unearned premiums and expected investment income on those unearned premiums, as computed on a product line basis. We routinely evaluate the realizability of deferred policy acquisition costs. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 there was no premium deficiency related to deferred policy acquisition costs.
Goodwill. Under ASC 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other,” goodwill is tested for impairment annually at the reporting unit level (business unit or one level below a business unit) on an annual basis (October 1) and between annual tests if an
event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. For purposes of evaluating goodwill for impairment, we have determined that our reporting units are the same as our business units except for the E&S Casualty and Aerospace & Programs business units for which reporting units are at the component level (“one level below”). Our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019 included goodwill of acquired businesses of $44.7 million that was assigned to our business units as follows: Commercial Accounts business unit - $2.1 million; Commercial Auto business units - $21.3 million; E&S Casualty business unit - $6.3 million (comprised of $2.6 million for the primary/excess liability and public entity component and $3.7 million for the E&S package component); Aerospace & Programs business unit- $9.7 million (comprised entirely of the general aviation component); and Specialty Personal Lines business unit - $5.3 million. This amount had been recorded as a result of prior business acquisitions accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. In connection with our normal process for evaluating impairment triggering events, during the first quarter of 2020 we determined that a significant decline in our market capitalization below our stockholders’ equity indicated the impairment of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets included in our balance sheet. As a result, we took a $44.7 million charge to goodwill and a $1.3 million charge to indefinite-lived intangible assets during the first quarter of 2020. Consequently, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no goodwill or indefinite-lived assets reported on our consolidated balance sheet.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Management overview. During fiscal 2021, our total revenues were $404.7 million, which was $64.1 million less than the $468.8 million in total revenues for fiscal 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported net income before tax of $11.5 million as compared to a net loss before tax of $115.8 million during the same period of 2020.
The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in net premiums earned of $92.6 million and a decrease in finance charges of $1.4 million partially offset by net investment gains of $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to investment losses of $22.9 million for the prior year.
Contributing to the improvement in the pre-tax results for the year ended December 31, 2021 were a decrease in losses and LAE of $131.7 million, due primarily to a $21.7 million charge for a loss portfolio transfer reinsurance contract during 2020, decreased net catastrophe losses of $4.7 million and lower unfavorable prior year loss reserve development. We reported $6.0 million of unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $58.3 million of unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development during the same period of 2020.
The improved pre-tax results during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was also impacted by a $44.7 million impairment charge to goodwill and a $1.3 million charge to indefinite-lived intangible assets during fiscal 2020. In connection with its normal process for evaluating impairment triggering events, the Company determined that a significant decline in its market capitalization below its stockholders’ equity during the first quarter of 2020 indicated the impairment of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets included in our balance sheet.
We reported net income of $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a net loss of $94.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. On a diluted per share basis, net income was $0.50 per share for fiscal 2021 as compared to net loss of $5.20 per share for fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate was 21.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 18.5% for the same period in 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due in large part to the non-deductible impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets incurred during fiscal 2020.
Segment information
The following is additional business segment information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1) The net loss ratio is calculated as incurred losses and LAE divided by net premiums earned, each determined in accordance with GAAP. The net expense ratio is calculated as total underwriting expenses offset by agency fee income divided by net premiums earned, each determined in accordance with GAAP. Net combined ratio is calculated as the sum of the net loss ratio and the net expense ratio.
Specialty Commercial Segment.
Gross premiums written for the Specialty Commercial Segment were $481.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was $79.3 million, or 14%, less than the $560.3 million reported for the same period of 2020. Net premiums written were $205.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $284.5 million for the same period of 2020. The decrease in gross premiums written was primarily the result of lower premium production in our Commercial Auto and Professional Liability business units, partially offset by increased premium production in our E&S Casualty and E&S Property and Aerospace & Programs business units. The decrease in net premiums written was primarily the result of lower net premiums written in our Commercial Auto, Professional Liability and E&S Property business units, partially offset by increased net premiums written in our E&S Casualty and Aerospace & Programs business units. In February 2020, we made the strategic decision to exit the contract binding line of the primary automobile business marketed by our Commercial Auto business unit as a result of increasing claim severity and limited opportunity for meaningful rate increases. At that time, we began the process of non-renewing policies and placing in-force policies in runoff in accordance with state regulatory guidelines. The exit of the contract binding line of the primary commercial automobile business contributed $25.2 million and $22.7 million to the decline in gross premiums written and net premiums written, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period the prior year.
The $252.4 million of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $88.1 million less than the $340.5 million reported by the Specialty Commercial Segment for the same period in 2020. This decrease in revenue was primarily due to a decrease in net premiums earned of $84.9 million attributable to a decrease in net premiums earned of $90.9 million from the Commercial Auto business unit and $2.6 million from the E&S Casualty business unit, partially offset by an increase in net premiums earned of $7.8 million from the E&S Casualty business unit, $0.7 million from the Aerospace & Programs business unit and $0.1 million from the Professional Liability business unit. A decrease in net investment income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 also contributed to the decrease in revenue.
The Specialty Commercial Segment reported pre-tax income of $32.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a pre-tax loss of $7.8 million reported for the same period in 2020. The improvement in the pre-tax result was primarily the result of a decrease in losses and LAE of $121.3 million and lower operating expenses of $5.9 million and lower amortization of intangible assets of $1.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020, partially offset by lower revenue as discussed above. The exit of the contract binding line of the primary commercial automobile business contributed $37 thousand to the pre-tax income for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a pre-tax loss of $56.6 million during the prior year. The $56.6 million pre-tax loss from the exited contract binding line of the primary commercial automobile business includes the $21.7 million charge for the loss portfolio transfer reinsurance contract that closed during the third quarter of 2020.
Our Specialty Commercial Segment reported lower losses and LAE as the combined result of (a) a $125.0 million decrease in losses and LAE in our Commercial Auto business unit due largely to a $21.7 million charge for the loss portfolio transfer reinsurance contract that closed during the third quarter 2020 and lower current accident year net loss trends as well as $2.1 million of favorable prior year net loss reserve development recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $41.8 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development during the same period of 2020, (b) a $17.4 million increase in losses and LAE in our E&S Casualty business unit due primarily to increased net premiums earned as well as $12.2 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $6.2 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development during the same period of 2020, partially offset by lower current accident year net loss trends, (c) a $8.6 million decrease in losses and LAE in our E&S Property business unit due primarily to lower net catastrophe losses of $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net catastrophe losses of $13.1 million during the same period of 2020 and lower net premiums earned, partially offset by unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $1.9 million during the same period of 2020, (d) a $5.8 million decrease in losses and LAE attributable to our Professional Liability business unit due primarily to favorable net prior year loss reserve development of $9.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to unfavorable net prior year loss reserve development of $0.1 million during the same period the prior year, partially offset by lower current accident year loss trends and (e) a $0.8 million increase in losses and LAE in our Aerospace & Programs business unit due primarily to $0.6 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.4 million of favorable prior year net loss reserve development during the same period of 2020.
Operating expenses decreased $5.9 million primarily as the result of lower production related expenses of $3.5 million, lower professional services of $1.4 million, lower salary and related expenses of $1.7 million and decreased occupancy and related expenses of $0.8 million, partially offset by higher other operating expenses of $1.5 million.
The Specialty Commercial Segment reported a net loss ratio of 68.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 87.5% for the same period in 2020. The gross loss ratio before reinsurance was 87.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 81.6% for the same period in 2020. The decrease in the net loss ratio was due in large part to the $21.7 million charge for the loss portfolio transfer reinsurance contract that closed during the third quarter of 2020 that was reported as ceded incurred losses. The decrease in the gross and net loss ratios was also impacted by catastrophe losses of $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to catastrophe losses of $15.7 million during the same period of 2020 as well as lower unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development and lower current accident year loss trends for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. The Specialty Commercial Segment reported $2.1 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development of $45.8 million for the same period of 2020. The Specialty Commercial Segment reported a net expense ratio of 23.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 19.3% for the same period of 2020. The increase in the net expense ratio was due largely to the decrease in net premiums earned partially offset by the decrease in operating expenses.
Standard Commercial Segment.
Gross premiums written for the Standard Commercial Segment were $105.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was $7.6 million, or 8%, more than the $98.0 million reported for the same period in 2020. Net premiums written were $67.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $68.4 million for the same period in
2020. The increase in gross premiums written was due to higher premium production in our Commercial Accounts business unit. The decrease in net premiums written was due to higher ceded catastrophe premium as a result of reinstatement premiums in fiscal 2021.
Total revenue for the Standard Commercial Segment of $71.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1.5 million, or 2%, more than the $69.8 million reported for the same period in 2020. This increase in total revenue was due to an increase in net premiums earned of $2.0 million, due primarily to the timing of earning the net premiums written of prior periods as compared to the prior year, partially offset by lower net investment income of $0.4 million and lower finance charges of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020.
Our Standard Commercial Segment reported a pre-tax loss of $30 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a pre-tax loss of $3.0 million for the same period of 2020. The lower pre-tax loss was the result of a decrease in losses and LAE of $3.3 million and higher revenue discussed above, partially offset by higher operating expenses of $1.8 million. The higher operating expenses were largely the result of higher production related expenses of $1.6 million and higher salary and related expenses of $0.2 million.
The Standard Commercial Segment reported a net loss ratio of 71.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 78.9% for the same period of 2020. The gross loss ratio before reinsurance for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 65.3% as compared to the 70.3% reported for the same period of 2020. The decrease in the gross loss ratio was due primarily to improved gross prior year loss reserve development. The decrease in the net loss ratio was due to improved prior year reserve development and lower net catastrophe losses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Standard Commercial Segment reported favorable net loss reserve development of $1.5 million as compared to unfavorable net loss reserve development of $3.4 million during the same period of 2020. The Standard Commercial Segment reported $6.3 million of net catastrophe losses during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $6.9 million of net catastrophe losses during the same period of 2020. The Standard Commercial Segment reported a net expense ratio of 33.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 31.1% for the same period of 2020. The increase in the expense ratio was primarily due to the impact of the higher operating expenses discussed above.
Personal Segment.
Gross premiums written for the Personal Segment were $67.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $85.0 million for the same period in the prior year. Net premiums written for the Personal Segment were $66.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was a decrease of $8.5 million from the $75.4 million reported for the same period in 2020. The decrease in gross and net premiums written was primarily due to lower premium production in our current geographical footprint.
Total revenue for the Personal Segment was $74.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $84.7 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease in revenue was due to a decrease in net premiums earned of $9.8 million and lower finance charges of $1.2 million partially offset by higher net investment income of $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020.
Pre-tax loss for the Personal Segment was $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to pre-tax loss of $10.3 million for the same period of 2020. The decrease in pre-tax loss was primarily the result of the decreased revenue discussed above partially offset by decreased losses and LAE of $7.1 million, decreased operating expenses of $3.7 million and decreased amortization of intangible assets of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020.
The Personal Segment reported a net loss ratio of 89.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 87.4% for the same period of 2020. The gross loss ratio before reinsurance was 90.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 83.0% for the same period in 2020. The higher gross and net loss ratios were primarily the result of higher current accident year loss trends and higher net catastrophe losses of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $0.4 million for the prior year partially offset by unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development of $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $9.1 million of unfavorable prior year net loss reserve development in 2020. The Personal Segment reported a net expense ratio of 27.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021
as compared to 27.5% for the same period of 2020. The increase in the expense ratio was due primarily to lower net premiums earned.
Corporate.
Total revenue for Corporate increased by $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period the prior year. This increase in total revenue was due predominately to investment gains of $10.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to investment losses of $22.9 million reported for the same period of 2020 and higher net investment income of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020.
Corporate pre-tax loss was $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to pre-tax loss of $94.6 million for the same period of 2020. The lower pre-tax loss was primarily due to a $44.7 million impairment charge to goodwill and a $1.3 million charge to indefinite-lived intangible assets during fiscal 2020. In connection with its normal process for evaluating impairment triggering events, the Company determined that a significant decline in its market capitalization below its stockholders’ equity during the first quarter of 2020 indicated the impairment of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets included in our balance sheet. Further contributing to the lower pre-tax loss were lower operating expenses of $3.6 million, lower interest expense of $0.3 million, as well as the higher revenue discussed above. The lower operating expenses of $3.6 million were primarily a result of lower professional service expenses of $2.1 million, decreased salary and related expenses of $1.4 million, largely due to lower incentive compensation accruals and decreased travel and related expenses of $0.1 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
Our sources of funds are from insurance-related operations, financing activities and investing activities. Major sources of funds from operations include premiums collected (net of policy cancellations and premiums ceded), commissions and processing and service fees. As a holding company, Hallmark is dependent on dividend payments and management fees from its subsidiaries to meet operating expenses and debt obligations. As of December 31, 2021, Hallmark and its non-insurance company subsidiaries had $8.9 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. As of that date, our insurance subsidiaries held $344.0 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents as well as $290.1 million in debt securities with an average modified duration of 0.6 years. Accordingly, we do not anticipate selling long-term debt instruments to meet any short term or long term liquidity needs.
AHIC and TBIC, domiciled in Texas, are limited in the payment of dividends to their stockholders in any 12-month period, without the prior written consent of the Texas Department of Insurance, to the greater of statutory net income for the prior calendar year or 10% of statutory policyholders’ surplus as of the prior year end. HIC and HNIC, both domiciled in Arizona, are limited in the payment of dividends to the lesser of 10% of prior year policyholders’ surplus or prior year’s net income, without prior written approval from the Arizona Department of Insurance. HSIC, domiciled in Oklahoma, is limited in the payment of dividends to the greater of 10% of prior year policyholders’ surplus or prior year’s statutory net income, not including realized capital gains, without prior written approval from the Oklahoma Insurance Department. For all our insurance companies, dividends may only be paid from unassigned surplus funds. During 2021, the aggregate ordinary dividend capacity of these subsidiaries is $32.0 million, of which $22.7 million is available to Hallmark. As a county mutual, dividends from HCM are payable to policyholders. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 our insurance company subsidiaries paid $3.0 million and $12.0 million, respectively, in dividends to Hallmark.
The state insurance departments also regulate financial transactions between our insurance subsidiaries and their affiliated companies. Applicable regulations require approval of management fees, expense sharing contracts and similar transactions. During 2021 our insurance subsidiaries paid $15.5 million in management fees to Hallmark and our non-insurance company subsidiaries. During 2020 our insurance subsidiaries paid $4.2 million in management fees to Hallmark and our non-insurance company subsidiaries.
Statutory capital and surplus is calculated as statutory assets less statutory liabilities. The various state insurance departments that regulate our insurance company subsidiaries require us to maintain a minimum statutory capital and surplus. As of December 31, 2021, our insurance company subsidiaries reported statutory capital and surplus of $232.3 million, substantially greater than the minimum requirements for each state. Each of our insurance company subsidiaries is also required to satisfy certain risk-based capital requirements. (See, “Item 1. Business - Insurance Regulation - Risk-based Capital Requirements.”) As of December 31, 2021, the adjusted capital under the risk-based capital calculation of each of our insurance company subsidiaries substantially exceeded the minimum requirements. Our total statutory net premium-to-surplus percentage for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 139% and 207%, respectively.
Comparison of December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020
On a consolidated basis, our cash and investments, excluding restricted cash and investments, at December 31, 2021 were $691.6 million compared to $639.2 million at December 31, 2020. The primary reason for this increase in unrestricted cash and investments was cash provided by operations during 2021, as well as increases in market value of our investment securities during the year.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Net cash provided by our consolidated operating activities was $43.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used by operations of $69.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash flow provided by operations was driven by a decrease in net paid claims, decreased paid operating expenses, lower interest paid, partially offset by decreased collected net premiums, higher taxes paid and lower collected investment income during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period the prior year.
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $204.6 million as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $122.7 million for the prior year. The increase in cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily comprised of a decrease of $153.0 million in purchases of debt and equity securities, partially offset by a decrease of $70.9 million in maturities, sales and redemptions of investment securities, and a $0.2 million increase in purchases of fixed assets.
The Company did not report any net cash from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020.
Senior Unsecured Notes
On August 19, 2019, Hallmark issued $50.0 million of senior unsecured notes (“Notes”) due August 15, 2029. Interest on the Notes accrues at the rate of 6.25% per annum and is payable semi-annually in arrears commencing February 15, 2020. The Notes are not obligations of or guaranteed by any of Hallmark’s subsidiaries and are not subject to any sinking fund requirements. At Hallmark’s option, the Notes are redeemable, in whole or in part, prior to the stated maturity subject to certain provisions intended to make the holders of the Notes whole on scheduled interest and principal payments. The indenture governing the Notes contains certain covenants which, among other things, restrict Hallmark’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, make certain payments, create liens on the stock of certain subsidiaries, dispose of certain assets, or merge or consolidate with other entities. The terms of the indenture prohibit payments or other distributions on any security of the Company that ranks junior to the Notes when the Company’s debt to capital ratio (as defined in the indenture) is greater than 35%. The Company’s debt to capital ratio was 38% as of December 31, 2021.
Subordinated Debt Securities
On June 21, 2005, we formed Hallmark Statutory Trust I (“Trust I”), an unconsolidated trust subsidiary, for the sole purpose of issuing $30.0 million in trust preferred securities. Trust I used the proceeds from the sale of these securities and our initial capital contribution to purchase $30.9 million of junior subordinated debt securities from Hallmark. The debt securities are the sole assets of Trust I, and the payments under the debt securities are the sole revenues of Trust I. On August 23, 2007, we formed Hallmark Statutory Trust II (“Trust II”), an unconsolidated trust subsidiary, for the sole purpose of issuing $25.0 million in trust preferred securities. Trust II used the proceeds from the sale of these securities
and our initial capital contribution to purchase $25.8 million of subordinated debt securities from Hallmark. The debt securities are the sole assets of Trust II, and the payments under the junior debt securities are the sole revenues of Trust II.
Each trust pays dividends on its preferred securities at the same rate each quarter as interest is paid on the junior subordinated debt securities. Under the terms of the trust subordinated debt securities, we pay interest only each quarter and the principal of each note at maturity. We may elect to defer payments of interest on the trust subordinated debt securities by extending the interest payment period for up to 20 consecutive quarterly periods. During any such extension period, interest continues to accrue on the trust subordinated debt securities, as well as interest on such accrued interest. In order to maintain compliance with the terms of our senior unsecured Notes, we have elected to defer payment of interest on the trust subordinated securities until our debt to capital ratio (as defined in the indenture governing the Notes) is less than 35%. The subordinated debt securities of each trust are uncollateralized and do not require maintenance of minimum financial covenants.
The following table summarizes the nature and terms of the junior subordinated debt and trust preferred securities: