Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K. Refer to ‘Item 7 -- Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations’ on our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of our results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Overview
We invest in climate solutions developed or sponsored by leading companies in the energy efficiency, renewable energy and other sustainable infrastructure markets. We believe we are one of the first U.S. public companies solely dedicated to climate solutions. Our goal is to generate attractive returns from a diversified portfolio of project company investments with long-term, predictable cash flows from proven technologies that reduce carbon emissions or increase resilience to climate change.
We are internally managed, and our management team has extensive relevant industry knowledge and experience, dating back more than 30 years. We have long-standing relationships with the leading energy service companies (“ESCOs”), manufacturers, project developers, utilities, owners and operators which provide recurring, programmatic investment and fee-generating opportunities. Additionally, we have relationships with leading banks, investment banks, and institutional investors from which we are referred additional investment and fee generating opportunities.
We completed approximately $1.7 billion of transactions during 2021, compared to approximately $1.9 billion during 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $3.6 billion of transactions on our balance sheet, which we refer to as our “Portfolio.” For those transactions that we choose not to hold on our balance sheet, we transfer all or a portion of the economics of the transaction, typically using securitization trusts, to institutional investors in exchange for cash and/or residual interests in the assets and in some cases, ongoing fees. As of December 31, 2021, we managed approximately $5.2 billion in these trusts or vehicles that are not consolidated on our balance sheet. When we combine these assets with our Portfolio, as of December 31, 2021, we manage approximately $8.8 billion of assets, which we refer to as our “Managed Assets”.
Our investments have taken many forms, including equity, joint ventures, land ownership, lending, or other financing transactions. We also generate ongoing fees through off-balance sheet securitization transactions, advisory services, and asset management. We use borrowings as part of our strategy to increase potential returns to our stockholders and have available a broad range of financing sources including non-recourse or recourse debt, equity and off-balance sheet securitization structures.
See Item 1. Business for a further discussion of our business, investing strategy, and financing strategy.
Market Conditions
As a result of increasing global awareness of and aversion to climate change impacts, we believe the climate solutions markets in which we invest, and investment in climate solutions more broadly, will continue to grow as the impact of climate change increases. In January 2022, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”) reported that globally, 2021 was the fourth warmest year on record, with all six of the warmest years on record having occurred since 2012.
Further, communities across the globe are increasingly experiencing the destructive economic impacts of climate change, which are only expected to increase in frequency and severity. According to NOAA, there were 20 natural disaster events in the United States in 2021, with an estimated individual cost of greater than $1 billion and an aggregate cost of approximately $145 billion. NOAA reports, that the total cost of climate related disasters over the last five years exceeds $742 billion. In its Weather, Climate & Catastrophe Insight: 2021 Annual Report, Aon reports that there were 401 natural catastrophe events globally in 2021, resulting in economic losses of $343 billion, making it the third costliest year on record.
In its Energy Efficiency 2021 report, the International Energy Agency (“IEA”) estimates global spending on energy efficiency at almost $300 billion, and forecasts that overall investment in energy efficiency will need to triple by 2030 in order to achieve certain net-zero carbon by 2050 targets. Given that many projects are often self-financed (especially energy efficiency), we believe our total addressable market is likely a subset of these overall industry estimates. However, we believe these estimates are reliable indicators of market trends.
These positive industry trends coupled with the increasing environmental and economic imperative to reduce carbon emissions are expected to further broaden our investable universe. Investments in energy efficiency as a service allow organizations to avoid the upfront costs of efficiency investments by paying for efficiency-enabled cost savings as operating rather than capital expenses. In its Annual Energy Outlook 2021, the U.S. Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) estimates that decreasing energy intensity resulting from energy efficiency improvements will continue until at least 2050. In addition, Lazard’s 2021 Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis shows that renewables continue to be competitive with traditional generation sources on a new-built cost basis with certain renewable technologies achieving competitiveness with existing conventional generation technologies on a marginal basis, making renewables even more attractive investment targets. Further,
- 47 -
in its New Energy Outlook 2021, Bloomberg New Energy Finance (“BNEF”) states global annual investment in energy supply and infrastructure will need to double from around $1.7 trillion per year today to between $3.1 trillion and $5.8 trillion per year on average over the next thirty years.
We expect the federal government to take, and they have taken, certain actions which are supportive of the industry for climate solutions. In 2021, Congress passed the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act which provides funding opportunities for a variety of traditional infrastructure projects including approximately $65 billion for energy and electric grid development which is critical for further development of renewable energy projects. In December 2021, President Biden signed an executive order committing the U.S. federal government to achieve 100 percent carbon pollution-free electricity and to achieve a net-zero emissions building portfolio by 2045, including a 50 percent emissions reduction from buildings, campuses, and installations by 2032 from 2008 levels.
Corporates are also responding to climate change risks - in part through renewable energy sourcing commitments. BNEF states that in 2021, a record 31 gigawatts of clean energy were purchased through corporate PPAs, an increase of over 20% from the previous year, with two-thirds of this purchasing occurring in the United States. In its 2021 Annual Report, the RE 100, a global corporate leadership initiative bringing together influential businesses committed to 100% renewable electricity, reported that over 300 multinational companies have pledged to achieve 100% renewable energy with an average target date of 2030, with the average target year for North American companies being 2027.
Federal Energy Savings Performance Contracts (“ESPCs”) are an example of a public-private partnership that eliminate the need for a federal agency to find appropriated funds to replace, operate, and maintain energy-intensive equipment while also providing multiple ancillary benefits, including saving taxpayer dollars currently spent on energy consumption, improving conditions for federal workers and service men and women, and creating private sector jobs. Support for ESPCs remain bipartisan, and the presidential administration is expected to continue to support the program. Almost $3.4 billion in ESPC contracts have been awarded over the last five government fiscal years.
While we believe that the long-term growth prospects for our business remain positive, volatility in financial markets and higher inflation along with interest rate movements could impact the markets we serve. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors has indicated that it will begin to reduce its asset purchases and increase the rate at which banks lend to one another (known as the federal funds rate) while monitoring the economic outlook. We believe higher interest rates and inflation are likely to have a minimal impact on our existing portfolio, and that PPA prices for future deals are rising to compensate with regards to new investments. See “