Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please refer to page 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information.
Overview of Business
The Company is one of the world’s largest producers of high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloys in flat product form, such as sheet, coil and plate. The Company is focused on developing, manufacturing, marketing and distributing technologically advanced, high-performance alloys, which are used primarily in the aerospace, chemical processing and industrial gas turbine industries. The global specialty alloy market includes stainless steel, titanium alloys, general-purpose nickel alloys and high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloys. The Company competes primarily in the high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloy sector, which includes high-temperature resistant alloys, or HTA products, and corrosion-resistant alloys, or CRA products. The Company believes it is one of the principal producers of high-performance alloy flat products in sheet, coil and plate forms. The Company also produces its products as seamless and welded tubulars and in bar, billet and wire forms.
The Company has manufacturing facilities in Kokomo, Indiana; Arcadia, Louisiana; and Mountain Home, North Carolina. The Kokomo facility specializes in flat products, the Arcadia facility specializes in tubular products and the Mountain Home facility specializes in wire and small-diameter bar products. The Company distributes its products primarily through its direct sales organization, which includes 11 service and/or sales centers in the United States, Europe and Asia. All of these centers are Company-operated.
Financial Data Trends
The following table shows certain financial information of the Company for each year in the five-year period ending September 30, 2022. This information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Amounts below are in thousands, except backlog, which is in millions, share and per share information and average nickel price.
(1) Significant volatility in the pension and postretirement benefits liability has occurred due to many factors such as changes in the discount rate used to value the future liability, variation in the return on assets and trends of postretirement health care expenses incurred by the Company. These changes have been reflected in the Pension and Postretirement Benefits Liability and a corresponding change to the accumulated other comprehensive loss account. During fiscal 2021 as a part of a broader capital allocation strategy, the U.S. pension asset allocation was changed to 30% equity and 70% fixed income as a part of a customized liability driven investment (LDI) strategy designed to secure the improved funding percentage and reduce interest rate and equity risk. In addition, a lump sum funding of $15 million occurred in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2022, the pension asset allocation was further changed to 14% equity and 86% fixed income in accordance with the Company’s customized LDI strategy.
Overview of Markets
The following table includes a breakdown of net revenues, shipments and average selling prices to the markets served by the Company for the periods shown.
(1) Other revenue consists of toll conversion, royalty income, scrap sales and revenue recognized from the TIMET agreement (see Note 15 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Other revenue does not include associated shipment pounds.
(2) Total product price per pound excludes “Other Revenue”.
Aerospace demand was favorably impacted by the transition to new engine platforms that is driven by a desire for more fuel-efficiency and lower emissions. Fiscal 2018 aerospace volume hit record levels, and revenue in that market increased 17.9% in that year. Growth continued in fiscal 2019, with further traction of the new generation engine platforms in spite of the grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. One of the Company’s core focus initiatives was to be compensated for value provided, which contributed to the revenue increase. Fiscal 2019 sales into the aerospace market represented a new record year in both volume and revenue. Sales in the first half of fiscal 2020 were reduced with the continued grounding and subsequent production halt of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. Sales in the second half of fiscal 2020 were further severely impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic causing significant reductions in air travel, which impacted both new plane builds and aftermarket sales. Sales into the aerospace market were also negatively affected by high inventory levels of metal in the supply chain, which take time to work through the inventory and slows order volume to the Company. Volume shipped into the aerospace market declined 30.1% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year. Volumes continued to decline in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 as sales in fiscal year 2021 were 50% of the fiscal year 2019 levels, then began to increase by the end of fiscal 2021. Growth continued as the number of people flying and announced aircraft build rates have significantly increased. Single-aisle aircraft build rates announced in the industry show significant growth expectations in both 2022 and 2023 and double-aisle build rate increases are expected to follow one to two years later. Net sales to the aerospace industry increased over $100 million from fiscal year 2021 to 2022. The
Company expects volume levels in fiscal year 2023 to be back to 2019 levels with 2023 revenue exceeding 2019 due to price increases implemented.
Chemical processing revenue grew double digits from fiscal year 2018 to 2019. The main driver of demand in this market is capital spending in the chemical processing sector, driven by end-user demand for housing, automotive, energy and agricultural products. The chemical processing market is sensitive to oil prices, currency fluctuations and fiscal policies as well as world economic conditions and GDP growth. Additional drivers of demand in this market include the increase in North American production of natural gas liquids and the further downstream processing of chemicals that may utilize equipment that requires high-performance alloys. Increased sales to the chemical processing industry in fiscal 2018 and 2019 were related to improvement in global spending in the chemical processing sector combined with the Company’s focus initiatives aimed at improving volumes. Fiscal 2020 and 2021 volume and sales were significantly impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Volume shipped into the chemical processing industry market declined 34.9% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year and generally remained at that level across fiscal year 2021. Fiscal year 2022 volumes increased 23.0% combined with a higher value mix driving a 45.2% revenue increase. Higher oil prices are fueling additional capital expenditures in the chemical industry.
Industrial gas turbines are beneficial in electricity generating facilities due to low capital cost at installation, fewer emissions than traditional fossil fuel-fired facilities and relative favorable natural gas prices in the U.S. provided by availability of non-conventional (shale) gas supplies. Sales to the industrial gas turbine market declined in years leading up to fiscal 2018, and fiscal 2018 volumes represented less than half the volume of fiscal 2012 peak levels. Reported significant overcapacity in large-frame turbines primarily used for electrical power generation combined with growth in renewable energy facilities had taken a toll on demand for large-frame gas turbines. Sales and volume began to recover in fiscal 2019 and the first half of fiscal 2020. The recovery included a market share gain for the Company which began to gain traction in fiscal 2020. The global COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected this market, however sales declines were mitigated by the Company’s market share gains as well as restocking beginning to occur in the supply chain. Sales declined only 4.7% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year, then increased 18.0% in fiscal 2021 and 37.6% in fiscal 2022 as the market share gain showed its full impact. The Company’s strategy includes efforts to further increase market share going forward.
Other markets represent certain traditional businesses of oil and gas, flue-gas desulfurization, automotive and heat treating as well as new emerging technologies such as ultra-supercritical CO2, next-generation nuclear, fuel cells and other alternative energy applications. The industries in the other markets category focus on upgrading overall product quality, improving product performance through increased efficiency, prolonging product life and lowering long-term costs. Companies in these industries are looking to achieve these goals through the use of “advanced materials” which support the increased use of high-performance alloys in an expanding number of applications. Sales into the other markets category improved in both fiscal 2018 and 2019. Sales in fiscal 2020 were significantly impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Sales in fiscal year 2021 increased 28.8% as the Company strategically sought increased mill volumes especially in the flue-gas desulphurization (FGD) industry to help improve fixed costs absorption challenges in the overall low volume environment in early fiscal year 2021. In fiscal year 2022, as overall volumes improved, the Company reallocated capacity to higher value markets such as aerospace and de-emphasized certain low-value commodity grade alloys such as those going into the FGD industry. The Company continues to evaluate new opportunities and applications for its products, particularly in the areas of renewable clean energy sources and other developing technologies relating to environmental and climate change issues.
Other revenue consists primarily of toll conversion, but also includes royalty income, scrap sales and revenue recognized from the TIMET agreement. The demand for toll conversion includes TIMET conversion demand completed on the Company’s four-high Steckel hot rolling mill in Kokomo, Indiana, as well as conversion work completed through LaPorte Custom Metal Products. Other revenue demand levels vary year-to-year based upon demand drivers in the respective markets of the Company’s tolling customers. The global COVID-19 pandemic impacted tolling revenue, particularly revenue from those tolling customers that sell into the aerospace market. In fiscal 2022, other revenue represented 4.7% of net sales. Other revenue does not include associated shipment pounds because the metal is not owned by the Company.
Valuation of the Pension Plan and the Retiree Healthcare Plan
The actuarial valuation of the U.S. pension and retiree healthcare plans on September 30, 2022 included a favorable increase in the discount rates used to measure the plan liabilities along with continued favorable retiree health care spending. The U.S. defined benefit pension net liabilities decreased $5.5 million from $26.1 million at the beginning of the year to $20.7 million at September 30, 2022. The funding percentage of plan assets compared to benefit obligation was 90.8% as of September 30, 2022. This funding percentage has held relatively steady even through significant market turmoil as the Company had previously implemented a glide path which includes a customized liability driven investment strategy designed to secure this funding percentage. In addition, the post-retirement health care liability, which is unfunded, declined $19.0 million during fiscal 2022 from $83.0 million at September 30, 2021 to $64.0 million at September 30, 2022 driven by the higher discount rates. These amounts do not include the United Kingdom pension plan which is a $7.7 million net asset (shown in other assets on the consolidated balance sheet) or two small nonqualified pension plans with a liability of $0.5 million.
Volumes and Pricing
Prior to the pandemic, the Company shipped 20.0 million pounds in fiscal 2019. Subsequent to fiscal 2019, in the first half of fiscal 2020, volumes were negatively impacted by the grounding and subsequent production halt of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. The second half of fiscal 2020 was then significantly additionally impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which dramatically lowered volumes for fiscal 2020 to 14.6 million pounds and fiscal 2021 to 14.0 million pounds. During fiscal year 2022 volumes progressively improved for a total of 17.6 million pounds with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 at 4.9 million pounds, a run rate near the pre-pandemic levels.
Solid increases in volume and average selling price per pound were achieved in all three major markets in fiscal 2022. Fiscal 2022 aerospace volume increased 65.5% along with an 8.4% increase in aerospace average selling price resulting in a 79.6% or $101.9 million aerospace revenue increase compared to the prior year. This increase is primarily driven by the single-aisle aircraft recovery with the double-aisle aircraft recovery expected to be delayed over fiscal 2023 and 2024. Volumes in the chemical processing industry (CPI) increased 23.0% along with an 18.0% increase in the CPI average selling price resulting in a 45.2% or $28.5 million CPI revenue increase compared to the prior year. Industrial gas turbine (IGT) volumes were up 8.6% along with a 26.7% increase in the IGT average selling price resulting in a 37.6% or $25.1 million IGT revenue increase compared to the prior year.
The product average selling price per pound in fiscal 2022 was $26.49, which is a 17.4% increase over last fiscal year. This increase is driven by higher raw material costs as well as price increases, partially offset by a lower-value product mix.
Gross Profit Margin Trend Performance
The following tables show net revenue, gross profit margin and gross profit margin percentage for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022.
A significant strategic effort to improve gross margins has occurred over the past few years. This effort was beginning to gain traction with gross margins as a percent of revenue hitting approximately 18% in the months preceding the pandemic. The significant drop in volumes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic compressed margins significantly through fiscal 2021, especially in the first half of the fiscal year. These low volume levels created a significant fixed cost absorption headwind which required a direct charge to cost of goods sold for excess fixed overhead per pound incurred due to abnormally low production levels that could not be capitalized into inventory. In fiscal 2021, the direct charges each quarter were $5.9 million, $2.8 million, $2.0 million and $0.8 million, respectively. As volumes began the recovery, no direct charges were necessary in fiscal 2022 and margins strengthened across fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year.
As a result of this strategy, the Company reduced the volume breakeven point by over 25%. The Company previously struggled to be profitable at roughly 5.0 million pounds. Now, with the current product mix, the Company can generate profits at lower volumes as first demonstrated in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, producing a positive net income at only 3.7 million pounds shipped. As volume continued to rise during 2022, incremental profitability leverage helped improve gross margins significantly. Rising raw material costs, which resulted in increased revenue from certain customer contracts with raw material cost adjustments also contributed to the improving gross margin percentages, although excluding this estimated impact, gross margins remained above 21% in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2022.
The improving gross margin as a percentage of sales along with rising sales levels, provides a compounding effect on the gross margin dollars generated in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year with gross margin dollars increasing $66.6 million or an improvement of 167.6%.
Controllable Working Capital
Controllable working capital, which includes accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable and accrued expenses, was $378.3 million at September 30, 2022, an increase of $139.6 million or 58.5% from $238.7 million at September 30, 2021. The increase resulted primarily from inventory increasing by $109.1 million and accounts receivable increasing by $37.0 million during fiscal 2022, partially offset by accounts payable and accrued expenses increasing by $6.4 million during the same period. Approximately 60% of the increase in inventory was attributable to a higher cost of inventory, primarily due to higher commodity prices, with the remaining increase due to a higher quantity of inventory. The Company continued to build work-in-process inventory during fiscal 2022 in response to the rapidly growing backlog.
Dividends Declared
On November 17, 2022, the Company announced that the Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.22 per outstanding share of the Company’s common stock. The dividend is payable December 19, 2022 to stockholders of record at the close of business on December 5, 2022. The aggregate cash payout based on current shares outstanding will be approximately $2.7 million, or approximately $11.0 million on an annualized basis if current dividend levels are maintained.
Backlog
Set forth below is information relating to the Company’s backlog and the 30-day average nickel price per pound as reported by the London Metals Exchange.
(1)
The Company defines backlog to include firm commitments from customers for delivery of product at established prices. There are orders in the backlog at any given time which include prices that are subject to adjustment based on changes in raw material costs, which can vary but is roughly 50% of the orders. Historically, approximately 70% of the backlog orders have shipped within six months and approximately 90% have shipped within 12 months. The backlog figures do not typically reflect that portion of the business conducted at service and sales centers on a spot or “just-in-time” basis.
(2) Represents the average price for a cash buyer as reported by the London Metals Exchange for the 30 days ending on the last day of the period presented.
(1) Represents the average price for a cash buyer as reported by the London Metals Exchange for the 30 days ending on the last day of the period presented.
The backlog dollars increased during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 due to a 5.6% increase in backlog pounds combined with a 4.7% increase in backlog average selling price. The average selling price increase was due to a higher-value product mix.
The backlog increase from September 30, 2021 to September 30, 2022 was due to an 80.7% increase in backlog pounds combined with an 18.0% increase in backlog average selling price. The increase in backlog pounds was primarily driven by increases in demand across all markets, especially aerospace. The increase in average selling price was due to a higher-value product mix in the backlog, along with higher raw material prices and higher prices for value provided.
Revenues by geographic area
Net revenues in fiscal 2020, 2021 and 2022 were generated primarily by the Company’s U.S. operations. Sales to domestic customers comprised approximately 61%, 53% and 57% of the Company’s net revenues in fiscal 2020, 2021 and 2022, respectively. In addition, the majority of the Company’s operating costs are incurred in the U.S., as all of its manufacturing facilities are located in the U.S. It is expected that net revenues will continue to be highly dependent on the Company’s domestic sales and manufacturing facilities in the U.S.
The Company’s foreign and export sales were approximately $149.8 million, $158.6 million and $212.0 million for fiscal 2020, 2021 and 2022, respectively. Additional information concerning foreign operations and export sales is set forth in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Quarterly Market Information
Results of Operations
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2022 and 2021. For discussion related to 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K, please refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2021 Form 10-K, filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on November 18, 2021.
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
($ in thousands, except per share figures)
The following table includes a breakdown of net revenues, shipments and average selling prices to the markets served by the Company for the periods shown.
By market
Net Revenues. Net revenues were $490.5 million in fiscal 2022, an increase of 45.3% from $337.7 million in fiscal 2021 due to increases in volume in key markets and average selling price per pound increases in all markets. The 25.9% increase in pounds sold is due to the demand recovery and strong sales in the aerospace market as well as the chemical processing and industrial gas turbine markets as compared to fiscal 2021. The product average selling price was $26.49 in fiscal 2022, an increase of 17.4% from $22.56 per pound in fiscal 2021. The increase in product average selling price per pound in fiscal 2022 largely reflects higher market prices of raw materials, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.31, and price increases and other sales factors, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.70, partially offset by a lower-value product mix, which decreased average selling price per pound by $0.08.
The aerospace market has experienced increased demand as inventory throughout the aerospace supply chain continues to be replenished in response to the expected increase in engine build rates. Additionally, demand in fiscal 2021 was depressed by the COVID-19 pandemic that decreased demand for air travel resulting in decreased demand for new planes and maintenance parts. The increase in average selling price per pound largely reflects higher market prices of raw materials, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.26, and price increases and other sales factors, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.58, partially offset by a lower-value product mix, which decreased average selling price per pound by $1.66.
Volume to the chemical processing market was higher as industrial activity increased with economies continuing to reopen from pandemic shutdowns as well as increases in oil prices resulting in expanded capital expenditures in the sector. The increase in average selling price per pound reflects higher market prices of raw materials, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.28, and price increases and other sales factors, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.00, partially offset by a lower-value product mix, which decreased average selling price per pound by $0.24.
The higher volume to the industrial gas turbine market was a result of overall increased demand in the market. The increase in average selling price per pound reflects higher market prices of raw materials, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.27, price increases and other sales factors, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.65 and a higher-value product mix, which increased average selling price per pound by $0.34.
The decrease in volume to other markets was primarily attributable to lower shipments into the flue-gas desulphurization market which also contributed to an improved product mix. The average selling price per pound increase reflects higher market prices of raw materials, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.83 as well as a higher-value product mix and other pricing factors, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $6.83.
Other Revenue. The 7.6% increase in other revenue was primarily due to increased sales of scrap material.
Cost of Sales. The decrease in cost of sales as a percentage of revenues was primarily attributable to variable cost saving measures that enable the Company mitigate the increase in costs in periods of higher net revenues. Additionally, higher volumes sold during fiscal 2022 eliminated the need for fixed costs to be directly expensed, as was the case in fiscal 2021, when $11.5 million of costs were directly expensed to cost of sales.
Gross Profit. As a result of the above factors, gross profit was $106.3 million in fiscal 2022, an increase of $66.6 million from fiscal 2021. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue increased to 21.7% in fiscal 2022 as compared to 11.8% in fiscal 2021 which continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of net revenues was largely driven by a 45.3% increase in net revenues. Higher foreign exchange losses as well as general inflation were the primary drivers of the increased expense during fiscal 2022. Additionally, some temporary cost containment initiatives that were in place during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, were subsequently ended, which contributed to higher expense in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021.
Nonoperating retirement benefit expense. The $6.1 million difference in nonoperating retirement benefit expense (income) was primarily driven by a favorable actuarial valuation of the U.S. pension plan liability as of September 30, 2021 caused by a higher-than-expected return on plan assets coupled with a higher discount rate. The amortization of this favorable valuation is recorded as a benefit to nonoperating retirement benefit expense (income).
Income Taxes. The $13.6 million difference in income tax expense was driven primarily by a difference in income (loss) before income taxes of $67.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Comparative cash flow analysis (2021 to 2022)
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $8.4 million at September 30, 2022, inclusive of $7.4 million that was held by foreign subsidiaries in various currencies, compared to $47.7 million at September 30, 2021. Additionally, the Company had $74.7 million of borrowings against the line of credit outstanding as of September 30, 2022.
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2022 was $79.5 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $23.3 million during fiscal 2021, a difference of $102.7 million. Cash used in operating activities in fiscal 2022 was driven by an increase in inventory of $116.8 million as compared to relatively flat inventory during fiscal 2021, and an increase in accounts receivable of $42.7 million during fiscal 2022 as compared to an increase in accounts receivable of $6.2 million during fiscal 2021. This was partially offset by net income of $45.1 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to net loss of $(8.7) million during fiscal 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $15.1 million in fiscal 2022, which was higher than cash used in investing activities of $5.9 million during fiscal 2021 due to higher additions to property, plant and equipment. Capital spending in fiscal 2022 approached a more normal level of investment; however, below the rate of depreciation, after lower than historical levels of investment in fiscal 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $56.6 million in fiscal 2022, a difference of $74.0 million from cash used in financing activities of $17.4 million during fiscal 2021. This difference was primarily driven by a net borrowing of $74.7 million against the revolving line of credit during fiscal 2022, partially offset by share repurchases of $7.2 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to $5.0 million during fiscal 2021. Dividends paid of $11.1 million during fiscal 2022 were $0.1 million lower than dividends paid of $11.2 million during fiscal 2021 due to fewer shares outstanding following the Company’s share repurchases.
Future sources of liquidity
The Company’s sources of liquidity for the next twelve months are expected to consist primarily of cash generated from operations, cash on-hand and borrowings under the U.S. revolving credit facility, the terms of which are described in Note 8 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements provided pursuant to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. At September 30, 2022, the Company had cash of $8.4 million, an outstanding balance of $74.7 million on the U.S. revolving credit facility with access to an additional $25.3 million, subject to a borrowing base formula and certain reserves. On October 7, 2022, the maximum availability under the U.S. revolving credit facility was increased from $100.0 million to $160.0 million to provide the Company with additional liquidity. Management believes that the resources described above will be sufficient to fund planned capital expenditures, any regular quarterly dividends declared and working capital requirements over the next twelve months.
The Company’s primary uses of cash over the next twelve months are expected to consist of expenditures related to:
● Funding operations, including raw material purchases, labor costs, insurance, utilities, equipment maintenance;
● Capital spending, including for purchases of new plant and equipment;
● Dividends to stockholders; and
● Pension and postretirement plan contributions, including an anticipated contribution to the U.S. pension plan of $6 million during fiscal 2023.
Capital investment in fiscal 2022 was $15.1 million, and the capital spending in fiscal 2023 is planned to be between $20.0 million and $24.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth the Company’s contractual obligations for the periods indicated, as of September 30, 2022. Management believes cash from operations, cash on hand and borrowings under the U.S. Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet these obligations as they come due.
(1) As of September 30, 2022, the revolver balance was $74,721 which expires on April 19, 2024 (See Note 8. Debt). Additionally, future unused line fees and interest expense are estimated assuming current borrowings on the revolving credit facility and no extension of terms beyond the current maturity date.
(2) Represents multi-year obligation for all operating leases for certain land and buildings, plant equipment, vehicles, office and computer equipment, including short term lease obligations. Typically, lease obligations on real estate are renewed upon expiration and lease obligations on equipment are replaced with new leases unless the Company makes a decision to purchase new equipment.
(3) Represents payments for finance lease obligations of real property that are intended to be held for a long time.
(4) Raw material purchase obligations consist primarily of commitments to purchase commodities, primarily nickel, cobalt, chromium or molybdenum as well as scrap alloys. We believe the minimum required purchase quantities are lower than our current requirements for these metals. Additionally, changes in the market price of these commodities along with changes in the Company’s production volumes will determine if future requirements beyond these commitments will differ from the current levels.
(5) The Company has a funding obligation to contribute $20,655 to the domestic pension plan. These payments will be tax deductible. All benefit payments under the domestic pension plan will come from the plan and not the Company.
(6) Represents expected other postretirement benefits based upon anticipated timing of payments.
Inflation or Deflation
The Company may be favorably or unfavorably impacted by inflation or deflation, resulting in a material impact on its operating results. The Company attempts to pass onto customers both increases in consumable costs and material costs because of the value-added contribution the material makes to the final product, however, the Company may not be able to successfully offset a rapid increase in raw material costs adjustments to customer selling prices. In the event of raw material price declines, the Company’s customers may delay order placement, resulting in lower volumes. In the event of raw material price increases that the Company is unable to pass on to its customers, the Company’s cash flows or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Overview
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to credit losses, inventories, income taxes, asset impairments, retirement benefits, matters related to product liability and other lawsuits and environmental matters. The process of determining significant estimates is fact specific and takes into account factors such as historical experience, current and expected economic conditions, product mix, pension asset mix and, in some cases, actuarial techniques and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of this process form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The Company routinely reevaluates these significant factors and makes adjustments where facts and circumstances dictate. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company’s accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company has identified certain critical accounting policies, which are described below. The following listing of policies is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of the Company’s accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits
The Company has defined benefit pension and postretirement plans covering most of its current and former employees. Significant elements in determining the assets or liabilities and related income or expense for these plans are the expected return on plan assets (if any), the discount rate used to value future payment streams, expected trends in health care costs and other actuarial assumptions. Annually, the Company evaluates the significant assumptions to be used to value its pension and postretirement plan assets and liabilities based on current market conditions and expectations of future costs. If actual results are less favorable than those projected by management, additional expense may be required in future periods.
The selection of the U.S. pension plan’s (the Plan) assumption for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based upon the Plan’s target allocation. The return on assets is based on fair value of the plan assets and their investment allocation at the beginning of the fiscal year. The Company also realizes that historical performance is no guarantee of future performance.
In the short term, substantial decreases in plan assets will result in higher plan funding contribution levels and higher pension expenses. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase in annual pension expense of about $0.5 million. To the extent that the actual return on plan assets during the year exceeds or falls short of the assumed long-term rate of return, an asset gain or loss is created. For funding purposes, gains and losses are generally amortized over a 6-year period.
Decreases in discount rates used to value future payment streams will result in higher liabilities for pension and postretirement plans. A decrease of 25 basis points would result in $5.8 million higher liability for the U.S. pension plan and $2.2 million higher liability for the postretirement plan. This increase in liability would also increase the accumulated other comprehensive loss that would be amortized as higher pension and postretirement expense over an amortization period of approximately 6.0 and 10.7 years, respectively.
Salaried employees hired after December 31, 2005 and hourly employees hired after June 30, 2007 are not covered by the pension plan; however, they are eligible for an enhanced matching program of the defined contribution plan (401(k)). Effective December 31, 2007, the U.S. pension plan was amended to freeze benefits for all non-union employees in the U.S. Effective September 30, 2009, the U.K. pension plan was amended to freeze benefits for employees in the plan.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between book and tax basis of recorded assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is required if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of whether or not a valuation allowance is needed is based upon an evaluation of both positive and negative evidence.
In the process of completing an assessment of the need for a valuation allowance, we make judgements and estimates with respect to future operating results, feasible tax planning strategies, timing of the reversal of deferred tax assets and current market and industry factors. In order to determine the effective tax rate to apply to interim periods, estimates and judgements are made (by taxable jurisdiction) as to the amount of taxable income that may be generated, the availability of deductions and credits expected and the availability of net operating loss carryforwards or other tax attributes to offset taxable income.
The ultimate amount of deferred tax assets realized could be different from those recorded, as influenced by potential changes in enacted tax laws and the availability of future taxable income. A change in our effective tax rate by 1% would have had an impact of approximately $0.6 million to Net income (loss) for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding New Accounting Standards.