Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
INTRODUCTION
This MD&A provides information we believe necessary for understanding our financial condition, changes in financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and other information contained in this report. The forward-looking statements in this section and other parts of this report involve assumptions, risks, uncertainties, and other factors, including statements regarding our plans, objectives, goals, strategies, and financial performance. Our actual results could differ materially from the results anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of factors set forth under the caption “Forward-Looking Statements” and those set forth in Item 1A.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Acquisition of TCF Financial Corporation
On June 9, 2021, Huntington closed the acquisition of TCF Financial Corporation in an all-stock transaction valued at $7.2 billion. TCF was a financial holding company headquartered in Detroit, Michigan with operations across the Midwest. The acquisition brought increased scale and market density, as well as added new markets and capabilities. Historical periods prior to June 9, 2021 reflect results of legacy Huntington operations. Subsequent to closing, results reflect all post-acquisition activity. For further information, refer to Note 3 “Acquisition of TCF Financial Corporation” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
46 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
2021 Financial Performance Review
Total full-year revenue increased 24% to $6.0 billion, driven from the benefits of the TCF acquisition and organic growth. In 2021, we reported net income of $1.3 billion, a 59% increase from the prior year. Earnings per common share on a diluted basis for the year were $0.90, up 30% from the prior year. The reported net income was negatively impacted by TCF acquisition-related expenses totaling $701 million, or $566 million after tax ($0.44 per common share), in addition to the TCF acquisition initial provision for credit losses of $294 million, or $239 million after tax ($0.19 per common share).
Net interest income for 2021 was $4.1 billion, up $878 million, or 27%, from 2020. FTE net interest income for 2021 increased $882 million from 2020. The increase in FTE net income reflected the benefit from a $31.7 billion, or 29%, increase in average earning assets, partially offset by a 5 basis point decrease in the FTE net interest margin to 2.94%. Average earning asset growth included a $17.6 billion, or 22%, increase in average loans and leases, impacted by the TCF acquisition in June 2021, and a $9.4 billion, or 39% increase in average securities. The NIM compression reflected an 37 basis point decline in average earning asset yields and a 14 basis point decline in the benefit from noninterest-bearing funds, partially offset by a 46 basis point decline in average funding costs.
The provision for credit losses was $25 million, a decrease of $1.0 billion, or 98%. The current year reflects forecasted improvement in the macroeconomic scenarios resulting primarily from lower forecasted unemployment, partially offset by the TCF acquisition initial provision for credit losses of $294 million ($234 million from non-PCD loans and leases and $60 million from acquired unfunded lending commitments). Prior year reflects the forecasted impact of COVID-19 and the related uncertainty.
Noninterest income was $1.9 billion, up $298 million, or 19%, from the prior year. Noninterest expense was $4.4 billion, up $1.6 billion, or 57%, from the prior year. The increases in both noninterest income and noninterest expense were primarily impacted by the acquisition of TCF.
The tangible common equity to tangible assets ratio was 6.88%, down 29 basis points. The regulatory Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) risk-based capital ratio was 9.33%, down 67 basis points. The regulatory Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio was 10.99%, down 148 basis points. The decrease in regulatory capital ratios was driven by the repurchase of $650 million of common stock during 2021 and cash dividends, partially offset by earnings. The balance sheet growth as a result of the TCF acquisition was largely offset by the common stock issued related to the acquisition, net of goodwill and intangibles, as both are deducted from capital in the ratio calculation. The regulatory Tier 1 risk-based capital and total risk-based capital ratios also reflect the issuance of $500 million of Series H preferred stock in the 2021 first quarter, the issuance of $175 million of Series I preferred stock in the 2021 second quarter, partially offset by the redemptions of $600 million of Series D preferred stock in the 2021 third quarter and $100 million of Series C preferred stock in the 2021 fourth quarter. Additionally, the total risk-based capital ratio reflects the issuance of $558 million of subordinated notes in the 2021 third quarter.
On July 21, 2021, the Board approved the repurchase of up to $800 million of common shares within the four quarter period from the third quarter of 2021 through the second quarter of 2022. Purchases of common stock under the authorization may include open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, and accelerated share repurchase programs. During 2021, Huntington repurchased a total of $650 million of common stock, representing 43.1 million common shares, at a weighted average price of $15.07.
2021 Form 10-K 47
Business Overview
General
Our general business objectives are:
•Build on our vision to become the country’s leading people-first, digitally powered bank
•Drive sustainable long-term revenue growth and efficiency
•Deliver a Category of One customer experience through proactive and personalized guidance, differentiated products, and expertise
•Extend our digital capabilities with focus on ease of use, access to information, and self-service across products and services
•Add scale and scope by acquiring and deepening relationships and launching of select partnerships
•Maintain positive operating leverage and execute disciplined capital management
•Execute effective risk management with an aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle risk appetite
COVID-19
Although U.S. and global economies have begun to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic as many health and safety restrictions have been lifted and vaccine distribution has increased, certain adverse consequences of the pandemic continue to impact the macroeconomic environment and may persist for some time, including labor shortages and disruptions of global supply chains. The growth in economic activity and demand for goods and services, alongside labor shortages and supply chain complications, has also contributed to rising inflationary pressures. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact our business, financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and are difficult to predict, including, but not limited to, the rate and distribution and administration of vaccines globally, the severity and duration of any resurgence of COVID-19 variants, the actions taken to contain the virus or treat its impact, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
We also expect that the temporary reduction of interest rates to near zero in response to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will, gradually and slowly over the course of the next year, be reversed, with the FRB now signaling its concerns with respect to inflation and announcing that it will begin to taper its purchase of mortgage and other bonds. The timing and impact of the expected reversal in interest rate trends is unknown.
Throughout the pandemic, we have worked with our customers to originate and renew business loans as well as originate loans made available through the SBA PPP, a lending program established as part of the relief to American consumers and businesses in the CARES Act. Several subsequent congressional acts have reopened and extended the PPP loan program. During the year, we continued to work with our customers who received PPP loan forgiveness. Through December 2021, $9.4 billion of the PPP loans have been forgiven by the SBA of the original $11.4 billion of PPP loans originated by both Huntington and TCF prior to acquisition. As of December 31, 2021, we have outstanding PPP loan balances of $1.5 billion.
Economy
Our 2021 results reflect good execution across the bank given the economic challenges faced by our customers, colleagues, communities and the country. We proactively managed through the continued low interest rate environment and economic volatility while finding additional ways to help our communities and complete the acquisition of TCF. The economy in our footprint continues to strengthen as demonstrated by the strong close to the year in commercial lending and our increasing loan pipelines. Additionally, many of the key economic indicators in the region such as unemployment rate, consumer confidence and consumer retail spending, continue to improve. We believe that Huntington enters 2022 with strong momentum. We are positioned to advance the strategy and long-term financial performance of the company through investments in technology, digital innovation, marketing and people.
Legislative and Regulatory
A comprehensive discussion of legislative and regulatory matters affecting us can be found in Item 1: Business - “Regulatory Matters” section of this Form 10-K.
48 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
NM - Not meaningful
(1) On a fully-taxable equivalent (FTE) basis assuming a 21% tax rate.
2021 Form 10-K 49
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section provides a review of financial performance on a consolidated basis. Key consolidated balance sheet and income statement trends are discussed. All earnings per share data are reported on a diluted basis. For additional insight on financial performance, please read this section in conjunction with the “Business Segment Discussion.”
For a discussion of our results of operations for 2020 versus 2019, see “Part II, Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” Discussion of Results of Operations included in our 2020 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Net Interest Income / Average Balance Sheet
Our primary source of revenue is net interest income, which is the difference between interest income from earning assets (primarily loans, securities, and direct financing leases), and interest expense of funding sources (primarily interest-bearing deposits and borrowings). Earning asset balances and related funding sources, as well as changes in the levels of interest rates, impact net interest income. The difference between the average yield on earning assets and the average rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities is the net interest spread. Noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as demand deposits and shareholders’ equity, also support earning assets. The impact of the noninterest-bearing sources of funds, often referred to as “free” funds, is captured in the net interest margin, which is calculated as net interest income divided by average earning assets. Both the net interest margin and net interest spread are presented on a FTE basis, which means that tax-free interest income has been adjusted to a pretax equivalent income, assuming a 21% tax rate.
The following table shows changes in fully-taxable equivalent interest income, interest expense, and net interest income due to volume and rate variances for major categories of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities:
(1)The change in interest income or expense due to both rate and volume has been allocated between the factors in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the change in each.
(2)Calculated assuming a 21% tax rate.
50 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
(1)For purposes of this analysis, NALs are reflected in the average balances of loans and leases.
(2)Includes consumer certificates of deposit of $250,000 or more
2021 Form 10-K 51
(1)Average rates include the impact of applicable derivatives. Loan and lease and deposit average rates also include impact of applicable non-deferrable and amortized fees.
(2)FTE yields are calculated assuming a 21% tax rate.
(3)For purposes of this analysis, NALs are reflected in the average balances of loans and leases.
(4)Includes consumer certificates of deposit of $250,000 or more.
(5)Reflects the benefit of $89 million mark-to-market of interest rate caps for 2021. There was no impact for 2020 or 2019.
52 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Net interest income for 2021 increased $878 million, or 27%, from 2020. FTE net interest income, a non-GAAP financial measure, for 2021 increased $882 million, or 27%, from 2020. The increase reflects the benefit of a $31.7 billion, or 29%, increase in average total earning assets partially offset by a 5 basis point decrease in the FTE NIM to 2.94%.
The increase in average total earning assets included a $17.6 billion, or 22%, increase in average loans and leases and a $9.4 billion, or 39%, increase in average total securities. Average balances across earning asset categories for 2021 reflect the late second-quarter TCF acquisition. The increase in average securities additionally reflected the purchase of securities to deploy excess liquidity. Average earning asset yields decreased 37 basis points due to lower interest rates on loans and leases (down 13 basis points), a decline in securities yields (down 70 basis points) and the impact of elevated deposits at the Federal Reserve Bank, partially offset by deferred PPP loan fees recognized upon receipt of forgiveness payments from the SBA (benefit of 9 basis points) and purchase accounting net accretion (benefit of 6 basis points). Average funding costs decreased 46 basis points, primarily driven by lower cost of long-term debt (down 167 basis points) and interest-bearing deposits (down 25 basis points). The benefit from noninterest-bearing funding declined 14 basis points.
Provision for Credit Losses
(This section should be read in conjunction with the “Credit Risk” section.)
The provision for credit losses is the expense necessary to maintain the ALLL and the AULC at levels appropriate to absorb our estimate of credit losses expected over the life of the loan and lease portfolio and unfunded lending commitments.
The provision for credit losses in 2021 was $25 million, a decrease of $1.0 billion, or 98%, from 2020. The decrease in provision expense over the prior year was primarily attributed to the improvement in the macroeconomic scenarios resulting primarily from lower forecasted unemployment, partially offset by the TCF acquisition initial provision for credit losses of $294 million ($234 million from non-PCD loans and leases and $60 million from acquired unfunded lending commitments). The provision for credit losses in 2020 reflects the forecasted impact of COVID-19 and the related uncertainty.
Noninterest Income
The following table reflects noninterest income for each of the periods presented:
2021 Form 10-K 53
Noninterest income was $1.9 billion, up $298 million, or 19%, from the prior year. Noninterest income for 2021 was impacted by the June 2021 acquisition of TCF. Card and payment processing increased $86 million, or 35%, primarily reflecting higher interchange income resulting from the TCF acquisition in addition to reduced customer activity as a result of the pandemic stay-at-home orders in the beginning of the prior year period. Leasing revenue increased $78 million primarily reflecting the addition of TCF’s portfolio of products. Service charges on deposit accounts increased $71 million, or 24%, primarily due to the impact of the addition of TCF customers, while the prior year period reflected pandemic-related fee waivers occurring through June. Other noninterest income increased $61 million, or 44%, primarily reflecting increased mezzanine investment income, increased amortization of upfront card-related contract renewal fees, purchase accounting accretion from acquired unfunded loan commitments and a gain from branch divestiture, partially offset by the prior year period gain on the annuitization of a retiree health plan. Trust and investment management services income increased $43 million, or 23%, primarily reflecting higher sales production, overall market performance and the impact of TCF. Capital markets fees increased $26 million, or 21%, primarily driven by increases in derivative trading fees and foreign exchange fees. Offsetting these increases, mortgage banking income decreased $57 million, or 16%, largely reflecting lower secondary marketing spreads. Gains on the sale of loans decreased $33 million, or 79%, due largely to the strategic decision to retain SBA loans on the balance sheet.
Impacts of TCF acquisition-related expense:
54 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Noninterest expense was $4.4 billion, an increase of $1.6 billion, or 57%, from the prior year primarily reflecting the impact of the TCF acquisition and the TCF acquisition-related expenses. Personnel costs increased $643 million, or 38%, primarily reflecting higher salaries and incentives related to an 18% increase in average full-time equivalent employees as a result of the TCF acquisition, as well as TCF acquisition-related expenses. Outside data processing and other services increased $466 million, or 121%, reflecting TCF acquisition-related expenses and an increase in technology investments. Increases in net occupancy of $119 million, or 75%, equipment expense of $68 million, or 38%, professional services expense of $58 million, or 105%, and other noninterest expense of $109 million, or 51%, were primarily due to the impact of the TCF acquisition and TCF acquisition-related expenses. Marketing expense increased $51 million, or 134%, reflecting deepening spend in new markets, and an increase in acquisition-related expenses. Lease financing equipment depreciation increased $40 million and deposit and other insurance expense increased $19 million, or 59%, primarily reflecting the impact of the TCF acquisition.
Provision for Income Taxes
(This section should be read in conjunction with Note 1 - “Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 18 - “Income Taxes” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
The provision for income taxes was $294 million for 2021, compared with a provision for income taxes of $155 million in 2020. The effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 18.5% and 15.9%, respectively. Both years included the benefits from general business credits, capital losses, tax-exempt income, tax-exempt bank owned life insurance income, and investments in qualified affordable housing projects.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 there was no valuation allowance on federal deferred taxes. In 2021, a $7 million increase in the provision for state income taxes, net of federal tax effect, was recorded for the portion of state deferred tax assets that are not more likely than not to be realized, compared to an increase of $5 million, net of federal tax effect, in 2020.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL
Risk Governance
We use a multi-faceted approach to risk governance. It begins with the Board of Directors defining our risk appetite as aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle. This does not preclude engagement in select higher risk activities. Rather, the definition is intended to represent an aggregate view of where we want our overall risk to be managed.
Three Board committees primarily oversee implementation and monitoring of this desired risk appetite:
•Our Audit Committee oversees the integrity of the consolidated financial statements, including policies, procedures, and practices regarding the preparation of financial statements, the financial reporting process, disclosures, and internal control over financial reporting. The Audit Committee also provides assistance to our Board in overseeing the internal audit division and the independent registered public accounting firm’s qualifications and independence; compliance with our Financial Code of Ethics for the chief executive officer and senior financial officers; and compliance with corporate securities trading policies.
•Our Risk Oversight Committee assists the Board in overseeing management of material risks, the approval and monitoring of our capital position and plan supporting our overall aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle risk appetite, the risk governance structure, compliance with applicable laws and regulations, and determining adherence to the board’s stated risk appetite. The ROC has oversight responsibility with respect to the full range of inherent risks: credit, market, liquidity, legal, compliance/regulatory, operational, strategic, and reputational. The ROC provides assistance to our Board in overseeing the credit review group. This committee also oversees our capital management and planning process, ensures that the amount and quality of capital are adequate in relation to expected and unexpected risks, and that our capital levels exceed “well-capitalized” requirements.
2021 Form 10-K 55
•Our Technology Committee assists our Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities with respect to all technology, cyber security, and third-party risk management strategies and plans. The committee is charged with evaluating Huntington’s capability to properly perform all technology functions necessary for its business plan, including projected growth, technology capacity, planning, operational execution, product development, and management capacity. Our Technology Committee provides oversight of technology investments and plans to drive efficiency as well as to meet defined standards for risk, information security, and redundancy. Our Technology Committee oversees the allocation of technology costs and ensures that they are understood by the Board. Our Technology Committee monitors and evaluates innovation and technology trends that may affect our strategic plans, including monitoring of overall industry trends. The Technology Committee reviews and provides oversight of our continuity and disaster recovery planning and preparedness.
Our Audit and Risk Oversight Committees routinely hold executive sessions with our key officers engaged in accounting and risk management. On a periodic basis, the two committees meet in joint session to cover matters relevant to both, such as the construct and appropriateness of the ACL, which is reviewed quarterly. All directors have access to information provided to each committee and all scheduled meetings are open to all directors.
Our Risk Oversight and Technology Committees routinely hold joint sessions to cover matters relevant to both such as cybersecurity and IT risk and control projects and risk assessments.
Further, through our Compensation Committee, our Board seeks to ensure its system of rewards is risk-sensitive and aligns the interests of management, creditors, and shareholders. We utilize a variety of compensation-related tools to induce appropriate behavior, including common stock ownership thresholds for the chief executive officer and certain members of senior management, a requirement to hold until retirement or exit from the Company, a portion of net shares received upon exercise of stock options or release of restricted stock awards (50% for executive officers and 25% for other award recipients), equity deferrals, recoupment provisions, and the right to terminate compensation plans at any time.
Management has implemented an Enterprise Risk Management and Risk Appetite Framework. Critically important is our self-assessment process, in which each business segment produces an analysis of its risks and the strength of its risk controls. The segment analyses are combined with assessments by our risk management organization of major risk sectors (e.g., credit, market, liquidity, operational, compliance, strategic, and reputation) to produce an overall enterprise risk assessment. Outcomes of the process include a determination of the quality of the overall control process, the direction of risk, and our position compared to the defined risk appetite.
Management also utilizes a wide series of metrics (key risk indicators) to monitor risk positions throughout the Company. In general, a range for each metric is established, which allows the Company, in aggregate, to operate within an aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle risk appetite. Deviations from the range will indicate if the risk being measured exceeds desired tolerance, which may then necessitate corrective action.
We also have four executive level committees to manage risk: ALCO, Credit Policy and Strategy, Risk Management, and Capital Management. Each committee focuses on specific categories of risk and is supported by a series of subcommittees that are tactical in nature. We believe this structure helps ensure appropriate escalation of issues and overall communication of strategies.
Huntington utilizes three lines of defense with regard to risk management: (1) business segments, (2) corporate risk management, and (3) internal audit and credit review. To induce greater ownership of risk within its business segments, segment risk officers have been embedded in the business to identify and monitor risk, elevate and remediate issues, establish controls, perform self-testing, and oversee the self-assessment process. Corporate Risk Management establishes policies, sets operating limits, reviews new or modified products/processes, ensures consistency and quality assurance within the segments, and produces the enterprise risk assessment. The Chief Risk Officer has significant input into the design and outcome of incentive compensation plans as they apply to risk. Internal audit and credit review provide additional assurance that risk-related functions are operating as intended.
A comprehensive discussion of risk management and capital matters affecting us can be found in the Risk Factors section included in Item 1A: Risk Factors and the “Regulatory Matters” section of Item 1: Business of this Form 10-K.
56 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Some of the more significant processes used to manage and control credit, market, liquidity, operational, and compliance risks are described in the following sections.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss if a counterparty is not able to meet the agreed upon terms of the financial obligation. The majority of our credit risk is associated with lending activities, as the acceptance and management of credit risk is central to profitable lending. We also have credit risk associated with our investment securities portfolios (see Note 4 - "Investment Securities and Other Securities" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). We engage with other financial counterparties for a variety of purposes including investing, asset and liability management, mortgage banking, and trading activities. A variety of derivative financial instruments, principally interest rate swaps, caps, floors, and collars, are used in asset and liability management activities to protect against the risk of adverse price or interest rate movements. We also use derivatives, principally loan sale commitments, in hedging our mortgage loan interest rate lock commitments and mortgage loans held for sale. While there is credit risk associated with derivative activity, we believe this exposure is minimal. (See Note 1 - "Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
We focus on the early identification, monitoring, and management of all aspects of our credit risk. In addition to the traditional credit risk mitigation strategies of credit policies and processes, market risk management activities, and portfolio diversification, we use quantitative measurement capabilities utilizing external data sources, enhanced modeling technology, and internal stress testing processes. Our ongoing expansion of portfolio management resources is central to our commitment to maintaining an aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle risk appetite. In our efforts to identify risk mitigation techniques, we have focused on product design features, origination policies, and solutions for delinquent or stressed borrowers.
The maximum level of credit exposure to individual credit borrowers is limited by policy guidelines based on the perceived risk of each borrower or related group of borrowers. All authority to grant commitments sits with the independent credit administration function and is closely monitored and regularly updated. Concentration risk is managed through limits on loan type, geography, industry, and loan quality factors. We focus predominantly on extending credit to consumer and commercial customers with existing or expandable relationships within our primary banking markets, although we will consider lending opportunities outside our primary markets if we believe the associated risks are acceptable and aligned with strategic initiatives. Although we offer a broad set of products, we continue to develop new lending products and opportunities. Each of these new products and opportunities goes through a rigorous development and approval process prior to implementation to ensure our overall objective of maintaining an aggregate moderate-to-low risk portfolio profile.
The checks and balances in the credit process and the separation of the credit administration and risk management functions are designed to appropriately assess and sanction the level of credit risk being accepted, facilitate the early recognition of credit problems when they occur, and provide for effective problem asset management and resolution. For example, we do not extend additional credit to delinquent borrowers except in certain circumstances that substantially improve our overall repayment or collateral coverage position.
Loan and Lease Credit Exposure Mix
At December 31, 2021, our loans and leases totaled $111.9 billion, representing a $30.3 billion, or 37%, increase compared to $81.6 billion at December 31, 2020.
2021 Form 10-K 57
Total commercial loans and leases were $61.6 billion at December 31, 2021, and represented 55% of our total loan and lease credit exposure. Our commercial loan portfolio is diversified by product type, customer size, and geography, and is comprised of the following (see Commercial Credit discussion):
C&I - C&I loans are made to commercial customers for use in normal business operations to finance working capital needs, equipment purchases, or other projects. We focus on borrowers doing business within our geographic markets. C&I loans are generally underwritten individually and secured with the assets of the company and/or the personal guarantee of the business owners. The financing of owner-occupied facilities is considered a C&I loan even though there is improved real estate as collateral. This treatment is a result of the credit decision process, which focuses on cash flow from operations of the business to repay the debt. The operation, sale, rental, or refinancing of the real estate is not considered the primary repayment source for these types of loans. As we have expanded our C&I portfolio, we have developed a series of “vertical specialties” to ensure that new products or lending types are embedded within a structured, centralized Commercial Lending area with designated, experienced credit officers. These specialties are comprised of either targeted industries (for example, Healthcare, Food & Beverage, Finance and Insurance, etc.) and/or lending disciplines (Equipment Finance, Inventory Finance, Asset Based Lending, etc.), all of which requires a high degree of expertise and oversight to effectively mitigate and monitor risk. As such, we have dedicated colleagues and teams focused on bringing value-added expertise to these specialty customers.
CRE - CRE loans consist of loans to developers and REITs supporting income-producing or for-sale commercial real estate properties. We mitigate our risk on these loans by requiring collateral values that exceed the loan amount and underwriting the loan with projected cash flow in excess of the debt service requirement. These loans are made to finance properties such as apartment buildings, office and industrial buildings, and retail shopping centers, and are repaid through cash flows related to the operation, sale, or refinance of the property. For loans secured by real estate, appropriate appraisals are obtained at origination and updated on an as needed basis in compliance with regulatory requirements and our credit policies.
Construction CRE - Construction CRE loans are loans to developers, companies, or individuals used for the construction of a commercial or residential property for which repayment will be generated by the sale or permanent financing of the property. Our construction CRE portfolio primarily consists of multi-family, retail, office, and warehouse project types. Generally, these loans are for construction projects that have been pre-sold or pre-leased, or have secured permanent financing, as well as loans to real estate companies with significant equity invested in each project. These loans are managed by a specialized real estate lending group that actively monitors the construction phase and manages the loan disbursements according to the predetermined construction schedule.
Lease Financing - Lease financing products are designed to address the diverse financing needs of small to large companies primarily for the acquisition of equipment. Our lease financing portfolio will utilize a variety of origination partners and third-party sources including equipment manufacturers, dealers, or vendors set up under program structures to generate transactions from a nationwide footprint. High level business lines comprise of Industrial Finance, Specialty Finance, Healthcare Finance, Technology Finance, and Specialized Transportation, Franchise, & Government.
Total consumer loans and leases were $50.3 billion at December 31, 2021, and represented 45% of our total loan and lease credit exposure. The consumer portfolio is comprised primarily of automobile loans, home equity lines-of-credit, residential mortgages, and RV and marine finance (see Consumer Credit discussion).
Residential mortgage - Residential mortgage loans represent loans to consumers for the purchase or refinance of a residence. These loans are generally financed over a 15-year to 30-year term, and in most cases, are extended to borrowers to finance their primary residence. Applications are underwritten centrally using consistent credit policies and processes. All residential mortgage loan decisions utilize a full appraisal for collateral valuation. Huntington has not originated or acquired residential mortgages that allow negative amortization or allow the borrower multiple payment options.
Automobile - Automobile loans are comprised primarily of loans made through automotive dealerships and include exposure in selected states outside of our primary banking markets. The exposure outside of our core footprint states represents 19% of the total exposure, with no individual state representing more than 6%.
58 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Applications are underwritten using an automated underwriting system that applies consistent policies and processes across the portfolio.
Home equity - Home equity lending includes both home equity loans and lines-of-credit. This type of lending, which is secured by a first-lien or junior-lien on the borrower’s residence, allows customers to borrow against the equity in their home or refinance existing mortgage debt. Products include closed-end loans which are generally fixed-rate with principal and interest payments, and variable-rate, interest-only lines-of-credit which do not require payment of principal during the 10-year revolving period. The home equity line of credit converts to a 20-year amortizing structure at the end of the revolving period. Applications are underwritten centrally in conjunction with an automated underwriting system. The home equity underwriting criteria is based on minimum credit scores, debt-to-income ratios, and LTV ratios, with current collateral valuations. The underwriting for the floating rate lines of credit also incorporates a stress analysis for rising interest rates.
RV and marine - RV and marine loans are loans provided to consumers for the purpose of financing recreational vehicles and boats. Loans are originated on an indirect basis through a series of dealerships across 34 states. The loans are underwritten centrally using an application and decisioning system similar to automobile loans. The current portfolio includes 31% of the balances within our core footprint states.
Other consumer - Other consumer loans primarily consists of consumer loans not secured by real estate, including credit cards, personal unsecured loans, and overdraft balances. We originate these products within our established set of credit policies and guidelines.
The table below provides the composition of our total loan and lease portfolio:
Our loan and lease portfolio is a managed mix of consumer and commercial credits. We manage the overall credit exposure and portfolio composition via a credit concentration policy. The policy designates specific loan types, collateral types, and loan structures to be formally tracked and assigned maximum exposure limits as a percentage of capital. Commercial lending by NAICS categories, specific limits for CRE project types, loans secured by residential real estate, large dollar exposures, and designated high risk loan categories represent examples of specifically tracked components of our concentration management process. There are no identified concentrations that exceed the assigned exposure limit. Our concentration management policy is approved by the ROC and is used to ensure a high quality, well diversified portfolio that is consistent with our overall objective of maintaining an aggregate moderate-to-low, through-the-cycle risk appetite. Changes to existing concentration limits, incorporating specific information relating to the potential impact on the overall portfolio composition and performance metrics, require the approval of the ROC prior to implementation.
2021 Form 10-K 59
The table below provides our total loan and lease portfolio segregated by industry type. The changes in the industry composition from December 31, 2020 are consistent with the portfolio growth metrics.
(1) Amounts include $1.5 billion and $2.4 billion of auto dealer services loans at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
60 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Commercial Credit
The primary factors considered in commercial credit approvals are the financial strength of the borrower, assessment of the borrower’s management capabilities, cash flows from operations, industry sector trends, type and sufficiency of collateral, type of exposure, transaction structure, and the general economic outlook. While these are the primary factors considered, there are a number of other factors that may be considered in the decision process. We utilize signature approval authorities and centralized loan approval committees, led by our credit officers. The risk rating, credit exposure amount, and complexity of the credit determines the threshold for approval. Credit officers who understand each local region and are experienced in the industries and loan structures of the requested credit exposure are involved in all loan decisions not requiring loan committee approval and have the primary credit authority, with the exception of small business loans. For small business loans, we utilize a centralized loan approval process for standard products and structures. In this centralized decision environment, certain individuals who understand each local region may make credit-extension decisions to preserve our commitment to the communities in which we operate. In addition to disciplined and consistent judgmental factors, a sophisticated credit scoring process is used as a primary evaluation tool in the determination of approving a loan.
In commercial lending, on-going credit management is dependent on the type and nature of the loan. We monitor all significant exposures. All commercial credit extensions are assigned internal risk ratings reflecting the borrower’s PD and LGD. This two-dimensional rating methodology provides granularity in the portfolio management process. The PD is rated and applied at the borrower level. The LGD is rated and applied based on the specific type of credit extension and the quality and lien position associated with the underlying collateral. The internal risk ratings are assessed at origination and updated at each periodic monitoring event. There is also extensive macro-portfolio management analysis. We review and adjust our risk-rating criteria based on actual experience, which provides us with the current risk level in the portfolio and is the basis for determining an appropriate ACL amount. A centralized portfolio management team monitors and reports on the performance of the entire commercial portfolio, including small business loans, to provide consistent oversight.
In addition to the initial credit analysis conducted during the approval process, our credit review group performs testing to provide an independent review and assessment of the quality and risk of new loan originations. This group is part of our Risk Management area and conducts portfolio reviews on a risk-based cycle to evaluate individual loans, validate risk ratings, and test the consistency of credit processes.
Our standardized loan grading system considers many components that directly correlate to loan quality and likelihood of repayment, one of which is guarantor support. On an at least annual basis, we consider, among other things, the guarantor’s reputation and creditworthiness, where available, along with various key financial metrics such as liquidity and net worth. Our assessment of the guarantor’s credit strength, or lack thereof, is reflected in our risk ratings for such loans, which is directly tied to, and an integral component of, our ACL methodology. When a loan goes to impaired status, viable guarantor support is considered in the determination of a credit loss.
If our assessment of the guarantor’s credit strength yields an inherent capacity to perform, we will seek repayment from the guarantor as part of the collection process and have done so successfully.
Substantially all loans categorized as Classified (See Note 5 “Loans / Leases” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) are managed by FRG. FRG is a specialized group of credit professionals that handle the day-to-day management of workouts, commercial recoveries, and problem loan sales. Its responsibilities include developing and implementing action plans, assessing risk ratings, and determining the appropriateness of the allowance, the accrual status, and the ultimate collectability of the Classified loan portfolio.
C&I PORTFOLIO
We manage the risks inherent in the C&I portfolio through origination policies, a defined loan concentration policy with established limits, on-going loan-level and portfolio-level reviews, recourse requirements, and continuous portfolio risk management activities. Our origination policies for the C&I portfolio include loan product-type specific policies such as LTV and debt service coverage ratios, as applicable.
2021 Form 10-K 61
The C&I portfolio continues to have solid origination activity while we maintain a focus on high quality originations. We continue to maintain a proactive approach to identifying borrowers that may be facing financial difficulty in order to maximize the potential credit outcomes. Subsequent to the origination of the loan, the credit review group provides an independent review and assessment of the quality of the underwriting and risk of new loan originations.
CRE PORTFOLIO
We manage the risks inherent in this portfolio specific to CRE lending, focusing on the quality of the developer and the specifics associated with each project. Generally, we: (1) limit our loans to 80% of the appraised value of the commercial real estate at origination, (2) require net operating cash flows to be 120% of required interest and principal payments, and (3) if the commercial real estate is non-owner occupied, require that pre-leasing generate break-even interest-only debt service. We actively monitor both geographic and project-type concentrations and performance metrics of all CRE loan types, with a focus on loans identified as higher risk based on the risk rating methodology. Both macro-level and loan-level stress-test scenarios based on existing and forecast market conditions are part of the on-going portfolio management process for the CRE portfolio.
Dedicated real estate professionals originate and manage the portfolio. The portfolio is diversified by project type and loan size, and this diversification represents a significant portion of the credit risk management strategies employed for this portfolio. Subsequent to the origination of the loan, the credit review group provides an independent review and assessment of the quality of the underwriting and risk of new loan originations.
Appraisal values are obtained in conjunction with all originations and renewals, and on an as-needed basis, in compliance with regulatory requirements and to ensure appropriate decisions regarding the on-going management of the portfolio reflect the changing market conditions. Appraisals are obtained from approved vendors and are reviewed by an internal appraisal review group comprised of certified appraisers to ensure the quality of the valuation used in the underwriting process. We continue to perform on-going portfolio level reviews within the CRE portfolio. These reviews generate action plans based on occupancy levels or sales volume associated with the projects being reviewed. This highly individualized process requires working closely with all of our borrowers, as well as an in-depth knowledge of CRE project lending and the market environment.
LEASE FINANCING
We manage the risks inherent in the Lease Financing portfolio through external consumer and business credit scoring solutions, internally developed custom probability of default and loss given default models, continuous portfolio risk management activities, and equipment and customer diversification. Our origination policies are aligned by transaction size with increased use of the personal guarantee of principals and external credit scoring tools for smaller transactions and expanded financial analysis and reporting requirements for larger transactions. Our program focuses on high-quality manufacturer, distributor, vendor, or third party originations sources with in-depth partner diligence. The lease financing group may use manufacturer loss risk share programs that provide additional transaction support, but the origination strategy prioritizes strong customer financial condition.
High level business lines are comprised of Industrial Finance, Specialty Finance, Healthcare Finance, Technology Finance, and Specialized Transportation, Franchise, and Government with multiple segments under each main line. We also have specific equipment types or industries designated as low tolerance with additional front-end guidance and diligence requirements. Subsequent to the origination of the lease, the credit review group provides an independent review and assessment of the quality of the underwriting and risk of new lease originations.
62 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Consumer Credit
Consumer credit approvals are based on, among other factors, the financial strength and payment history of the borrower, type of exposure, and transaction structure. Consumer credit decisions are generally made in a centralized environment utilizing decision models. Importantly, certain individuals who understand each local region have the authority to make credit extension decisions to preserve our focus on the local communities in which we operate. For all classes within the consumer loan portfolio, loans are assigned pool level PD factors based on the FICO range within which the borrower’s credit bureau score falls. The credit bureau score is widely accepted as the standard measure of consumer credit risk used by lenders, regulators, rating agencies, and consumers. The LGD is related to the type of collateral associated with the credit extension, which typically does not change over the course of the loan term. This allows Huntington to maintain a current view of the customer for credit risk management and ACL purposes.
In consumer lending, credit risk is managed from a segment (i.e., loan type, collateral position, geography, etc.) and vintage performance analysis. All portfolio segments are continuously monitored for changes in delinquency trends and other asset quality indicators. We make extensive use of portfolio assessment models to continuously monitor the quality of the portfolio, which may result in changes to future origination strategies. The credit review group conducts ongoing independent credit origination and process reviews to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the consumer credit processes.
Collection actions by our customer assistance team are initiated as needed through a centrally managed collection and recovery function. We employ a series of collection methodologies designed to maintain a high level of effectiveness, while maximizing efficiency. In addition to the consumer loan portfolio, the customer assistance team is responsible for collection activity on all sold and securitized consumer loans and leases. Collection practices include a single contact point for the majority of the residential real estate secured portfolios.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SECURED PORTFOLIOS
The properties securing our residential mortgage and home equity portfolios are primarily located within our geographic footprint. Huntington continues to support our local markets with consistent underwriting across all residential secured products. The residential secured portfolio originations continue to be of high quality. Our portfolio management strategies associated with our Home Savers group allow us to focus on effectively helping our customers with appropriate solutions for their specific circumstances.
Huntington underwrites all residential mortgage applications centrally, with a focus on higher quality borrowers. We do not originate residential mortgages that allow negative amortization or allow the borrower multiple payment options. Residential mortgages are originated based on a completed full appraisal during the credit underwriting process. We update values in compliance with applicable regulations to facilitate our portfolio management, as well as our workout and loss mitigation functions.
We are subject to repurchase risk associated with residential mortgage loans sold in the secondary market. An appropriate level of reserve for representations and warranties related to residential mortgage loans sold has been established to address this repurchase risk inherent in the portfolio.
AUTOMOBILE PORTFOLIO
Our strategy in the automobile portfolio continues to focus on high quality borrowers as measured by both FICO and internal custom scores, combined with appropriate LTVs, terms, and profitability. Our strategy and operational capabilities allow us to appropriately manage the origination quality across the entire portfolio, including our newer markets. Although increased origination volume and entering new markets can be associated with increased risk levels, we believe our disciplined strategy and operational processes significantly mitigate these risks.
We have continued to consistently execute our value proposition and take advantage of available market opportunities. Importantly, we have maintained our high credit quality standards while expanding the portfolio.
RV AND MARINE PORTFOLIO
Our strategy in the RV and Marine portfolio focuses on high quality borrowers, combined with appropriate LTVs, terms, and profitability. Although entering new markets can be associated with increased risk levels, we believe our disciplined strategy and operational processes significantly mitigate these risks.
2021 Form 10-K 63
Credit Quality
(This section should be read in conjunction with Note 5 “Loans / Leases and Note 6 “Allowance for Credit Losses” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
We believe the most meaningful way to assess overall credit quality performance is through an analysis of specific performance ratios. This approach forms the basis of the discussion in the sections immediately following: NPAs, NALs, ACL, and NCOs. In addition, we utilize delinquency rates, risk distribution and migration patterns, product segmentation, and origination trends in the analysis of our credit quality performance.
Credit quality performance in 2021 reflected NCOs of $215 million, or 0.22% of average total loans and leases, a decrease from $449 million or 0.57% in the prior year. The decrease was driven by $182 million decrease in Commercial NCOs and a $52 million decrease in Consumer NCOs. NPAs increased by $187 million, or 33%, to $750 million, largely driven by the TCF acquisition. The ACL to total loans ratio decreased to 1.88% at December 31, 2021 compared to 2.29% at December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting the improvement in the macroeconomic scenarios resulting primarily from lower forecasted unemployment. The prior year reflects the forecasted impact of COVID-19 and the related uncertainty.
NPAs and NALs
NPAs consist of (1) NALs, which represent loans and leases no longer accruing interest, (2) OREO properties, and (3) other NPAs. Any loan in our portfolio may be placed on nonaccrual status prior to the policies described below when collection of principal or interest is in doubt. Also, when a borrower with discharged non-reaffirmed debt in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy is identified and the loan is determined to be collateral dependent, the loan is placed on nonaccrual status.
Commercial loans are placed on nonaccrual status at 90-days past due, or earlier if repayment of principal and interest is in doubt. Of the $522 million of commercial related NALs at December 31, 2021, $382 million, or 73%, represent loans that were less than 30-days past due, demonstrating our continued commitment to proactive credit risk management. With the exception of residential mortgage loans guaranteed by government organizations which continue to accrue interest, first lien loans secured by residential mortgage collateral are placed on nonaccrual status at 150-days past due. Junior-lien home equity loans are placed on nonaccrual status at the earlier of 120-days past due or when the related first-lien loan has been identified as nonaccrual. Automobile, RV and marine and other consumer loans are generally fully charged-off at 120-days past due, and if not fully charged-off is placed on non-accrual.
When loans are placed on nonaccrual, any accrued interest is reversed against interest income. When, in our judgment, the borrower’s ability to make required interest and principal payments has resumed and collectability is no longer in doubt, the loan or lease could be returned to accrual status.
64 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
The following table reflects period-end NALs and NPAs detail:
(1)Other nonperforming assets include certain impaired investment securities and/or nonaccrual loans held-for-sale.
(2)Nonperforming assets divided by the sum of loans and leases, other real estate owned, and other NPAs.
Total NPAs increased $187 million, or 33%, compared with December 31, 2020, largely driven by the TCF acquisition.
ACL
Our ACL is comprised of two different components, both of which in our judgment are appropriate to absorb lifetime expected credit losses in our loan and lease portfolio: the ALLL and the AULC.
We use a statistically-based models that employ assumptions about current and future economic conditions throughout the contractual life of the loan. The process of estimating expected credit losses is based on three key parameters: PD, EAD, and LGD. Beyond the reasonable and supportable period (two to three years), the economic variables revert to a historical equilibrium at a pace dependent on the state of the economy reflected within the economic scenario.
These three parameters, PD, EAD, and LGD, are utilized to estimate the cumulative credit losses over the remaining expected life of the loan. We also consider the likelihood a previously charged-off account will be recovered. This calculation is dependent on how long ago the account was charged-off and future economic conditions, which estimate the likelihood and magnitude of recovery. Our models are developed using internal historical loss experience covering the full economic cycle and consider the impact of account characteristics on expected losses.
Future economic conditions consider multiple macroeconomic scenarios provided to us by an independent third party and are reviewed through the appropriate committee governance channels described below. These macroeconomic scenarios contain certain variables that are influential to our modeling process, the most significant being unemployment rates and GDP. The probability weights assigned to each scenario are generally expected to be consistent from period to period. Any changes in probability weights must be supported by appropriate documentation and approval of senior management. Additionally, we consider whether to adjust the modeled estimates to address possible limitations within the models or factors not captured within the macroeconomic scenarios. Lifetime losses for most of our loans and leases are evaluated collectively based on similar risk characteristics, risk ratings, origination credit bureau scores, delinquency status, and remaining months within loan agreements, among other factors.
2021 Form 10-K 65
The macroeconomic scenarios evaluated by Huntington during the 2021 fourth quarter continued to reflect the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The baseline scenario used at year-end assumes that the worst of the economic disruption from the pandemic has passed, with the expectation that subsequent waves of the virus will not carry the same level of economic disruption experienced to date. The unemployment variable is incorporated within our models as both a rate of change variable and an absolute level variable. Historically, changes in unemployment have taken gradual paths resulting in more measured impacts each quarter.
The table below is intended to show how the forecasted path of these key macroeconomic variables has changed since the end of 2020:
(1)Values reflect the baseline scenario forecast inputs for each period presented, not updated for subsequent actual amounts.
Management continues to assess the uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment, including uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and considered multiple macroeconomic forecasts that reflected a range of possible outcomes in order to address such uncertainty. While we have incorporated estimates of economic uncertainty into our ACL, the ultimate impact the unprecedented levels of government fiscal and monetary actions will have on the economy, including inflation and our credit losses remain uncertain.
Management develops additional analytics to support adjustments to our modeled results. Our governance committees reviewed model results of each economic scenario for appropriate usage, concluding that the quantitative transactional reserve (collectively assessed) will continue to utilize scenario weighting. Given the uncertainty associated with key economic scenario assumptions, the December 31, 2021 ACL included a general reserve that consists of various risk profile components, including profiles related to the commercial real estate portfolio, to capture economic uncertainty not addressed within the quantitative transaction reserve.
Our ACL methodology committee is responsible for developing the methodology, assumptions and estimates used in the calculation, as well as determining the appropriateness of the ACL. The ALLL represents the estimate of lifetime expected losses in the loan and lease portfolio at the reported date. The loss modeling process uses an EAD concept to calculate total expected losses on both funded balances and unfunded lending commitments, where appropriate. Losses related to the unfunded lending commitments are then recorded as AULC within other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. A liability for expected credit losses for off-balance sheet credit exposures is recognized if Huntington has a present contractual obligation to extend the credit and the obligation is not unconditionally cancelable.
The AULC is determined by applying the same quantitative reserve determination process to the unfunded portion of the loan exposures adjusted by an applicable funding expectation. (See Note 1 - "Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Our ACL evaluation process includes the on-going assessment of credit quality metrics, and a comparison of certain ACL benchmarks to current performance. The absolute level of the ACL balance increased year over year, driven by the impact of the TCF acquisition. However, all of the relevant allowance coverage ratios have improved from the prior year end, while still reflecting the level of uncertainty around the future macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and indicated inflationary pressures. For further information, including the ALLL and AULC activity by portfolio segment, refer to Note 6 “Allowance for Credit Losses” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
66 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
The table below reflects the allocation of our ALLL among our various loan categories and the reported ACL:
(1)Percentages represent the percentage of each loan and lease category to total loans and leases.
At December 31, 2021, the ACL was $2.1 billion or 1.88% of total loans and leases, compared to $1.9 billion or 2.29% at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to the TCF acquisition and associated allowance attributable to the acquired loans and leases and unfunded lending commitments, partially offset by improvement in the forecasted macroeconomic environment resulting from anticipated lower unemployment and higher GDP.
NCOs
A loan in any portfolio may be charged-off prior to the policies described below if a loss confirming event has occurred. Loss confirming events include, but are not limited to, bankruptcy (unsecured), continued delinquency, foreclosure, or receipt of an asset valuation indicating a collateral deficiency where that asset is the sole source of repayment. Additionally, discharged, collateral dependent non-reaffirmed debt in Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings will result in a charge-off to estimated collateral value, less anticipated selling costs at the time of discharge.
Commercial loans are either charged-off or written down to net realizable value by 90-days past due with the exception of administrative small ticket lease delinquencies. Automobile loans, RV and marine, and other consumer loans are generally fully charged-off at 120-days past due. First-lien and junior-lien home equity loans are charged-off to the estimated fair value of the collateral, less anticipated selling costs, at 150-days past due and 120-days past due, respectively. Residential mortgages are charged-off to the estimated fair value of the collateral, less anticipated selling costs, at 150-days past due. The remaining balance is in delinquent status until a modification can be completed, or the loan goes through the foreclosure process.
2021 Form 10-K 67
The following table reflects NCO detail:
(1) Net charge-offs and associated metrics for the year ended December 31, 2021 exclude $80 million of charge-offs recognized immediately upon completion of the TCF acquisition and related to required purchase accounting treatment.
NCOs decreased $234 million, or 52%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was evident across both the commercial and consumer portfolios. The commercial decrease was primarily a function of elevated losses associated within the oil and gas portfolio in 2020, while the consumer decrease was broad based due to positive portfolio performance throughout 2021.
Market Risk
Market risk refers to potential losses arising from changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, equity prices and commodity prices, including the correlation among these factors and their volatility. When the value of an instrument is tied to such external factors, the holder faces market risk. We are primarily exposed to interest rate risk as a result of offering a wide array of financial products to our customers and secondarily to price risk from trading securities, securities owned by our broker-dealer subsidiaries, foreign exchange positions, equity investments, and investments in securities backed by mortgage loans.
68 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
We measure market risk exposure via financial simulation models, which provide management with insights on the potential impact to net interest income and other key metrics as a result of changes in market interest rates. Models are used to simulate cash flows and accrual characteristics of the balance sheet based on assumptions regarding the slope or shape of the yield curve, the direction and volatility of interest rates, and the changing composition and characteristics of the balance sheet resulting from strategic objectives and customer behavior. Assumptions and models provide insight on forecasted balance sheet growth and composition, and the pricing and maturity characteristics of current and future business.
In measuring the financial risks associated with interest rate sensitivity in our balance sheet, we compare a set of alternative interest rate scenarios to the results of a base case scenario derived using market forward rates. The market forward reflects the market consensus regarding the future level and slope of the yield curve across a range of tenor points. The standard set of interest rate scenarios includes two types: “shock” scenarios which are instantaneous parallel rate shifts, and “ramp” scenarios where the parallel shift is applied gradually over the first 12 months of the forecast on a pro rata basis. In both shock and ramp scenarios with falling rates, we presume that market rates will not go below 0%. The scenarios are inclusive of all executed interest rate risk hedging activities. Forward starting hedges are included to the extent that they have been transacted and that they start within the measurement horizon.
Interest rate risk measurement is calculated and reported to the Board of Directors at least quarterly. A comprehensive discussion of risk management governance can be found in Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the “Risk Governance” section of this Form 10-K.
We use two approaches to model interest rate risk: Net interest income at risk (NII at risk) and economic value of equity at risk modeling sensitivity analysis (EVE at Risk).
The NII at Risk results included in the table above reflect the analysis used monthly by management. It models gradual (“ramp” as defined above) +100 and +200 basis point parallel shifts in market interest rates, implied by the forward yield curve over the next twelve months as well as an instantaneous parallel shock of -25 basis points.
The NII at Risk shows that the balance sheet is asset sensitive at both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The increase in sensitivity is primarily driven by changes in market interest rate expectations, and the size and mix of the balance sheet.
The EVE results included in the table above reflect the analysis used monthly by management. It models immediate -25, +100 and +200 basis point parallel shifts (“shocks” as defined above) in market interest rates.
As of December 31, 2021, the EVE depicts a liability sensitive (long duration) balance sheet profile. The change in sensitivity from December 31, 2020 asset sensitive (short duration) position was driven primarily by changes in the spot market rate curve impacting forecasted runoff expectations, and the size and composition of the balance sheet as a result of the TCF acquisition.
2021 Form 10-K 69
We have LIBOR-based exposure in the form of variable rate loans, derivatives, Series B preferred stock, long term debt and other securities and financial arrangements. To address the discontinuance of LIBOR in its current form, we established a LIBOR transition team and project plan under the oversight of the CRO and CFO, providing periodic updates to the ROC. As of December 31, 2021, Huntington ceased issuance of new LIBOR loans. All legacy Huntington contracts that reference LIBOR have been reviewed to determine if fallback language is needed and legacy TCF contracts are in the review process. Remediation efforts coordinated by the LIBOR transition team will be complete by June of 2023. Source systems have been updated to support alternative reference rates. At this time alternative reference rates are predominantly SOFR based. As such, we have developed a SOFR-enabled interest rate risk monitoring framework and a strategy for managing interest rate risk during the transition from LIBOR to SOFR. We continue to monitor market developments and regulatory updates, including the recent announcements from the ICE Benchmark Administrator to extend the cessation date for several USD LIBOR tenors to June 30, 2023. For a discussion of the risks associated with the LIBOR transition to alternative reference rates, refer to "Item 1A: Risk Factors.”
Use of Derivatives to Manage Interest Rate Risk
An integral component of our interest rate risk management strategy is the use of derivative instruments to minimize significant fluctuations in earnings caused by changes in market interest rates. Examples of derivative instruments that we may use as part of our interest rate risk management strategy include interest rate swaps, caps and floors, forward contracts, and forward starting interest rate swaps.
Table 14 shows all swap and floor positions, and cap positions that existed at the prior year end, that are utilized for purposes of managing our exposures to the variability of interest rates. The interest rates variability may impact either the fair value of the assets and liabilities or impact the cash flows attributable to net interest margin. These positions are used to protect the fair value of asset and liabilities by converting the contractual interest rate on a specified amount of assets and liabilities (i.e., notional amounts) to another interest rate index. The positions are also used to hedge the variability in cash flows attributable to the contractually specified interest rate by converting the variable rate index into a fixed rate. The volume, maturity and mix of derivative positions change frequently as we adjust our broader interest rate risk management objectives and the balance sheet positions to be hedged. For further information, including the notional amount and fair values of these derivatives, refer to Note 20 “Derivative Financial Instruments” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
70 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
The following tables present additional information about the interest rate swaps and floors used in Huntington’s asset and liability management activities at December 31, 2021 and interest rate swaps, caps and floors at December 31, 2020.
(1)Amounts include interest rate swaps as fair value hedges of fixed-rate investment securities using the last-of-layer method.
(2)Forward starting swaps effective starting between June 2022 and February 2023.
(3)Forward starting swaps effective starting January 2022.
(4)Swaps have variable pay and variable receive resets. Weighted Average Fixed Rate column represents pay rate reset.
(5)Forward starting swaps and caps effective starting in April 2021.
(6)Forward starting swaps become effective starting from January 2021 to May 2021.
(7)Forward starting floors become effective starting from March 2021 to June 2021.
2021 Form 10-K 71
Net interest income in 2021 was benefited by $89 million mark-to-market of interest rate caps. The mark-to-market is not included in the NII at Risk calculations above. The interest rate caps were terminated in the 2021 second quarter.
MSRs
(This section should be read in conjunction with Note 7 - “Mortgage Loan Sales and Servicing Rights” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
At December 31, 2021, we had a total of $351 million of capitalized MSRs representing the right to service $31.0 billion in mortgage loans.
MSR fair values are sensitive to movements in interest rates as expected future net servicing income depends on the projected outstanding principal balances of the underlying loans, which can be reduced by prepayments and declines in credit quality. Prepayments usually increase when mortgage interest rates decline and decrease when mortgage interest rates rise. We also employ hedging strategies to reduce the risk of MSR fair value changes or impairment. However, volatile changes in interest rates can diminish the effectiveness of these economic hedges. We report changes in the MSR value net of hedge-related trading activity in the mortgage banking income category of noninterest income.
MSR assets are included in servicing rights and other intangible assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Price Risk
Price risk represents the risk of loss arising from adverse movements in the prices of financial instruments that are carried at fair value and are subject to fair value accounting. We have price risk from trading securities, securities owned by our broker-dealer subsidiaries, foreign exchange positions, derivative instruments, and equity investments. We have established loss limits on the trading portfolio, on the amount of foreign exchange exposure that can be maintained, and on the amount of marketable equity securities that can be held.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the possibility of us being unable to meet current and future financial obligations in a timely manner. Liquidity is managed to ensure stable, reliable, and cost-effective sources of funds to satisfy demand for credit, deposit withdrawals and investment opportunities. We consider core earnings, strong capital ratios, and credit quality essential for maintaining high credit ratings, which allows us cost-effective access to market-based liquidity. We rely on a large, stable core deposit base and a diversified base of wholesale funding sources to manage liquidity risk. The Board of Directors approves the liquidity strategy and furthermore reviews the acceptable level of liquidity risk, policy, and procedures established by senior management. The ALCO is appointed by the ROC to oversee liquidity risk management and the establishment of liquidity risk policies and limits. Liquidity Risk is managed centrally by Corporate Treasury. Our liquidity position is evaluated daily, weekly, and monthly by analyzing the composition of all funding sources, reviewing projected liquidity commitments by future months, and identifying sources and uses of funds. The overall management of our liquidity position is also integrated into consumer and commercial pricing policies to ensure a stable core deposit base. Liquidity risk is reviewed and managed continuously for the Bank and the parent company, as well as its subsidiaries. In addition, liquidity working groups meet regularly to identify and monitor liquidity positions, provide policy guidance, review funding strategies, and oversee the adherence to, and maintenance of, the contingency funding plans.
72 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Our primary source of liquidity is our core deposit base. Core deposits comprised approximately 98% of total deposits at December 31, 2021. We also have available unused wholesale sources of liquidity, including advances from the FHLB, issuance through dealers in the capital markets, and access to certificates of deposit issued through brokers. Liquidity is further provided by unencumbered, or unpledged, investment securities that totaled $19.1 billion as of December 31, 2021. The treasury department also prepares a contingency funding plan that details the potential erosion of funds in the event of a systemic financial market crisis or institutional-specific stress scenario. An example of an institution specific event would be a downgrade in our public credit rating by a rating agency due to factors such as deterioration in asset quality, a large charge to earnings, a decline in profitability or other financial measures, or a significant merger or acquisition. Examples of systemic events unrelated to us that could have an effect on our access to liquidity would be terrorism or war, natural disasters, political events, or the default or bankruptcy of a major corporation, mutual fund or hedge fund. Similarly, market speculation or rumors about us, or the banking industry in general, may adversely affect the cost and availability of normal funding sources. The liquidity contingency plan therefore outlines the process for addressing a liquidity crisis. The plan provides for an evaluation of funding sources under various market conditions. It also assigns specific roles and responsibilities and communication protocols for effectively managing liquidity through a problem period.
Investment securities portfolio
(This section should be read in conjunction with Note 4 - “Investment Securities and Other Securities” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
Our investment securities portfolio is evaluated under established ALCO objectives. Changing market conditions could affect the profitability of the portfolio, as well as the level of interest rate risk exposure.
The weighted average yield by maturity of the held-to-maturity portfolio is presented on the following table:
(1)Weighted average yields were calculated using amortized cost on a fully-taxable equivalent basis, assuming a 21% tax rate where applicable.
Bank Liquidity and Sources of Funding
Our primary sources of funding for the Bank are consumer and commercial core deposits. At December 31, 2021, these core deposits funded 80% of total assets (125% of total loans). Other sources of liquidity include non-core deposits, FHLB advances, wholesale debt instruments, and securitizations. Demand deposit overdrafts that have been reclassified as loan balances were $29 million and $14 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
2021 Form 10-K 73
The following table reflects deposit composition detail:
(1)Includes consumer certificates of deposit of $250,000 or more.
The following table reflects consolidated Huntington Bancshares Incorporated amounts. Uninsured deposits are defined as the portion of deposit accounts in U.S. offices that exceed the FDIC insurance limit or similar state deposit insurance regimes and amounts in any other uninsured investment or deposit accounts that are classified as deposits and not subject to any federal or state deposit insurance regimes.
(1)Uninsured deposits were determined by adjusting the amounts reported in the Bank Call Report to arrive at consolidated Huntington Bancshares Incorporated.
The Bank maintains borrowing capacity at the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window. The Bank does not consider borrowing capacity from the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window as a primary source of liquidity. Total loans and securities pledged to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window and the FHLB are $70.1 billion and $53.4 billion at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, the market value of investment securities pledged to secure public and trust deposits, trading account liabilities, U.S. Treasury demand notes, and security repurchase agreements totaled $21.7 billion. There were no securities of a single issuer, which are not governmental or government-sponsored, that exceeded 10% of shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021.
To the extent we are unable to obtain sufficient liquidity through core deposits, we may meet our liquidity needs through sources of wholesale funding, asset securitization or sale. Sources of wholesale funding include other domestic deposits of $250,000 or more, negotiable CDs, brokered and other deposits, short-term borrowings, and long-term debt. Our wholesale funding for both the Bank and parent company totaled $11.3 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $12.8 billion at December 31, 2020. The decrease from the prior year-end primarily relates to a decrease in long-term debt.
74 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
The Bank may issue long-term debt pursuant to an authorization from the Bank’s board of directors that allows for the periodic issuance of senior and/or subordinated debt securities with fixed or floating interest rates. The aggregate principal amount of the debt securities available for issuance is capped by the board authorization and is reviewed periodically for adjustment.
At December 31, 2021, we believe the Bank has sufficient liquidity and capital resources to meet its cash flow obligations over the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future.
The following table reflects the composition and maturities of the loan and lease portfolio:
The following table reflects the loans and leases due after one year:
Parent Company Liquidity
The parent company’s funding requirements consist primarily of dividends to shareholders, debt service, income taxes, operating expenses, funding of nonbank subsidiaries, repurchases of our stock, and acquisitions. The parent company obtains funding to meet obligations from dividends and interest received from the Bank, interest and dividends received from direct subsidiaries, net taxes collected from subsidiaries included in the federal consolidated tax return, fees for services provided to subsidiaries, and the issuance of debt securities.
2021 Form 10-K 75
During the 2021 first quarter, Huntington issued $500 million of Series H Preferred Stock. On June 9, 2021, each share of TCF’s Series C Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock was converted into a share of Series I Preferred Stock of Huntington having substantially the same terms as TCF’s preferred stock. See Note 13 - “Shareholders’ Equity” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the parent company had $2.8 billion and $4.5 billion, respectively, in cash and cash equivalents.
On January 19, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly common stock cash dividend of $0.155 per common share. The dividend is payable on April 1, 2022, to shareholders of record on March 18, 2022. Based on the current quarterly dividend of $0.155 per common share, cash demands required for common stock dividends are estimated to be approximately $223 million per quarter. On January 19, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly Series B, Series E, Series F, Series G and Series H Preferred Stock dividend payable on April 15, 2022 to shareholders of record on April 1, 2022. On December 9, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend for the Series I Preferred Stock payable on March 1, 2022 to shareholders of record on February 15, 2022. Total cash demands required for Series B, Series E, Series F, Series G, Series H and Series I Preferred Stock are expected to be approximately $28 million per quarter.
During 2021, the Bank paid preferred and common dividends to the parent company of $45 million and $1.3 billion, respectively. To meet any additional liquidity needs, the parent company may issue debt or equity securities. To support the parent company’s ability to issue debt or equity securities, we have filed with the SEC an automatic shelf registration statement covering an indeterminate amount or number of securities to be offered or sold from time to time as authorized by the Huntington’s Board of Directors.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into various off-balance sheet arrangements. These arrangements include commitments to extend credit, interest rate swaps, caps and floors, financial guarantees contained in standby letters-of-credit issued by the Bank, and commitments by the Bank to sell mortgage loans.
COMMITMENTS TO EXTEND CREDIT
Commitments to extend credit generally have fixed expiration dates, are variable-rate, and contain clauses that permit Huntington to terminate or otherwise renegotiate the contracts in the event of a significant deterioration in the customer’s credit quality. These arrangements normally require the payment of a fee by the customer, the pricing of which is based on prevailing market conditions, credit quality, probability of funding, and other relevant factors. Since many of these commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the contract amounts are not necessarily indicative of future cash requirements. The interest rate risk arising from these financial instruments is insignificant as a result of their predominantly short-term, variable-rate nature. See Note 22 - “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
STANDBY LETTERS-OF-CREDIT
Standby letters-of-credit are conditional commitments issued to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third-party. These guarantees are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements, including commercial paper, bond financing, and similar transactions. Most of these arrangements mature within two years and are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Standby letters-of-credit are included in the determination of the amount of risk-based capital that the parent company and the Bank are required to hold. Through our credit process, we monitor the credit risks of outstanding standby letters-of-credit. When it is probable that a standby letter-of-credit will be drawn and not repaid in full, a loss is recognized in the provision for credit losses. See Note 22 - “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
COMMITMENTS TO SELL LOANS
Activity related to our mortgage origination activity supports the hedging of the mortgage pricing commitments to customers and the secondary sale to third parties. In addition, we have commitments to sell residential real estate loans. These contracts mature in less than one year. See Note 22 - “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
76 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Contractual obligations, including off-balance sheet arrangements are properly considered in our liquidity risk management process. At December 31, 2021, we believe the Company has sufficient liquidity and capital resources to meet its cash flow obligations over the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future.
(1)Amounts do not include associated interest payments.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of loss due to human error, third-party performance failures, inadequate or failed internal systems and controls, including the use of financial or other quantitative methodologies that may not adequately predict future results; violations of, or noncompliance with, laws, rules, regulations, prescribed practices, or ethical standards; and external influences such as market conditions, fraudulent activities, disasters, failed business contingency plans, and security risks. We continuously strive to strengthen our system of internal controls to ensure compliance with significant contracts, agreements, laws, rules, and regulations, and to improve the oversight of our operational risk.
We actively monitor cyberattacks such as attempts related to online deception and loss of sensitive customer data. We evaluate internal systems, processes and controls to mitigate loss from cyber-attacks and, to date, have not experienced any material losses. Cybersecurity threats have increased, primarily through phishing campaigns. We are actively monitoring our email gateways for malicious phishing email campaigns. We have also increased our cybersecurity and fraud monitoring activities through the implementation of specific monitoring of remote connections by geography and volume of connections to detect anomalous remote logins, since a significant portion of our workforce is now working remotely.
Our objective for managing cyber security risk is to avoid or minimize the impacts of external threat events or other efforts to penetrate our systems. We work to achieve this objective by hardening networks and systems against attack, and by diligently managing visibility and monitoring controls within our data and communications environment to recognize events and respond before the attacker has the opportunity to plan and execute on its own goals. To this end we employ a set of defense in-depth strategies, which include efforts to make us less attractive as a target and less vulnerable to threats, while investing in threat analytic capabilities for rapid detection and response. Potential concerns related to cyber security may be escalated to our board-level Technology Committee, as appropriate. As a complement to the overall cyber security risk management, we use a number of internal training methods, both formally through mandatory courses and informally through written communications and other updates. Internal policies and procedures have been implemented to encourage the reporting of potential phishing attacks or other security risks. We also use third-party services to test the effectiveness of our cyber security risk management framework, and any such third parties are required to comply with our policies regarding information security and confidentiality.
2021 Form 10-K 77
To mitigate operational risks, we have an Operational Risk Committee, a Legal, Regulatory, and Compliance Committee, a Funds Movement Committee, and a Third Party Risk Management Committee. The responsibilities of these committees, among other duties, include establishing and maintaining management information systems to monitor material risks and to identify potential concerns, risks, or trends that may have a significant impact and ensuring that recommendations are developed to address the identified issues. In addition, we have a Model Risk Oversight Committee that is responsible for policies and procedures describing how model risk is evaluated and managed and the application of the governance process to implement these practices throughout the enterprise. These committees report any significant findings and remediation recommendations to the Risk Management Committee. Potential concerns may be escalated to our ROC and our Audit Committee, as appropriate. Significant findings or issues are escalated by the Third Party Risk Management Committee to the Technology Committee of the Board, as appropriate.
The goal of this framework is to implement effective operational risk-monitoring; minimize operational, fraud, and legal losses; minimize the impact of inadequately designed models and enhance our overall performance.
Compliance Risk
Financial institutions are subject to many laws, rules, and regulations at both the federal and state levels. These broad-based laws, rules, and regulations include, but are not limited to, expectations relating to anti-money laundering, lending limits, client privacy, fair lending, prohibitions against unfair, deceptive or abusive acts or practices, protections for military members as they enter active duty, and community reinvestment. The volume and complexity of recent regulatory changes have increased our overall compliance risk. As such, we utilize various resources to help ensure expectations are met, including a team of compliance experts dedicated to ensuring our conformance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our colleagues receive training for several broad-based laws and regulations including, but not limited to, anti-money laundering and customer privacy. Additionally, colleagues engaged in lending activities receive training for laws and regulations related to flood disaster protection, equal credit opportunity, fair lending, and/or other courses related to the extension of credit. We set a high standard of expectation for adherence to compliance management and seek to continuously enhance our performance.
Capital
(This section should be read in conjunction with the “Regulatory Matters” section included in Part I, Item 1: Business and Note 23 - “Other Regulatory Matters” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.)
Both regulatory capital and shareholders’ equity are managed at the Bank and on a consolidated basis. We have an active program for managing capital and maintain a comprehensive process for assessing the Company’s overall capital adequacy. We believe our current levels of both regulatory capital and shareholders’ equity are adequate.
The U.S. federal banking regulatory agencies have permitted BHCs and banks to phase-in, for regulatory capital purposes, the day-one impact of the CECL accounting rule on retained earnings over a period of three years. As part of its response to the impact of COVID-19, the U.S. federal banking regulatory agencies issued a final rule that provides the option to temporarily delay certain effects of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. The final rule allows BHCs and banks to delay for two years 100% of the day-one impact of adopting CECL and 25% of the cumulative change in the reported allowance for credit losses since adopting CECL. The cumulative impact of the two-year delay will be phased-in over the three-year transition period. We have elected to adopt the final rule, which is reflected in the regulatory capital data presented below.
Regulatory Capital
We are subject to the Basel III capital requirements including the standardized approach for calculating risk-weighted assets in accordance with subpart D of the final capital rule. The following table presents risk-weighted assets and other financial data necessary to calculate certain financial ratios, including CET1, which we use to measure capital adequacy.
78 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
(1)Reflects Huntington's election of a five-year transition of CECL on regulatory capital. The CECL transitional amount includes the impact of Huntington's adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020 and 25% of the cumulative change in the reported allowance for credit losses since adopting CECL, excluding the allowance established at acquisition for purchased credit deteriorated loans.
(1)Deferred tax liability related to other intangible assets is calculated at a 21% tax rate.
2021 Form 10-K 79
The following table presents certain regulatory capital data at both the consolidated and Bank levels for each of the periods presented:
(1) Capital ratios reflect Huntington's election of a five-year transition of CECL on regulatory capital. The CECL transition amount includes the impact of Huntington’s adoption of the new CECL accounting standards on January 1, 2020 and 25% for the cumulative change in the reported ACL since adopting CECL, excluding the allowance established at acquisition for purchased credit deteriorated loans.
At December 31, 2021, we maintained Basel III capital ratios in excess of the well-capitalized standards established by the FRB. The decrease in regulatory capital ratios was driven by the repurchase of $650 million of common stock during 2021 and cash dividends, partially offset by earnings. The balance sheet growth as a result of the TCF acquisition was largely offset by the common stock issued related to the acquisition, net of goodwill and other intangibles, as both are deducted from capital in the ratio calculation. The change in regulatory Tier 1 risk-based capital and total risk-based capital ratios for 2021 also reflect the issuance of $500 million of Series H preferred stock and the issuance of $175 million of Series I preferred stock resulting from the conversion of TCF preferred stock, partially offset by the redemption of $600 million of Series D preferred stock and $100 million of Series C preferred stock. Additionally, the total risk-based capital ratio reflects the issuance of $558 million of subordinated notes in 2021.
Shareholders’ Equity
We generate shareholders’ equity primarily through the retention of earnings, net of dividends and share repurchases. Other potential sources of shareholders’ equity include issuances of common and preferred stock. Our objective is to maintain capital at an amount commensurate with our risk appetite and risk tolerance objectives, to meet both regulatory and market expectations, and to provide the flexibility needed for future growth and business opportunities.
Shareholders’ equity totaled $19.3 billion at December 31, 2021 an increase of $6.3 billion or 49% when compared with December 31, 2020, primarily due to the $7.2 billion of equity issued in conjunction with the acquisition of TCF.
On February 2, 2021, Huntington issued $500 million of preferred stock. Huntington issued 20,000,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/40th ownership interest in a share of 4.50% Series H Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock (Preferred H Stock), par value $0.01 per share, with a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share).
80 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
On June 9, 2021, each share of TCF Financial Corporation 5.70% Series C Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock outstanding immediately prior to acquisition of TCF Financial Corporation was converted into the right to receive a share of the newly created Huntington 5.70% Series I Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share.
On July 15, 2021, all 24,000,000 outstanding depositary shares, each representing 1/40th interest in a share of Huntington’s 6.250% Series D Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, were redeemed.
On October 15, 2021, all 4,000,000 outstanding depositary shares, each representing a 1/40th interest in a share of Huntington’s 5.875% Series C Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, were redeemed.
We were notified by the FRB on August 5, 2021 that Huntington’s SCB requirement would be unchanged at 2.5%, which is the minimum under the SCB framework. Huntington is authorized to make capital distributions that are consistent with the requirements in the FRB's capital rule, inclusive of the 2.5% SCB requirement.
Dividends
We consider disciplined capital management as a key objective, with dividends representing one component. Our strong capital positions us to take advantage of additional capital management opportunities.
Share Repurchases
From time to time the Board of Directors authorizes the Company to repurchase shares of our common stock. Although we announce when our Board authorizes share repurchases, we typically do not give any public notice before we repurchase our shares. Future stock repurchases may be private or open-market repurchases, including block transactions, accelerated or delayed block transactions, forward transactions, and similar transactions. Various factors determine the amount and timing of our share repurchases, including our capital requirements, the number of shares we expect to issue for employee benefit plans and acquisitions, market conditions (including the trading price of our stock), and regulatory and legal considerations.
On July 21, 2021, our Board authorized the repurchase of up to $800 million of common shares within the four quarter period from the third quarter of 2021 through the second quarter of 2022. Purchases of common stock under the authorization may include open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, and accelerated share repurchase programs. During the 2021, Huntington repurchased a total of $650 million of common stock, representing 43.1 million common shares, at a weighted average price of $15.07.
BUSINESS SEGMENT DISCUSSION
Overview
Our business segments are based on our internally-aligned segment leadership structure, which is how we monitor results and assess performance. We have four major business segments: Commercial Banking, Consumer and Business Banking, Vehicle Finance, and Regional Banking and The Huntington Private Client Group (RBHPCG). The Treasury / Other function includes technology and operations, other unallocated assets, liabilities, revenue, and expense.
Business segment results are determined based upon our management practices, which assigns balance sheet and income statement items to each of the business segments. The process is designed around our organizational and management structure and, accordingly, the results derived are not necessarily comparable with similar information published by other financial institutions.
For a discussion of business segment trends for 2020 versus 2019, see “Part II, Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” Business Segment Discussion included in our 2020 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
2021 Form 10-K 81
Revenue Sharing
Revenue is recorded in the business segment responsible for the related product or service. Fee sharing is recorded to allocate portions of such revenue to other business segments involved in selling to, or providing service to customers. Results of operations for the business segments reflect these fee sharing allocations.
Expense Allocation
The management process that develops the business segment reporting utilizes various estimates and allocation methodologies to measure the performance of the business segments. Expenses are allocated to business segments using a two-phase approach. The first phase consists of measuring and assigning unit costs (activity-based costs) to activities related to product origination and servicing. These activity-based costs are then extended, based on volumes, with the resulting amount allocated to business segments that own the related products. The second phase consists of the allocation of overhead costs to all four business segments from Treasury / Other. We utilize a full-allocation methodology, where all Treasury / Other expenses, except reported acquisition-related expenses, if any, and a small amount of other residual unallocated expenses, are allocated to the four business segments.
Funds Transfer Pricing (FTP)
We use an active and centralized FTP methodology to attribute appropriate net interest income to the business segments. The intent of the FTP methodology is to transfer interest rate risk from the business segments by providing matched duration funding of assets and liabilities. The result is to centralize the financial impact, management, and reporting of interest rate risk in the Treasury / Other function where it can be centrally monitored and managed. The Treasury / Other function charges (credits) an internal cost of funds for assets held in (or pays for funding provided by) each business segment. The FTP rate is based on prevailing market interest rates for comparable duration assets (or liabilities).
Net Income (Loss) by Business Segment
Net income (loss) by business segment for the past three years is presented in the following table:
82 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Commercial Banking reported net income of $798 million in 2021, an increase of $720 million, compared to the year ago period. Segment net interest income increased $381 million, or 42%, primarily due to an increase in average loans and leases reflecting the impact of the TCF acquisition and an 11 basis point increase in net interest margin driven by an increase in loan spread inclusive of purchase accounting accretion, partially offset by the continued decline in the benefit of deposits. The provision for credit losses decreased $622 million, or 99%, primarily due to changes in the forecasted economic outlook compared to the year-ago period, partially offset by the TCF acquisition initial provision for credit losses. Noninterest income increased $159 million, or 44%, reflecting the impact of the TCF acquisition, purchase accounting accretion from acquired unfunded loan commitments, an increase in capital markets fees reflecting an increase in market activity and improvement in business conditions, increased mezzanine investment income and an increase in leasing revenue reflecting higher gains on terminations and sales. Noninterest expense increased $249 million, or 46%, primarily due to personnel expense and lease financing equipment depreciation as a result of the TCF acquisition.
.
2021 Form 10-K 83
Consumer and Business Banking, including Home Lending, reported net income of $308 million in 2021, an increase of $38 million, or 14%, compared with net income of $270 million in 2020. Segment net interest income increased $231 million, or 16%, primarily due to an increase in average loans and leases reflecting the impact of the TCF acquisition and PPP revenue, partially offset by a 46 basis point decrease in net interest margin driven by a decrease in loan margin and the continued decline in the benefit of deposits. The provision for credit losses decreased $174 million, or 66%, primarily due to changes in the forecasted economic outlook compared to the year-ago period, partially offset by the TCF acquisition initial provision for credit losses. Noninterest income increased $100 million, or 11%, primarily due to higher interchange income and service charge income resulting from the TCF acquisition in addition to reduced customer activity and fee-waivers as a result of the pandemic in the beginning of the prior year period and a gain from branch divestiture, partially offset by decreased mortgage banking income. Noninterest expense increased $457 million, or 26%, primarily due to the impact of the TCF acquisition, in addition to increased allocated expense and personnel costs due to higher levels of production and origination volume.
Home Lending, an operating unit of Consumer and Business Banking, reflects the result of the origination, sale, and servicing of mortgage loans less referral fees and net interest income for mortgage banking products distributed by the retail branch network and other business segments. Home Lending reported net income of $3 million in 2021, compared with $78 million in the prior year. Noninterest income decreased $93 million, driven primarily by decreased spreads on salable originations, partially offset by higher salable originations. Noninterest expense increased $42 million due primarily to higher personnel expense as a result of the TCF acquisition and higher origination volumes.
Vehicle Finance reported net income of $319 million in 2021, an increase of $199 million, or 166%, compared with net income of $120 million in 2020. Segment net interest income increased $38 million or 9%, primarily due to an 18 basis point increase in the net interest margin. The provision for credit losses decreased $232 million to a benefit of $86 million, primarily due to strong credit performance and improvement in the economic outlook as compared to the year ago period. Noninterest income increased $4 million, or 44%, primarily due to increases in fee income from commercial relationships. Noninterest expense increased $22 million, or 16%, primarily attributable to higher production related costs.
84 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
eop-End of Period.
RBHPCG reported net income of $55 million in 2021, a decrease of $30 million, or 35%, compared with a net income of $85 million in 2020. Segment net interest income decreased $1 million, or 1%, due to a 46 basis point decrease in net interest margin, largely driven by lower benefit in deposit spreads, partially offset by an increase in average loans and leases. Average loans and leases increased $625 million, or 10%, primarily due to an increase in residential real estate mortgage loans and the impact of the TCF acquisition. Average deposits increased $1.7 billion, or 25%, primarily related to higher customer liquidity levels and the impact of the acquired TCF deposit portfolio. Noninterest income increased $26 million, or 13%, reflecting higher sales production and overall market performance, and the impact of the TCF acquisition. 2020 included the sale of Retirement Plan Services recordkeeping and administrative services. Total assets under management increased 27% due to positive net asset flows, equity markets, and the impact of the TCF acquisition. Noninterest expense increased $57 million, or 23%, primarily due to the impact of the TCF acquisition and higher production related costs.
Treasury / Other
The Treasury / Other function includes revenue and expense related to assets, liabilities, derivatives (including the mark-to-market of interest rate caps), and equity not directly assigned or allocated to one of the four business segments. Assets include investment securities and bank owned life insurance.
Net interest income includes the impact of administering our investment securities portfolios, the net impact of derivatives used to hedge interest rate sensitivity as well as the financial impact associated with our FTP methodology, as described above. Noninterest income includes miscellaneous fee income not allocated to other business segments, such as bank owned life insurance income and securities and trading asset gains or losses. Noninterest expense includes certain corporate administrative, acquisition-related expenses, if any, and other miscellaneous expenses not allocated to other business segments. The provision for income taxes for the business segments is calculated at a statutory 21% tax rate, although our overall effective tax rate is lower.
2021 Form 10-K 85
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, including MD&A, contains certain forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, certain plans, expectations, goals, projections, and statements, which are not historical facts and are subject to numerous assumptions, risks, and uncertainties. Statements that do not describe historical or current facts, including statements about beliefs and expectations, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements may be identified by words such as expect, anticipate, believe, intend, estimate, plan, target, goal, or similar expressions, or future or conditional verbs such as will, may, might, should, would, could, or similar variations. The forward-looking statements are intended to be subject to the safe harbor provided by Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
While there is no assurance that any list of risks and uncertainties or risk factors is complete, below are certain factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained or implied in the forward-looking statements: changes in general economic, political, or industry conditions; the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and related variants and mutations and their impact on the global economy and financial market conditions and our business, results of operations, and financial condition; uncertainty in U.S. fiscal and monetary policy, including the interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve Board; volatility and disruptions in global capital and credit markets; movements in interest rates; reform of LIBOR; competitive pressures on product pricing and services; success, impact, and timing of our business strategies, including market acceptance of any new products or services including those implementing our “Fair Play” banking philosophy; the nature, extent, timing, and results of governmental actions, examinations, reviews, reforms, regulations, and interpretations, including those related to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the Basel III regulatory capital reforms, as well as those involving the OCC, Federal Reserve, FDIC, and CFPB; the possibility that the anticipated benefits of the transaction with TCF are not realized when expected or at all, including as a result of the impact of, or problems arising from, the integration of the two companies or as a result of the strength of the economy and competitive factors in the areas where Huntington does business; and other factors that may affect the future results of Huntington.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made and are based on information available at that time. Huntington does not assume any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect circumstances or events that occur after the date the forward-looking statements were made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events except as required by federal securities laws. As forward-looking statements involve significant risks and uncertainties, caution should be exercised against placing undue reliance on such statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This document contains GAAP financial measures and non-GAAP financial measures where management believes it to be helpful in understanding our results of operations or financial position. Where non-GAAP financial measures are used, the comparable GAAP financial measure, as well as the reconciliation to the comparable GAAP financial measure, can be found herein.
Fully-Taxable Equivalent Basis
Interest income, yields, and ratios on a FTE basis are considered non-GAAP financial measures. Management believes net interest income on a FTE basis provides an insightful picture of the interest margin for comparison purposes. The FTE basis also allows management to assess the comparability of revenue arising from both taxable and tax-exempt sources. The FTE basis assumes a federal statutory tax rate of 21 percent. We encourage readers to consider the Consolidated Financial Statements and other financial information contained in this Form 10-K in their entirety, and not to rely on any single financial measure.
86 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Non-Regulatory Capital Ratios
In addition to capital ratios defined by banking regulators, the Company considers various other measures when evaluating capital utilization and adequacy, including:
•Tangible common equity to tangible assets,
•Tangible equity to tangible assets, and
•Tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets using Basel III definitions.
These non-regulatory capital ratios are viewed by management as useful additional methods of reflecting the level of capital available to withstand unexpected market conditions. Additionally, presentation of these ratios allows readers to compare our capitalization to other financial services companies. These ratios differ from capital ratios defined by banking regulators principally in that the numerator excludes goodwill and other intangible assets, the nature and extent of which varies among different financial services companies. These ratios are not defined in GAAP or federal banking regulations. As a result, these non-regulatory capital ratios disclosed by the Company are considered non-GAAP financial measures.
Because there are no standardized definitions for these non-regulatory capital ratios, the Company’s calculation methods may differ from those used by other financial services companies. Also, there may be limits in the usefulness of these measures to investors. As a result, we encourage readers to consider the Consolidated Financial Statements and other financial information contained in this Form 10-K in their entirety, and not to rely on any single financial measure.
Risk Factors
More information on risk is discussed in the Risk Factors section included in Item 1A: “Risk Factors” of this report. Additional information regarding risk factors can also be found in the Risk Management and Capital discussion of this report, as well as the “Regulatory Matters” section included in Item 1 : Business of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Significant Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to establish accounting policies and make estimates that affect amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Note 1 - “Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated by reference into this MD&A, describes the significant accounting policies we used in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
An accounting estimate requires assumptions and judgments about uncertain matters that could have a material effect on the Consolidated Financial Statements. Estimates are made under facts and circumstances at a point in time, and changes in those facts and circumstances could produce results substantially different from those estimates. Our most significant accounting policies and estimates and their related application are discussed below.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Our ACL at December 31, 2021 represents our current estimate of the lifetime credit losses expected from our loan and lease portfolio and our unfunded lending commitments. Management estimates the ACL by projecting probability of default, loss given default and exposure at default conditional on economic parameters, for the remaining contractual term. Internal factors that impact the quarterly allowance estimate include the level of outstanding balances, the portfolio performance and assigned risk ratings.
One of the most significant judgments influencing the ACL estimate is the macroeconomic forecasts. Key external economic parameters that directly impact our loss modeling framework include forecasted unemployment rates and Gross Domestic Product. Changes in the economic forecasts could significantly affect the estimated credit losses which could potentially lead to materially different allowance levels from one reporting period to the next.
Given the dynamic relationship between macroeconomic variables within our modeling framework, it is difficult to estimate the impact of a change in any one individual variable on the allowance. As a result, management uses a probability-weighted approach that incorporates a baseline, an adverse and a more favorable economic scenario when formulating the quantitative estimate.
2021 Form 10-K 87
However, to illustrate a hypothetical sensitivity analysis, management calculated a quantitative allowance using a 100% weighting applied to an adverse scenario. This scenario includes assumptions around increased COVID-19 morbidity and mortality rates. Additionally, consumer confidence declines with the resulting drop in consumer spending sending the economy back into recession in the first quarter of 2022. Under this scenario, as an example, the unemployment rate increases and remains elevated for a prolonged period, the rate is estimated at 8.7% and 7.1% at the end of 2022 and 2023, respectively. These numbers result in unemployment rates that are approximately 5.2% and 3.6% higher than baseline scenario projections of 3.5% and 3.5%, respectively for the same time periods.
To demonstrate the sensitivity to key economic parameters used in the calculation of our ACL at December 31, 2021, management calculated the difference between our quantitative ACL and a 100% adverse scenario. Excluding consideration of general reserve adjustments, this sensitivity analysis would result in a hypothetical increase in our ACL of approximately $1.2 billion at December 31, 2021.
The resulting difference is not intended to represent an expected increase in allowance levels for a number of reasons including the following:
•Management uses a weighted approach applied to multiple economic scenarios for its allowance estimation process;
•The highly uncertain economic environment;
•The difficulty in predicting the inter-relationships between the economic parameters used in the various economic scenarios; and
•The sensitivity estimate does not account for our general reserve and associated risk profile components incorporated by management as part of its overall allowance framework.
We regularly review our ACL for appropriateness by performing on-going evaluations of the loan and lease portfolio. In doing so, we consider factors such as the differing economic risks associated with each loan category, the financial condition of specific borrowers, the level of delinquent loans, the value of any collateral and, where applicable, the existence of any guarantees or other documented support. We also evaluate the impact of changes in key economic parameters and overall economic conditions on the ability of borrowers to meet their financial obligations when quantifying our exposure to credit losses and assessing the appropriateness of our ACL at each reporting date. There is no certainty that our ACL will be appropriate over time to cover losses in our portfolio as economic and market conditions may ultimately differ from our reasonable and supportable forecast. Additionally, events adversely affecting specific customers, industries, or our markets, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic, could severely impact our current expectations. If the credit quality of our customer base materially deteriorates or the risk profile of a market, industry, or group of customers changes materially, our net income and capital could be materially adversely affected which, in turn, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. The extent to which the current COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact our businesses, financial condition, liquidity and results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be forecasted with precision at this time. For more information, see Note 5 - ”Loans / Leases” and Note 6 - “Allowance for Credit Losses” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Acquisition Method of Accounting
The acquisition method of accounting requires that acquired assets and liabilities in a business combination are recorded at their fair values as of the date of acquisition. This method often involves estimates based on third party valuations or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques, all of which are inherently subjective. Acquisition-related restructuring costs are expensed as incurred. The acquisition method of accounting does allow for a measurement period to make adjustments to acquisition accounting for up to one year after the acquisition date, for new information that existed at the acquisition date but may not have been known or available at that time. For more information, see Note 3 - “Acquisition of TCF Financial Corporation” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
88 Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
Fair Value Measurement
Certain assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis, including securities and derivative instruments. Assets and liabilities carried at fair value inherently include subjectivity and may require the use of significant assumptions, adjustments and judgment including, among others, discount rates, rates of return on assets, cash flows, default rates, loss rates, terminal values and liquidation values. A significant change in assumptions may result in a significant change in fair value, which in turn, may result in a higher degree of financial statement volatility and could result in significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition or disclosures of fair value information.
In addition to the above mentioned on-going fair value measurements, fair value is also used for recording business combinations and measuring other non-recurring financial assets and liabilities. At June 9, 2021, approximately $46 billion of our assets and $43 billion of our liabilities were recorded at fair value as a result of applying the acquisition method of accounting.
The fair value hierarchy requires use of observable inputs first and subsequently unobservable inputs when observable inputs are not available. Our fair value measurements involve various valuation techniques and models, which involve inputs that are observable (Level 1 or Level 2 in fair value hierarchy), when available. The level of judgment required to determine fair value is dependent on the methods or techniques used in the process. Assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value using quoted prices in active markets (Level 1) do not require significant judgment while the valuation of assets and liabilities when quoted market prices are not available (Levels 2 and 3) may require significant judgment to assess whether observable or unobservable inputs for those assets and liabilities provide reasonable determination of fair value. The fair values measured at each level of the fair value hierarchy, additional discussion regarding fair value measurements, and a brief description of how fair value is determined for categories that have unobservable inputs, can be found in Note 19 - “Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Acquisitions typically result in goodwill, the amount by which the cost of net assets acquired in a business combination exceeds their fair value, which is subject to impairment testing at least annually. The amortization of identified intangible assets recognized in a business combination is based upon the estimated economic benefits to be received over their economic life, which is also subjective. Customer attrition rates that are based on historical experience are used to determine the estimated economic life of certain intangibles assets, including but not limited to, customer deposit intangibles.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Developments
Note 2 - “Accounting Standards Update” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements discusses new accounting pronouncements adopted during 2021 and the expected impact of accounting pronouncements recently issued but not yet required to be adopted. To the extent the adoption of new accounting standards materially affect financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity, the impacts are discussed in the applicable section of this MD&A and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.