Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical financial statements and related notes thereto and the other disclosures contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis focuses on our financial results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and year-to-year comparisons between these years. A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7 "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company's consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities (if any). Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the Company's customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Sales taxes are excluded from revenue. At contract inception, the Company assesses the goods and services promised in its contracts with customers and identifies a performance obligation for each promised good or service that is distinct. The Company has elected to account for shipping and handling activities performed after a customer obtains control of the goods as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the goods, and therefore these activities are not assessed as a separate service to customers. The amount of revenue recognized varies primarily with price concessions and changes in returns. The Company offers price concessions to our customers for incentive offerings, special pricing agreements, price competition, promotions or other volume-based arrangements. We determine whether price concessions offered to our customers are a reduction of the transaction price and revenue or are advertising expense, depending on whether we receive a distinct good or service from our customers and, if so, whether we can reasonably estimate the fair value of that distinct good or service. We evaluated such agreements with our customers and determined they should be accounted for as variable consideration.
To estimate variable consideration, the Company applies both the expected value method and most likely amount method based on the form of variable consideration, according to which method would provide the better prediction. The expected value method involves a probability weighted determination of the expected amount, whereas the most likely amount method identifies the single most likely outcome in a range of possible amounts.
The Company monitors its estimates of variable consideration, which includes returns and price concessions, and periodically makes adjustments to the carrying amounts as appropriate. During 2021, there were no material adjustments to the aforesaid estimates and the Company's past results of operations have not been materially affected by a change in these estimates. Although there can be no assurances, the Company is not aware of any circumstances that would be reasonably likely to materially change these estimates in the future.
Retirement Benefit Plans: The Company maintains two defined benefit pension plans that provide benefits based on years of service and average compensation during certain periods. The Company's policy is to periodically make contributions to fund the defined benefit pension plans within the range allowed by applicable regulations. The defined benefit pension plan assets consist primarily of publicly traded stocks and government and corporate bonds. There is no guarantee the actual return on the plans’ assets will equal the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets or that the plans will not incur investment losses.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
The expected long-term rate of return on defined benefit plan assets reflects management’s expectations of long-term rates of return on funds invested to provide for benefits included in the projected benefit obligations. In establishing the expected long-term rate of return assumption for plan assets, the Company considers the historical rates of return over a period of time that is consistent with the long-term nature of the underlying obligations of these plans as well as a forward-looking rate of return. The historical and forward-looking rates of return for each of the asset classes used to determine the Company's estimated rate of return assumption are based upon the rates of return earned or expected to be earned by investments in the equivalent benchmark market indices for each of the asset classes.
Expected returns for the U.S. pension plan are based on a calculated market-related value for U.S. pension plan assets. Under this methodology, asset gains and losses resulting from actual returns that differ from the Company's expected returns which are recognized ratably in the market-related value of assets over three years. Expected returns for the non-U.S. pension plan are based on fair market value for non-U.S. pension plan assets.
The basis for the selection of the discount rate for each plan is determined by matching the timing of the payment of the expected obligations under the defined benefit plans against the corresponding yield of high-quality corporate bonds of equivalent maturities.
Changes to the estimate of any of these factors could result in a material change to the Company's pension obligation causing a related increase or decrease in reported net operating results in the period of change in the estimate. Because the 2021 assumptions are used to calculate 2022 pension expense amounts, a one percentage-point change in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a change in pension expense for 2022 of approximately $0.4 million for the plans. A one percentage-point change in the discount rate would result in a change in pension expense for 2022 by less than $0.1 million. A one percentage-point increase in the discount rate would have lowered the plans’ projected benefit obligation as of the end of 2021 by approximately $1.5 million; while a one percentage-point decrease in the discount rate would have raised the plans’ projected benefit obligation as of the end of 2021 by approximately $1.7 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The results of operations for Hamilton Beach Holding were as follows for the years ended December 31:
2021 Compared with 2020
Effective income tax rate on continuing operations 26.4 % 28.7 %
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
The following table identifies the components of the change in revenue for 2021 compared with 2020:
Revenue - Revenue increased $54.7 million, or 9.1%. The Company had higher sales in the North American consumer market, driven by continued strong demand in the US and Latin American markets and an increase in average sales price, a result of the previously announced price increases that were implemented during the back half of 2021. Revenue in the Global Commercial market increased $10.9 million compared to prior year as the market rebounded from the pandemic-related demand softness in the prior year. Ecommerce revenue represents 37.5% of total sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 and increased 22.4% compared to 2020.
Gross profit - Gross profit margin decreased to 20.7% from 23.0% due to significantly higher transportation costs, as a result of the disruption and congestion in the supply chain. These costs were not fully offset by the price increases implemented by the Company during the second half of 2021. Additionally, gross profit in 2020 includes a benefit of approximately $2.1 million for tariff relief.
Selling, general and administrative expenses - Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $4.8 million, driven primarily by $2.9 million of incremental expenses incurred during the relocation of the Company's distribution center, an increase in employee-related costs, and a full year of depreciation expense for ERP-related capitalized software compared to six months of expense in the prior year. Included in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 is $1.9 million of charges to write-off unrealizable assets created as a result of the unauthorized transactions at our Mexico subsidiary identified during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 which resulted in a restatement filed on Form 10-K/A for the year ended December 31, 2019, offset by a net $1.0 million reduction to the accruals for litigation and environmental reserves.
Other expense (income), net - Other expense (income), net in 2021 includes currency losses of $0.6 million in the current year compared to currency losses of $1.7 million in 2020.
Income tax expense - The effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was 26.4% and 28.7% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective tax rate was lower for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 due to an expense related to the loss on Kitchen Collections dissolution in the prior year that did not recur, the reversal of deferred taxes related to certain foreign items and a reduction in the current year valuation allowance, partially offset by state income taxes and non-deductible expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Hamilton Beach Brands Holding Company cash flows are provided by dividends paid or distributions made by its subsidiary. The only material assets held by it are the investment in its consolidated subsidiary. As a result, certain statutory limitations or regulatory or financing agreements could affect the levels of distributions allowed to be made by its subsidiary. Hamilton Beach Brands Holding Company has not guaranteed any of the obligations of its subsidiary.
HBB's principal sources of cash to fund liquidity needs are: (i) cash generated from operations and (ii) borrowings available under the revolving credit facility, as defined below. HBB's primary use of funds consists of working capital requirements, operating expenses, capital expenditures, and payments of principal and interest on debt. At December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents for continuing operations of $1.1 million, compared to $2.4 million at December 31, 2020.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
We believe we are well positioned to effectively navigate the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic for a number of reasons. Demand for certain retail small kitchen appliances in the U.S. remains strong as consumers prepare more food and beverages at home. We have implemented a number of mitigation strategies, including previously announced price increases, are managing discretionary expenses, and have sufficient availability under the revolving credit facility to meet our future anticipated obligations. We will continue to work with our customers, employees, suppliers and communities to address the impacts of COVID-19 and closely monitor our liquidity.
The following table presents selected cash flow information from continuing operations:
December 31, 2021 Compared with December 31, 2020
Operating activities - Net cash provided by operating activities was $17.9 million compared to cash used for operating activities of $27.9 million in 2020 primarily due to net working capital which was a use of cash of $1.5 million in 2021 compared to a use of cash of $66.9 million in 2020. In 2021, Trade receivables provided net cash of $27.6 million compared to a use of cash of $41.3 million in the prior year due to the timing of collections and increased fourth quarter sales in 2020 compared to 2021. This was partially offset by changes in other assets and other liabilities, primarily federal income taxes paid, payment of a previously accrued legal settlement and an increase in the net pension plan assets.
Investing activities - Net cash used for investing activities increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to capital spending for the Company's new distribution center leased facility, which is partially offset by $4.0 million in lease incentives and tenant improvement allowances classified as cash provided by operating activities.
Financing activities - Net cash used for financing activities was $7.3 million in 2021 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $34.2 million primarily due to a decrease in HBB's net borrowing activity on the revolving credit facility. Borrowings on the revolving credit facility are used to fund net working capital.
Capital Resources
On September 17, 2021, HBB entered into Amendment No. 10 to its Amended and Restated Credit Agreement by and among Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, the Lenders that are Parties thereto as the Lenders, Hamilton Beach Brands, Inc., as Parent and U.S. Borrower, and Hamilton Beach Brands Canada, Inc., as Canadian Borrower (the “Amendment”). Among other changes, the Amendment increased the credit facility from $125 million to $150 million, amended the pricing grid and increased the eligible inventory included in the borrowing base. Under the Amendment, dividends to Hamilton Beach Brands Holding Company are not to exceed $7.0 million during any calendar year to the extent that for the thirty days prior to the dividend payment date, and after giving effect to the dividend payment, HBB maintains excess availability of not less than $18.0 million. Dividends to Hamilton Beach Brands Holding Company are discretionary to the extent that for the thirty days prior to the dividend payment date, and after giving effect to the dividend payment, HBB maintains excess availability of not less than $30 million. In addition, the Amendment provides mechanics relating to the transition away from LIBOR as a benchmark interest rate and the replacement of LIBOR with a replacement or alternative benchmark interest rate.
The Company expects to continue to borrow against the facility and make voluntary repayments within the next twelve months. Repayment of the credit facility is due on June 30, 2025, therefore all borrowings are classified as long term debt as of December 31, 2021. The obligations under the HBB Facility are secured by substantially all of HBB's assets.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
At December 31, 2021, the borrowing base under the HBB Facility was $149.0 million and borrowings outstanding were $96.8 million. At December 31, 2021, the excess availability under the HBB Facility was $52.2 million.
The maximum availability under the HBB Facility is governed by a borrowing base derived from advance rates against eligible trade receivables, inventory and trademarks of the borrowers, as defined in the HBB Facility. Borrowings bear interest at a floating rate, which can be a base rate, LIBOR or bankers' acceptance rate, as defined in the HBB Facility, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margins, effective December 31, 2021, for base rate loans and LIBOR loans denominated in U.S. dollars were 0.00% and 1.75%, respectively. The applicable margins, effective December 31, 2021, for base rate loans and bankers' acceptance loans denominated in Canadian dollars were 0.00% and 1.75%, respectively. The HBB Facility also requires a fee of 0.25% per annum on the unused commitment. The margins and unused commitment fee under the HBB Facility are subject to quarterly adjustment based on average excess availability. The weighted average interest rate applicable to the HBB Facility for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 3.38%, including the floating rate margin and the effect of the interest rate swap agreements described below.
To reduce the exposure to changes in the market rate of interest, HBB has entered into interest rate swap agreements for a portion of the HBB Facility. Terms of the interest rate swap agreements require HBB to receive a variable interest rate and pay a fixed interest rate. HBB has interest rate swaps with notional values totaling $25.0 million at December 31, 2021 at an average fixed interest rate of 1.7%. HBB also entered into delayed-start interest rate swaps during the second and third quarter of 2021. These swaps have notional values totaling $75.0 million as of December 31, 2021, with an average fixed interest rate of 1.2%.
The HBB Facility includes restrictive covenants, which, among other things, limit the payment of dividends to Hamilton Beach Holding, subject to achieving availability thresholds. Under Amendment No. 10 to the HBB Facility, dividends to Hamilton Beach Holding are not to exceed $7.0 million during any calendar year to the extent that for the thirty days prior to the dividend payment date, and after giving effect to the dividend payment, HBB maintains excess availability of not less than $18.0 million. Dividends to Hamilton Beach Holding are discretionary to the extent that for the thirty days prior to the dividend payment date, and after giving effect to the dividend payment, HBB maintains excess availability of not less than $30.0 million. The HBB Facility also requires HBB to achieve a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio in certain circumstances, as defined in the HBB Facility. December 31, 2021, HBB was in compliance with all financial covenants in the HBB Facility.
The Company maintains an arrangement with a financial institution to sell certain U.S. trade receivables on a non-recourse basis. The Company utilizes this arrangement as an integral part of financing working capital.
HBB believes funds available from cash on hand, the HBB Facility and operating cash flows will provide sufficient liquidity to meet its operating needs and commitments arising during the next twelve months and until the expiration of the HBB Facility.
Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
Following is a table which summarizes the contractual obligations of Hamilton Beach Holding as of December 31, 2021:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
HBB’s variable interest payments are calculated based upon HBB's anticipated payment schedule and the December 31, 2021 base rate and applicable margins, as defined in the HBB Facility. A 1/8% increase in the base rate would increase HBB’s estimated total annual interest payments on the HBB Facility by approximately $0.1 million.
HBB's purchase and other obligations are primarily for accounts payable, open purchase orders and accrued payroll and incentive compensation.
An event of default, as defined in the HBB Facility and in HBB's operating lease agreements, could cause an acceleration of the payment schedule. No such event of default for HBB has occurred or is anticipated to occur.
Pension funding can vary significantly each year due to plan amendments, changes in the market value of plan assets, legislation and the Company’s decisions to contribute above the minimum regulatory funding requirements. As a result, pension funding has not been included in the table above. HBB does not expect to contribute to its pension plans in 2022. Pension benefit payments are made from assets of the pension plans.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has not entered into any off balance sheet financing arrangements, other than operating leases, which are disclosed in the contractual obligations table above.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS HAMILTON BEACH BRANDS HOLDING COMPANY
(Tabular Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share and Percentage Data)
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The statements contained in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not historical facts are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward looking statements are made subject to certain risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those presented. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. The Company undertakes no obligation to publicly revise these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the date hereof. Such risks and uncertainties include, without limitation: (1) the Company’s ability to source and ship products to meet anticipated demand, (2) the Company’s ability to successfully manage ongoing constraints throughout the global transportation supply chain, (3) the unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on the Company's business; (4) the direct and indirect impacts of the increasingly volatile global economic conditions as a result of the conflict in Ukraine; (5) changes in the sales prices, product mix or levels of consumer purchases of small electric and specialty housewares appliances, (6) changes in consumer retail and credit markets, including the increasing volume of transactions made through third-party internet sellers, (7) bankruptcy of or loss of major retail customers or suppliers, (8) changes in costs, including transportation costs, of sourced products, (9) delays in delivery of sourced products, (10) changes in or unavailability of quality or cost effective suppliers, (11) exchange rate fluctuations, changes in the import tariffs and monetary policies and other changes in the regulatory climate in the countries in which the Company buys, operates and/or sells products, (12) the impact of tariffs on customer purchasing patterns, (13) product liability, regulatory actions or other litigation, warranty claims or returns of products, (14) customer acceptance of, changes in costs of, or delays in the development of new products, (15) increased competition, including consolidation within the industry, (16) shifts in consumer shopping patterns, gasoline prices, weather conditions, the level of consumer confidence and disposable income as a result of economic conditions, unemployment rates or other events or conditions that may adversely affect the level of customer purchases of HBB products, (17) changes mandated by federal, state and other regulation, including tax, health, safety or environmental legislation, and (18) other risk factors, including those described in the Company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including, but not limited to, the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. Furthermore, the situation surrounding COVID-19, including the mutation of variants, remains fluid and the potential for a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and stock price increases the longer the virus impacts activity levels in the U.S. and globally. For this reason, the Company cannot reasonably estimate with any degree of certainty the future impact COVID-19 may have on its results of operations, financial position, liquidity and stock price. The extent of any impact will depend on the scope of any new virus mutations and outbreaks, the nature of government public health guidelines and the public’s adherence to those guidelines, the rate of individuals becoming fully vaccinated, the public's adherence to guidelines to receive booster shots, the success of business and economic recovery as the pandemic recedes, unemployment levels, the extent to which new shutdowns may be needed, the impact of any further government economic relief on the U.S. economy, consumer confidence and demand for the Company's products.