Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, or MD&A, contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our historical financial statements and related notes thereto and the other disclosures contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results of operations for the periods reflected herein are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for future periods, and our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those listed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This MD&A is a supplement to our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is provided to enhance your understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. Our MD&A is organized as follows:
•Overview. This section provides a general description of our Company and operating segments, business and industry trends, our key business strategies and background information on other matters discussed in this MD&A.
•2021 Highlights. This section discusses some of the highlights of our performance and activities during 2021.
•Consolidated Results of Operations and Operating Results by Business Segment. These sections provide our analysis and outlook for the significant line items in our Consolidated Statements of Income, as well as other information that we deem meaningful to an understanding of our results of operations on both a consolidated basis and a business segment basis.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides an analysis of trends and uncertainties affecting liquidity, cash requirements for our business, sources and uses of our cash and our financing arrangements.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section discusses the accounting policies that we consider important to the evaluation and reporting of our financial condition and results of operations, and whose application requires significant judgments or a complex estimation process.
•Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements. This section provides a summary of the most recent authoritative accounting pronouncements that were adopted during 2021 and that we will be required to adopt in a future period.
Overview
Our Company
Hanesbrands Inc. is a socially responsible leading marketer of everyday basic innerwear and activewear apparel in the Americas, Australasia, Europe and Asia under some of the world’s strongest apparel brands, including Hanes, Champion, Bonds, Bali, Maidenform, Playtex, Bras N Things, JMS/Just My Size, Alternative, Berlei, Wonderbra, Gear for Sports and Comfortwash. We design, manufacture, source and sell a broad range of basic apparel such as T-shirts, bras, panties, shapewear, underwear, socks and activewear produced in our low-cost global supply chain. Our brands hold either the number one or number two market position by units sold in many of the product categories and geographies in which we compete.
Our Segments
Our operations are managed and reported in three operating segments, each of which is a reportable segment for financial reporting purposes: Innerwear, Activewear and International. These segments are organized principally by product category and geographic location. Each segment has its own management team that is responsible for the operations of the segment’s businesses, but the segments share a common supply chain and media and marketing platforms. Other consists of our U.S.-based outlet stores, U.S. Sheer Hosiery business and certain sales from our supply chain to the European Innerwear business. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we reached the decision to divest our U.S. Sheer Hosiery business, including the L’eggs brand, as part of our strategy to streamline our portfolio under our Full Potential plan. See Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
The reportable segments are as follows:
•Innerwear includes sales in the United States of basic branded apparel products that are replenishment in nature under the product categories of men’s underwear, women’s panties, children’s underwear and socks, and intimate apparel, which includes bras and shapewear. Innerwear also includes sales in the United States of personal protective equipment (“PPE”) including products such as cloth face coverings and gowns in 2020.
•Activewear includes sales in the United States of branded products that are primarily seasonal in nature to both retailers and wholesalers, as well as licensed sports apparel and licensed logo apparel.
•International primarily includes sales of our innerwear and activewear products, including PPE in 2020, outside the United States, primarily in Australasia, Europe, Asia, Canada and Latin America.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
As the global impact of COVID-19 continues, our priority has been to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers around the world. To help mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus and in response to health advisories and governmental actions and regulations, we have modified our business practices and have implemented health and safety measures that are designed to protect employees in our corporate, retail, distribution and manufacturing facilities around the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business operations and financial results, as described in more detail under “Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended January 1, 2022 (“2021”) Compared with Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”)” and “Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”) Compared with Year Ended December 28, 2019 (“2019”)” below, primarily through reduced traffic and closures of Company-operated and third-party retail locations for portions of each of 2021 and 2020 in certain markets and global supply chain disruptions in both periods. Global supply chain disruptions primarily due to port congestion, transportation delays as well as labor and container shortages have resulted in higher operating costs and higher levels of inflation. The future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains highly uncertain, and our business and results of operations, including our net revenues, earnings and cash flows, could continue to be adversely impacted. See “The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our business.” in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Outlook for 2022
We estimate our 2022 guidance as follows:
•Net sales of approximately $7.00 billion to $7.15 billion, net of approximately $100 million of unfavorable foreign exchange impact;
•Operating profit of approximately $780 million to $850 million, net of approximately $14 million of unfavorable foreign exchange impact ;
•Full Potential plan-related charges of approximately $60 million included in operating profit;
•Interest expense and other expenses of approximately $142 million combined;
•An effective tax rate from continuing operations of approximately 17%;
•Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of approximately $1.50 to $1.67;
•Cash flow from operating activities of approximately $500 million to $550 million; and
•Capital expenditures of approximately $150 million to $175 million.
Business and Industry Trends
Inflation and Changing Prices
Cotton is the primary raw material used in manufacturing many of our products. While we do not own yarn operations, we are still exposed to fluctuations in the cost of cotton. Increases in the cost of cotton can result in higher costs in the price we pay for yarn from our large-scale yarn suppliers and may result in the need to implement future price increases in order to maintain our margins. Decreases in cotton prices can lead to lower margins for inventory and products produced from cotton we have already purchased, particularly if there is downward price pressure as a result of consumer demand, competition or other factors.
Our costs for cotton yarn, cotton-based textiles and cotton-based products sourced from third-party suppliers vary based upon the fluctuating cost of cotton, which is affected by, among other factors, weather, the impacts of climate change, consumer demand, speculation on the commodities market, the relative valuations and fluctuations of the currencies of producer versus consumer countries and other factors that are generally unpredictable and beyond our control. We are able to lock in the cost of cotton reflected in the price we pay for yarn from our primary yarn suppliers in an attempt to protect our business from the volatility of the market price of cotton. Under our agreements with these suppliers, we have the ability to periodically fix the cotton cost component of our yarn purchases. When we elect to fix the cotton cost component under these agreements, interim fluctuations in the price of cotton do not impact the price we pay for the specified volume of yarn. The yarn suppliers bear the
risk of cotton fluctuations for the yarn volume specified and it is their responsibility to procure the cotton at the agreed upon pricing through arrangements they make with their cotton suppliers. However, our business can be affected by dramatic movements in cotton prices. The cost of cotton used in our products, which includes the cost of cotton used in goods manufactured by us, as well as the cotton content in yarn, textiles and turnkey products we purchase from third-party suppliers, as a percentage of our cost of sales was in the high single digits in 2021. Costs incurred today for materials and labor, including cotton, typically do not impact our results until the inventory is sold approximately six to nine months later.
Inflation can have a long-term impact on us because increasing costs of materials and labor may impact our ability to maintain satisfactory margins. For example, the cost of the materials that are used in our manufacturing process, such as oil-related commodity prices and other raw materials, including cotton, dyes and chemicals, and other costs, such as fuel, energy and utility costs, can fluctuate as a result of inflation and other factors. Disruptions to the global supply chain due to factory closures, port congestion, container shortages, trucking capacity shortages, transportation delays and labor shortages may negatively impact product availability, revenue growth and gross margins. We would work to mitigate the impact of the global supply chain disruptions through a combination of cost savings and operating efficiencies, as well as pricing actions, which could have an adverse impact on demand. Costs incurred for materials and labor are capitalized into inventory and impact our results as the inventory is sold. In addition, a significant portion of our products are manufactured in countries other than the United States and declines in the value of the U.S. dollar may result in higher manufacturing costs. Increases in inflation may not be matched by growth in consumer income, which also could have a negative impact on spending.
Other Business and Industry Trends
The basic apparel market is highly competitive and rapidly evolving. Competition generally is based upon brand, comfort, fit, style, innovation and price. The majority of our core styles continue from year to year, with variations only in color, fabric or design details. Some products, however, such as intimate apparel and activewear, do have more of an emphasis on style. Our businesses face competition today from other large domestic and foreign corporations and manufacturers, as well as smaller companies, department stores, specialty stores and other retailers that market and sell basic apparel products under private labels that compete directly with our brands.
In 2021, our top 10 customers accounted for approximately 45% of our total net sales. Our top customer, Walmart, accounted for 17% of our total net sales in 2021. The increasing bargaining power of retailers can create pricing pressures as our customers grow larger and seek greater concessions in their purchase of our products, while also demanding exclusivity with respect to some of our products. To counteract these effects, it has become increasingly important to leverage our national brands through investment in our largest and strongest brands as our customers strive to maximize their performance especially in today’s challenging retail economic environment. Brands are important in our core categories to drive traffic and project the quality and value our customers demand.
Consumers are increasingly embracing shopping online through e-commerce platforms. As a result, an increasing portion of our revenue across all channels is being generated online through e-commerce platforms. We are continuing to develop and expand our omnichannel capabilities to allow a consumer to use more than one channel when making a purchase, including in-store, at one of our retail or outlet stores or those of our retail partners, online or with a mobile device, through one of our branded websites, the website of one of our retail partners, or an online retailer, such as Amazon.com. In addition to broadening our assortment of product offerings across all online channels, we are also increasing the proportion of our media budget dedicated to digital marketing.
Foreign Exchange Rates
Changes in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and other currencies can impact our financial results in two ways; a translation impact and a transaction impact. The translation impact refers to the impact that changes in exchange rates can have on our published financial results. Similar to many multi-national corporations that publish financial results in U.S. dollars, our revenue and profit earned in local foreign currencies is translated back into U.S. dollars using an average exchange rate over the representative period. A period of strengthening in the U.S. dollar has a negative impact to our published financial results (because it would take more units of a local currency to convert into a dollar). The opposite is true during a period of weakening in the U.S. dollar. Our biggest foreign currency exposures are the Australian dollar and the Euro. We use cross-currency swap contracts and nonderivative financial instruments to minimize material foreign currency translation exposures.
The transaction impact on financial results is common for apparel companies that source goods because these goods are purchased in U.S. dollars. The transaction impact from a strengthening U.S. dollar would have a negative impact to our financial results (because the U.S. dollar-based costs would convert into a higher amount of local currency units, which means a higher local-currency cost of goods, and in turn, a lower local-currency gross profit). The transaction impact from exchange rates is typically recovered over time with price increases. However, during periods of rapid change in exchange rates, pricing is unable to change quickly enough; therefore, we use forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge against our sourcing costs to minimize our exposure to fluctuating exchange rates.
Our Key Business Strategies
Our business strategy integrates our brand superiority, industry-leading innovation and low-cost global supply chain to provide higher value products while lowering production costs. We operate in the global innerwear and global activewear apparel categories. These are stable, heavily branded categories where we have a strong consumer franchise based on a global portfolio of industry-leading brands that we have built over multiple decades, through hundreds of millions of direct interactions with consumers. Our multi-year growth strategy (“Full Potential plan”) focuses on four pillars to drive growth and enhance long-term profitability and identifies the initiatives to unlock growth. Our four pillars of growth are to grow the Champion brand globally, drive growth in Innerwear with brands and products that appeal to younger consumers, build e-commerce excellence across channels and streamline our global portfolio. In order to deliver this growth and create a more efficient and productive business model, we have launched a multi-year cost savings program intended to self-fund the investments necessary to achieve the Full Potential plan’s objectives. We remain highly confident that our strong brand portfolio, world-class supply chain and diverse category and geographic footprint will help us unlock our full potential, deliver long-term growth and create stockholder value.
In the first quarter of 2021, we announced that as part of our Full Potential plan, we were exploring alternatives for our European Innerwear business and subsequently reached the decision to exit this business. We determined that our European Innerwear business met held-for-sale and discontinued operations accounting criteria at the end of the first quarter of 2021. Accordingly, we began to separately report the results of our European Innerwear business as discontinued operations in our Consolidated Statements of Income, and to present the related assets and liabilities as held for sale in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. On November 4, 2021, we announced that we reached an agreement to sell our European Innerwear business to an affiliate of Regent, L.P., pending the completion of consultation with the European and French works councils representing employees of the European Innerwear business and customary closing conditions. Under the agreement, the purchaser will acquire all of the assets and operating liabilities of the European Innerwear business for a purchase price of one Euro, subject to a post-closing adjustment to reflect any deviation at closing from a normalized level of working capital. Under the agreement, there is also a potential earnout due to us based on future performance. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2022.
In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2021, we reached the decision to divest our U.S. Sheer Hosiery business, including the L’eggs brand, as part of our strategy to streamline our portfolio under our Full Potential plan. We determined that our U.S. Sheer Hosiery business met held-for-sale accounting criteria in the fourth quarter of 2021, and the related assets and liabilities are presented as held for sale in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at January 1, 2022. The operations of our U.S. Sheer Hosiery business are reported in “Other” for all periods presented in Note “Business Segment Information” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We are currently exploring potential purchasers for this business and expect to complete the sale of this business within one year. See Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We seek to generate strong cash flow through effectively optimizing our capital structure and managing working capital levels. Our capital allocation strategy is to deploy our significant, consistent cash flow effectively to generate the best long-term returns for our shareholders. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization excluding restructuring and other action-related costs and stock compensation expense. Net debt is defined as total debt less cash and cash equivalents. Our strategy is to use our cash flow from operations to first fund capital investments and dividends. When we are within our targeted leverage range, we intend to use excess free cash flow, which is defined as cash flow from operations less capital expenditures and dividends, for share repurchases, as permitted under our Senior Secured Credit Facility.
Tax Expense
As a global company, we are subject to income taxes and file income tax returns in more than 100 domestic and foreign jurisdictions each year. For the year ended January 1, 2022, a substantial majority of our foreign income was earned by our manufacturing and sourcing operations in El Salvador, Hong Kong, Dominican Republic, Honduras and Thailand. The relatively lower effective tax rates in these jurisdictions as a result of favorable local tax regimes and various free trade zone agreements significantly reduced our consolidated effective tax rate. Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower effective tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries where we have higher effective tax rates, or by changes in tax laws or regulations.
In addition, future acquisitions may affect the proportion of our pre-tax income from foreign jurisdictions, both due to external sales and also increased volume in our self-owned supply chain. We follow a disciplined acquisition strategy focused on acquisitions that meet strict criteria for strong likely returns with relatively low risk. It is difficult to predict whether or when such acquisitions will occur and whether the acquisition targets will be foreign or domestic. Therefore, it is also difficult to predict the effect of acquisitions on the future distribution of our pre-tax income.
We maintain intercompany transfer pricing agreements governing sales within our self-owned supply chain, which can impact the amount of pre-tax income we recognize in foreign jurisdictions. In compliance with applicable tax laws, we regularly review the terms of these agreements utilizing independent third-party transfer pricing studies to ensure that intercompany pricing is consistent with what a seller would charge an independent, arm’s length customer, or what a buyer would pay an independent, arm’s length supplier. Therefore, changes in intercompany pricing are often driven by market conditions, which are also difficult to predict.
As of January 1, 2022, we have continued to evaluate our global capital allocation strategy and assertions made with respect to the accumulated earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. As a result of our overall and continuous evaluation, we have not changed our assertion from prior year and we will continue to permanently reinvest a portion of our unremitted foreign earnings. The portion of our unremitted foreign earnings as of January 1, 2022 that we intend to remit to the United States totals approximately $579 million. We intend to use these earnings to fund capital investments, pay dividends, reduce debt held in the United States and execute share repurchases, as permitted under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. The remaining portion of our unremitted foreign earnings will continue to be permanently reinvested to fund working capital requirements and operations abroad. As of January 1, 2022, we have accrued for income taxes of $40 million in connection with the $579 million of unremitted foreign earnings we intend to remit in the future. These income tax effects include United States federal, state, foreign and withholding tax implications in accordance with the planned remittance of such foreign earnings.
We regularly assess any significant exposure associated with increases in effective tax rates, and adjustments are made as events occur that warrant adjustment to our income tax provisions. See “We have a complex multinational tax structure, and changes in effective tax rates or adverse outcomes resulting from examination of our income tax returns could impact our capital deployment strategy and adversely affect our results.” in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2021 Highlights
Key financial highlights are as follows:
•Total net sales in 2021 were $6.8 billion, compared with $6.1 billion in 2020, representing a 11% increase.
•Operating profit was $798 million in 2021 compared with $43 million in 2020, representing a 1,770% increase. As a percentage of sales, operating profit was 11.7% in 2021 compared to 0.7% in 2020. Included within operating profit in 2021 and 2020 were charges of $132 million and $582 million, respectively, related to the implementation of our Full Potential plan. Operating profit in 2020 also included charges of $98 million related to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and $54 million of other restructuring and action-related charges.
•Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $1.48 in 2021, compared with diluted loss per share of $(0.09) in 2020.
•Operating cash flows were $623 million in 2021 compared with $448 million in 2020.
•As part of our cash deployment strategy, we paid four quarterly dividends, in March, June, August and November, of $0.15 per share each.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended January 1, 2022 (“2021”) Compared with Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”)
Net Sales
Net sales increased 11% during 2021 primarily due to the following:
•Retailers continuing to replenish inventory levels as well as strong consumer demand and point-of-sale trends as stores reopened after temporary closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic and incremental sales partially as a result of higher U.S. government stimulus spending;
•A lower sales comparison in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic-related shutdowns; and
•The favorable impact from foreign exchange rates in our International business of approximately $93 million.
Partially offset by:
•The exit of the PPE business as part of our Full Potential plan, which contributed net sales of $820 million in 2020; and
•An incremental $45 million of net sales related to the 53rd week included in our 2020 fiscal year.
Operating Profit
Operating profit as a percentage of net sales was 11.7% in 2021, representing an increase from 0.7% in the prior year. Operating margin benefited from fixed cost leverage from higher sales, favorable sales mix and cost savings initiatives such as our SKU reduction program, which more than offset higher expedite costs, increased investments in brand marketing and higher levels of inflation. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 benefited from temporary cost savings initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Included in operating profit in 2021 were charges of $132 million related to the implementation of our Full Potential plan, including $46 million of asset impairment charges. Included in operating profit in 2020 were restructuring and other action-related charges of $734 million primarily related to our Full Potential plan initiatives to streamline our portfolio including charges to write off our PPE inventory and write down inventory as a result of our SKU reduction initiative. In 2020, we also recorded charges for supply chain actions, program exits, asset write-downs recorded as a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain re-startup as a result of incremental costs incurred, such as freight and sourcing premiums, to expedite product delivery to meet customer demand following the extended shut-down of parts of our manufacturing network as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Other Highlights
Other Expenses - Other expenses increased $33 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of the refinancing of our Senior Secured Credit Facility and the redemption of our 5.375% Senior Notes in November 2021. Redemption of our 5.375% Senior Notes required payment of a make-whole premium of $35 million. The redemption of our 5.375% Senior Notes and the refinancing of our Senior Secured Credit Facility also resulted in a charge of $11 million for the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and fees incurred. See Note “Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this
Annual Report on Form 10-K. These charges were partially offset by lower pension expense and lower funding fees for sales of accounts receivable to financial institutions in 2021.
Interest Expense - Interest expense was lower by $1 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to lower outstanding debt balances during 2021 partially offset by a higher weighted average interest rate on our borrowings during 2021 and interest expense on cross-currency swap contracts entered into on April 1, 2021 that are being used to hedge foreign currency cash flows. Our weighted average interest rate on our outstanding debt was 4.06% during 2021 compared to 3.93% during 2020.
Income Tax Expense - Our effective income tax rate was 10.3% and 77.3% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The lower effective tax rate for 2021 was primarily due to the prior year write-down of certain inventory recognized in high tax rate jurisdictions, including the United States, the change in jurisdictional mix of income attributable to the economic impacts of COVID-19 and an income tax benefit recognized in the prior year due to our change in estimate of the transition tax liability due as mandated under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”).
Discontinued Operations - The results of our discontinued operations include the operations of our European Innerwear business which we reached the decision to exit at the end of the first quarter of 2021 in connection with our Full Potential plan. See Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of non-cash asset impairment charges and non-cash charges to record a valuation allowance against the net assets held for sale to write down the carrying value to the estimated fair value less costs of disposal.
Operating Results by Business Segment - Year Ended January 1, 2022 (“2021”) Compared with Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”)
Innerwear
Innerwear net sales decreased $258 million or 9% compared to 2020. Net sales of PPE were $801 million in 2020. We exited the PPE business in 2021 as a result of the implementation of our Full Potential plan. Net sales of core apparel increased $543 million or 25% in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily as a result of a lower sales comparison in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic-related shutdowns, retailers continuing to replenish inventory levels and strong consumer demand and point-of-sale trends as stores reopened after temporary closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic and incremental sales partially as a result of higher U.S. government stimulus spending.
Innerwear operating margin was 21.1%, a decrease from 24.1% in 2020 due to fixed cost deleverage from lower sales, higher expedite costs, increased investments in brand marketing and higher levels of inflation.
Activewear
Activewear net sales increased 42% in 2021 compared to the prior year driven by lower comparable sales in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic-related shutdowns and incremental sales in 2021 partially as a result of higher U.S. government stimulus spending. We experienced strong point-of-sale trends across our activewear brands and growth in all product categories.
Activewear operating margin was 14.1%, representing an increase from 5.7% in the prior year. Operating margin improvement primarily resulted from fixed cost leverage from higher sales and favorable sales mix, which more than offset increased investments in brand marketing and higher levels of inflation.
International
Net sales in the International segment increased 21% as a result of lower sales in 2020 due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates of approximately $93 million in 2021. International net sales on a constant currency basis, defined as net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency, increased 15%. The impact of foreign exchange rates is calculated by applying prior period exchange rates to the current year financial results. Net sales in the international segment in 2020 included net sales of PPE of $19 million. Net sales in certain of our international markets continue to be negatively impacted by COVID-19 related shutdowns.
International operating margin was 16.4%, an increase from 14.6% in 2020. Operating margin improvement primarily resulted from fixed cost leverage from higher sales and favorable sales mix, which more than offset increased investments in brand marketing.
Other
Other net sales increased due to increased sales at our retail outlets and in our sheer hosiery business during 2021 driven by lower comparable sales in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic-related shutdowns . Operating margin increased due to the increase in sales volume.
We expect to continue certain sales from our supply chain to the European Innerwear business on a transitional basis after the sale of the business. Those sales and the related profit are included in Other in all periods presented and have not been eliminated as intercompany transactions in consolidation.
Corporate
Corporate expenses in 2021 included incremental recurring COVID-19 related costs such as cleaning and health-related supplies to protect our employees and customers, as well as higher compensation expense compared to 2020. Corporate expenses were lower in 2021 compared to the same period of 2020 due to lower restructuring and other action-related charges and bad debt expense.
Restructuring and other action-related charges include:
•Charges related to our Full Potential plan.
◦In 2021, we recorded $132 million of charges related to the implementation of our Full Potential plan. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that our U.S. Sheer Hosiery business met held-for-sale accounting criteria and recorded a non-cash charge of $38 million to record a valuation allowance against the net assets held for sale to write down the carrying value of the disposal group to the estimated fair value less costs of disposal. Additionally, we recorded a charge of $16 million for an action to resize our U.S. corporate office workforce through a voluntary retirement program, which is included in the “Operating model” line in the restructuring and other action-related charges table below, and impairment charges of $7 million related to the full impairment of an indefinite-lived trademark related to a specific brand within the European Innerwear business that was excluded from the disposal group as it is not being marketed for sale.
◦In the fourth quarter of 2020, we began the implementation of our Full Potential plan including a number of actions to simplify our business including streamlining our portfolio and SKU rationalization. We recorded a charge of $363 million to write down our entire PPE inventory balance to its estimated net realizable value and a charge of $26 million to accrue for vendor commitments for PPE materials that were paid in 2021. Additionally, we commenced an initiative to reduce 20% of our SKUs in inventory in order to streamline product offerings while also implementing a formal lifecycle management process. As a result, we recorded a charge of $193 million to write down inventory to its estimated net realizable value taking into account these initiatives.
•COVID-19 related charges. In 2020, we recorded charges of $49 million for the write-down of assets as a result of the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and $49 million of supply chain re-start up charges primarily related
to incremental costs incurred, such as freight and sourcing premiums, to expedite product to meet customer demand following the extended shut-down of parts of our manufacturing network as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Other charges in 2020 include:
◦The write-off of an acquisition tax asset in the fourth quarter of 2020 which was fully offset by a discrete tax benefit included in the “Income tax expense (benefit)” line in our Consolidated Statements of Income;
◦Supply chain actions to reduce overhead costs;
◦Program exit charges; and
◦Other restructuring costs including action-related costs such as workforce reductions, as well as acquisition and integration charges for smaller acquisitions in 2019.
The components of restructuring and other action-related charges were as follows:
Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”) Compared with Year Ended December 28, 2019 (“2019”)
Net Sales
Net sales and profit trends across our apparel businesses were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. While many of our retail stores were temporarily closed for varying periods of time throughout the year, most were reopened by the end of the second quarter of 2020 as some government restrictions were removed or lightened. In the second half of 2020, some of our apparel businesses experienced growth in net sales primarily as a result of retailers replenishing inventory levels as stores re-opened after temporary closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our online sales increased in 2020 as consumer spending continued to shift towards online shopping experiences due to the changing retail landscape as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we sold PPE globally to governments, large organizations, business-to-business customers and consumers for use to help mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus.
Net sales decreased 5% in 2020 primarily due to the following:
•The disruption of our U.S. and International apparel businesses related to the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•The exit of our C9 Champion mass program and the DKNY intimate apparel license in 2019 which, together, represented approximately $419 million of net sales in 2019.
Partially offset by:
•Net sales of PPE of $820 million in 2020;
•An incremental $45 million of net sales related to the 53rd week included in our 2020 fiscal year; and
•The favorable impact from foreign exchange rates in our International business of approximately $6 million.
Operating Profit
Operating profit as a percentage of net sales was 0.7% in 2020, representing a decrease from 13.2% in the prior year. Decreased operating profit was the result of lower sales volume in our apparel businesses including the exit of our C9 Champion mass program in 2019, higher manufacturing costs, increased inventory reserves and higher bad debt expense. These decreases were partially offset by cost controls and temporary cost savings initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Included in operating profit in 2020 and 2019 were restructuring and other action-related charges of $734 million and $63 million, respectively, including supply chain restructuring charges. In 2020, restructuring and other action-related charges also included charges related to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including asset write-downs, supply chain re-start up charges primarily related to incremental costs incurred, such as freight and sourcing premiums, to expedite product to meet customer demand following the extended shut-down of parts of our manufacturing network as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also recorded charges in 2020 as part of our Full Potential plan initiatives to streamline our portfolio including charges to write off our PPE inventory and write down inventory as a result of our SKU reduction initiative.
Other Highlights
Other Expenses - Other expenses decreased $10 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower pension expense and lower funding fees for sales of accounts receivable to financial institutions in 2020.
Interest Expense - Interest expense was lower by $13 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the impact of the cross-currency swap contracts entered into in July 2019 and a lower weighted average interest rate on our borrowings partially offset by higher outstanding debt balances. Our weighted average interest rate on our outstanding debt was 3.93% during 2020 compared to 4.15% during 2019.
Income Tax Expense - Our effective income tax rate was 77.3% and 10.9% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The higher effective tax rate for 2020 was primarily due to the write-down of certain inventory recognized in high tax rate jurisdictions, including the United States, the change in jurisdictional mix of income attributable to the economic impacts of COVID-19 and an income tax benefit recognized in the current year due to our change in estimate of the transition tax liability due as mandated under the Tax Act. During 2020, the Internal Revenue Service closed the examination of the income tax years ended January 2, 2016 and December 31, 2016. The examination resulted in an immaterial adjustment which had been accrued as an uncertain tax benefit in a prior period.
Discontinued Operations - The results of our discontinued operations include the operations of our European Innerwear business which we reached the decision to exit at the end of the first quarter of 2021 in connection with our Full Potential plan. See Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Operating Results by Business Segment - Year Ended January 2, 2021 (“2020”) Compared with Year Ended December 28, 2019 (“2019”)
Innerwear
Innerwear net sales increased 29% compared to 2019 driven by $801 million of net sales of PPE. This increase was partially offset by a 2% and a 16% decline in net sales in our basics and intimate apparel businesses, respectively, primarily as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first half of 2020. During the second half of 2020, all categories except shapewear within both our basics and intimate apparel businesses experienced growth in net sales primarily as a result of retailers replenishing inventory levels as stores re-opened after temporary closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The shapewear category was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, net sales in our Innerwear segment decreased as a result of the exit of the C9 Champion mass program and the DKNY intimate apparel license in 2019.
Innerwear operating margin was 24.1%, an increase from 22.4% in 2019. Operating margin enhancement resulted primarily from fixed cost leverage from higher sales and temporary cost reduction initiatives.
Activewear
Activewear net sales decreased 36% in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the exit of the C9 Champion mass program in 2019 represented approximately $361 million of the net sales decrease in 2020 compared to 2019.
Activewear operating margin was 5.7%, representing a decrease from 15.2% in the prior year. The decrease was a result of lower sales, including the exit of the C9 Champion mass program, higher manufacturing costs, increased inventory reserves and higher selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. Lower variable costs as a result of decreased net sales and temporary cost savings initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic reduced selling, general and administrative costs, but not at the same rate as the decline in sales.
International
Net sales in the International segment decreased 11% as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates of approximately $6 million. International net sales on a constant currency basis, defined as net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency, decreased 12%. The impact of foreign exchange rates is calculated by applying prior period exchange rates to the current year financial results. Sales of PPE increased International segment net sales by $19 million in 2020.
International operating margin was 14.6%, a decrease from 17.2% in 2019, primarily due to decreased sales partially offset by various temporary cost reduction initiatives and selling, general and administrative cost management.
Other
Other net sales decreased as a result of decreased traffic at our retail outlets due to temporary store closures during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and continued declines in sheer hosiery sales in the United States. Operating margin decreased due to the decrease in sales volume.
We expect to continue certain sales from our supply chain to the European Innerwear business on a transitional basis after the sale of the business. Those sales and the related profit are included in Other in all periods presented and have not been eliminated as intercompany transactions in consolidation.
Corporate
Corporate expenses included certain administrative costs including restructuring and other action-related charges. Corporate expenses were higher in 2020 compared to 2019 due to higher restructuring and other action-related charges and higher bad debt expense as a result of charges for bankruptcies partially offset by cost savings initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restructuring and other action-related charges included:
•In 2020, COVID-19 related charges of $49 million for the write-down of assets recorded as a result of the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and $49 million of supply chain re-start up charges primarily related to incremental costs incurred, such as freight and sourcing premiums, to expedite product to meet customer demand following the extended shut-down of parts of our manufacturing network as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•Charges related to our Full Potential plan. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we began the implementation of our Full Potential plan including a number of actions to simplify our business including streamlining our portfolio and SKU rationalization. In 2020, as a result of COVID-19 vaccines rolling out around the world along with slowing retail orders and a flood of competitive offerings, our future PPE sales opportunities were dramatically reduced. Therefore, we did not view PPE as a future growth opportunity for our Company. We recorded a charge of $363 million to write down our entire PPE inventory balance to its estimated net realizable value and a charge of $26 million to accrue for vendor commitments for PPE materials that were paid in 2021. Additionally, we commenced an initiative to reduce 20% of our SKUs in inventory in order to streamline product offerings while also
implementing a formal lifecycle management process. As a result, we recorded a charge of $193 million to write down inventory to its estimated net realizable value taking into account these initiatives.
•Other charges which include:
◦The write-off of an acquisition tax asset in the fourth quarter of 2020 which was fully offset by a discrete tax benefit included in the “Income tax expense (benefit)” line in our Consolidated Statements of Income;
◦Supply chain actions to reduce overhead costs;
◦Program exit charges associated with exiting the C9 Champion mass program and the DKNY intimate apparel license; and
◦Other restructuring costs including action-related costs such as workforce reductions, as well as acquisition and integration charges for smaller acquisitions in 2019.
The components of restructuring and other action-related charges were as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Requirements and Trends and Uncertainties Affecting Liquidity
We rely on our cash flows generated from operations and the borrowing capacity under our credit facilities to meet the cash requirements of our business. Our primary uses of cash are payments to our employees and vendors in the normal course of business, capital expenditures, maturities of debt and related interest payments, contributions to our pension plans, regular quarterly dividend payments and income tax payments.
Based on our current estimate of future earnings and cash flows, we believe we have sufficient cash and available borrowings for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements based on our current expectations and forecasts.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from global operations and cash available under our Revolving Loan Facility, our Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility and our other international credit facilities.
We had the following borrowing capacity and available liquidity under our credit facilities as of January 1, 2022:
(1)A portion of the Revolving Loan Facility is available to be borrowed in Euros or Australian dollars.
(2)Borrowing availability under the Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility is subject to a quarterly fluctuating facility limit, not to exceed $175 million and permitted only to the extent that the face of the receivables in the collateral pool, net of applicable reserves and other deductions, exceeds the outstanding loans.
The following have impacted or may impact our liquidity:
•The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our business.
•We have historically paid a regular quarterly dividend. The declaration of any future dividends and, if declared, the amount of any such dividends, will be subject to our actual future earnings, capital requirements, regulatory restrictions, debt covenants, other contractual restrictions and to the discretion of our Board of Directors.
•We have principal and interest obligations under our debt and ongoing financial covenants under those debt facilities. In March 2021, we repaid the outstanding balance of the Term Loan B, which consisted of a required excess cash flow prepayment of $239 million and a voluntary prepayment of $61 million. We refinanced our Senior Secured Credit Facility in the fourth quarter of 2021 and redeemed our 5.375% Senior Notes using proceeds from the transaction and cash on hand.
•We have invested in efforts to accelerate worldwide omnichannel and global growth initiatives, as well as marketing and brand building.
•We have launched a multi-year cost savings program intended to self-fund the investments necessary to achieve our Full Potential plan’s objectives.
•We expect capital investments of approximately $150 million to $175 million in 2022.
•In the future, we may pursue strategic business acquisitions or divestitures.
•We made a contribution of $40 million to our U.S. pension plan in 2021 and we expect to have no required cash contributions to our U.S. pension plan in 2022 based on a preliminary calculation by our actuary. We may also elect to make additional voluntary contributions. Our U.S. qualified pension plan was approximately 97% and 94% funded as of December 1, 2021 and 2020, respectively, under the Pension Protection Act funding rules.
•We may increase or decrease the portion of the current-year income of our foreign subsidiaries that we remit to the United States, which could impact our effective income tax rate. We have not changed our reinvestment strategy from the prior year with regards to our unremitted foreign earnings and intend to remit foreign earnings totaling $579 million.
Future Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table contains information on our material contractual obligations and commitments at January 1, 2022, and their expected timing on future cash flows and liquidity.
(1)Interest obligations on floating rate debt instruments are calculated for future periods using interest rates in effect at January 1, 2022.
(2)Represents only the required minimum pension contributions to our U.S. qualified pension plan in the current year. We expect to have no required cash contributions to our U.S. pension plan in 2022 based on a preliminary calculation by our actuary although we may elect to make voluntary contributions to maintain certain funded levels. For a discussion of our pension plan obligations, see Note “Defined Benefit Pension Plans” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3)Represents current tax liabilities, uncertain tax positions and transition tax liabilities resulting from the Tax Act.
(4)Primarily represents the projected payments for liabilities recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for royalty-bearing license agreements, information technology services, certain employee benefit claims, deferred compensation, and marketing and advertising obligations.
Sources and Uses of Our Cash
The information presented below regarding the sources and uses of our cash flows for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 was derived from our consolidated financial statements.
Operating Activities
Our overall liquidity has historically been driven by our cash flow provided by operating activities, which is dependent on net income and changes in our working capital and was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Higher profitability drove improved year over year cash flow. Cash used by operating activities includes a $40 million and $25 million contribution to our U.S. pension plan made in the first quarter of 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Investing Activities
Investing activities in 2021 and 2020 primarily include capital investments into our business. The increase in cash used by investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily the result of an increase in capital investments into our business as we managed our spending on our focused strategic goals. In 2020, we tightly managed capital investment spending to help mitigate the negative impact of COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financing Activities
Net cash from financing activities decreased primarily as a result of lower borrowings as compared to 2020. We increased our borrowings in 2020 primarily to strengthen our cash position and to provide us with additional financial flexibility to manage our business during the COVID-19 pandemic. We also repurchased shares at a total cost of $200 million in 2020. In 2021, we repaid the outstanding balance of the Term Loan B, which consisted of a required excess cash flow prepayment of $239 million and a voluntary prepayment of $61 million, we amended and restated our Senior Secured Credit Facility resulting in payment of $8 million for debt issuance costs, and we redeemed our $700 million 5.375% Senior Notes which required payment of a make-whole premium of $35 million.
Financing Arrangements
In November 2021, we amended and restated our Senior Secured Credit Facility to provide for potential committed aggregate borrowings of up to $2 billion, consisting of a $1 billion Revolving Loan Facility and a $1 billion Term Loan Facility, to extend the maturity date of the Senior Secured Credit Facility from December 2022 to November 2026 and to refinance the Australian Revolving Loan Facility that was originally entered into in July 2016 under our Syndicated Facility as a joinder to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. The Australian Revolving Loan Facility, which was previously amended in July 2021 to extend the maturity date to July 2022, was incorporated into the $1 billion Revolving Loan Facility on the date the amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Facility became effective. The $1 billion Revolving Loan Facility, a portion of which is available to be borrowed in Euros or Australian dollars, will be used for general corporate purposes and working capital needs. The proceeds of the $1 billion Term Loan Facility were used to refinance the Term Loan A, which resulted in an increase in term loan borrowings of $391 million on the date the amendment became effective, and to redeem, together with cash on hand, our 5.375% Senior Notes. All borrowings under the Revolving Loan Facility may be repaid and reborrowed from time to time without penalty but must be repaid in full upon maturity. Outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan A are repayable in equal quarterly installments of the following amounts per annum, calculated as a percentage of the original principal amount: 2.5% in years one and two, 5.0% in years three and four and 7.5% in year five, with the remainder to be repaid at maturity.
In March 2021, we amended our Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility to decrease the fluctuating facility limit, which was $175 million as of January 1, 2022, from $225 million as of January 2, 2021 and extend the maturity date from March 2021 to June 2022. Additionally, the amendment changed certain ratios and borrowing base calculations, raised pricing and added certain receivables to the pledged collateral pool for the facility.
We believe our financing structure provides a secure base to support our operations and key business strategies. As of January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under our credit facilities and other outstanding indebtedness. Under the terms of our Senior Secured Credit Facility, among other financial and non-financial covenants, we are required to maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio and a maximum total debt to EBITDA (earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation expense and amortization, as computed pursuant to the Senior Secured Credit Facility), or leverage ratio, each of which is defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility. The method of calculating all of the components used in the covenants is included in the Senior Secured Credit Facility. We expect to maintain compliance with our covenants for at least one year from the issuance date of these financial statements based on our current expectations and forecasts, however economic conditions or the occurrence of events discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K could cause noncompliance.
For further details regarding our liquidity from our available cash balances and credit facilities see “Cash Requirements and Trends and Uncertainties Affecting Liquidity” above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have chosen accounting policies that we believe are appropriate to report our operating results and financial condition in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We apply these accounting policies in a consistent manner. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The application of critical accounting policies requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions are based on
historical and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and may retain outside consultants to assist in our evaluation. If actual results ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in results of operations in the period in which the actual amounts become known. The critical accounting policies that involve the most significant management judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements, or are the most sensitive to change from outside factors, are described below:
Sales Recognition and Incentives
We recognize revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied, which occurs at a point in time, upon either shipment or delivery to the customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods, which includes estimates for variable consideration. We record provisions for any uncollectible amounts based upon our historical collection statistics and current customer information. Our management reviews these estimates each quarter and makes adjustments based upon actual experience.
Note “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (d) Sales Recognition and Incentives” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes a variety of sales incentives that we offer to resellers and consumers of our products. Measuring the cost of these incentives requires, in many cases, estimating future customer utilization and redemption rates. We use historical data for similar transactions to estimate the cost of current incentive programs. Our management reviews these estimates each quarter and makes adjustments based upon actual experience and other available information. We classify the costs associated with cooperative advertising as a reduction in the “Net sales” line in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Accounts Receivable Valuation
Accounts receivable consist primarily of amounts due from customers. We carry our accounts receivable at their net realizable value. In determining the appropriate allowance for doubtful accounts, we evaluate our receivables on a collection (pool) basis which are aggregated based on similar risk characteristics and consider a combination of factors, such as historical losses, the aging of trade receivables, industry trends, and our customers’ financial strength, credit standing and payment and default history. Changes in the characteristics of our accounts receivables and the aforementioned factors, among others, are reviewed quarterly and may lead to adjustments in our allowance for doubtful accounts. The calculation of the required allowance involves judgment by our management as to the impact of these and other factors on the ultimate realization of our trade receivables. Charges to the allowance for doubtful accounts are reflected in the “Selling, general and administrative expenses” line and charges to the allowance for customer chargebacks and other customer deductions are primarily reflected as a reduction in the “Net sales” line in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Because we cannot predict future changes in the financial stability of our customers, actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make payments, a large reserve might be required. The amount of actual historical losses has not varied materially from our estimates for bad debts.
Inventory Valuation
We carry inventory on our balance sheet at the estimated lower of cost or market. Cost is determined by the first-in, first-out, or “FIFO,” method for our inventories. We carry obsolete, damaged and excess inventory at the net realizable value, which we determine by assessing historical recovery rates, current market conditions and our future marketing and sales plans. Because our assessment of net realizable value is made at a point in time, there are inherent uncertainties related to our value determination. Market factors and other conditions underlying the net realizable value may change, resulting in further reserve requirements. A reduction in the carrying amount of an inventory item from cost to market value creates a new cost basis for the item that cannot be reversed at a later period. While we believe that adequate write-downs for inventory obsolescence have been provided in the consolidated financial statements, consumer tastes and preferences will continue to change and we could experience additional inventory write-downs in the future.
Rebates, discounts and other cash consideration received from a vendor related to inventory purchases are reflected as reductions in the cost of the related inventory item, and are therefore reflected in the “Cost of Sales” line in our Consolidated Statements of Income when the related inventory item is sold.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the income tax basis of our assets and liabilities, as well as for realizable operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, at tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable income in specific jurisdictions, the amount and timing of which are uncertain, and on possible changes in tax laws and tax planning strategies. If in our judgment it appears that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the asset will not
be realized, valuation allowances are established against our deferred tax assets, which increase income tax expense in the period when such determination is made.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. These assessments of uncertain tax positions contain judgments related to the interpretation of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we transact business. The judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the outcome of tax audits, expiration of statutes of limitations, as well as changes to, or further interpretations of tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense is adjusted in our Consolidated Statements of Income in the period in which these events occur.
Assets and Liabilities Acquired in Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the purchase method, which requires us to allocate the cost of an acquired business to the acquired assets and assumed liabilities based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. We recognize the excess of an acquired business’ cost over the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities as goodwill. We use a variety of information sources to determine the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities. We generally use third-party appraisers to assist management in determination of the fair value and lives of property and identifiable intangibles, consulting actuaries to assist management in determining the fair value of obligations associated with defined benefit pension plans and legal counsel to assist management in assessing obligations associated with legal and environmental claims.
Trademarks and Other Identifiable Intangibles
Trademarks, license agreements, customer and distributor relationships and computer software are our primary identifiable intangible assets. We amortize identifiable intangibles determined to have finite lives over their estimated useful lives, and we do not amortize identifiable intangibles with indefinite lives. As of January 1, 2022, the net book value of trademarks and other identifiable intangible assets was $1.2 billion, of which we are amortizing a balance of $130 million. We anticipate that our amortization expense for 2022 will be approximately $26 million.
We evaluate identifiable intangible assets subject to amortization for impairment at least annually and as triggering events occur, such as significant adverse changes in business climate, several periods of operating or cash flow losses, forecasted continued losses or a current expectation that an intangible asset’s value will be eliminated prior to the end of its useful life. We estimate an intangible asset’s useful life based on historical experience, the level of maintenance expenditures required to obtain future cash flows, future business plans and the period over which the asset will be economically useful to us. Our policies require that we periodically review our assets’ remaining depreciable lives based upon actual experience and expected future utilization. A change in the depreciable life is treated as a change in accounting estimate and the accelerated amortization is accounted for in the period of change and future periods.
We assess identifiable intangible assets not subject to amortization for impairment at least annually, as of the first day of the third fiscal quarter, and more often as triggering events occur. In order to determine the impairment of identifiable intangible assets, we compare the fair value of the intangible asset to its carrying amount. Fair values of intangible assets are primarily based on future cash flows projected to be generated from that asset. We recognize an impairment loss for the amount by which an identifiable intangible asset’s carrying value exceeds its fair value.
As a result of our strategic decision to exit our European Innerwear business and classify it as discontinued operations, we performed a full impairment analysis of the disposal group's indefinite-lived intangible assets in the first quarter of 2021. We revised forecasts for our European Innerwear business to include updated market conditions and the removal of strategic operating decisions that would no longer occur under our ownership. The revised forecasts indicated impairment of certain indefinite-lived trademarks and license agreements, resulting in a non-cash charge of $62 million that was recorded in 2021 as "Impairment of intangible assets and goodwill" in Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We also recorded an impairment charge of $7 million in 2021 to fully impair an indefinite-lived trademark related to a specific brand within our European Innerwear business that was excluded from the disposal group as it is not being marketed for sale. We intend to exit this brand subsequent to the sale of our European Innerwear business.
In connection with our annual impairment testing performed in the third quarter of 2021, we performed a quantitative assessment, utilizing an income approach to estimate the fair value of each indefinite-lived intangible asset. The most significant assumptions include the weighted average cost of capital, revenue growth rate, terminal growth rate and operating profit margin, all of which are used to estimate the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets. The tests indicated the indefinite-lived intangible assets had fair values that exceeded their carrying values and no impairment of trademarks or other identifiable intangible assets was identified as a result of our annual testing conducted in 2021.
Goodwill
As of January 1, 2022, we had $1.1 billion of goodwill. We do not amortize goodwill, but we assess for impairment at least annually and more often as triggering events occur. The timing of our annual goodwill impairment testing is the first day of the third fiscal quarter. In evaluating the recoverability of goodwill in 2021, we estimated the fair value of our reporting units. We relied on a number of factors to determine the fair value of our reporting units and evaluated various factors to discount anticipated future cash flows, including operating results, business plans and present value techniques. As discussed above under “Trademarks and Other Identifiable Intangibles,” there are inherent uncertainties related to these factors, and our judgment in applying them and the assumptions underlying the impairment analysis may change in such a manner that impairment in value may occur in the future. Such impairment will be recognized in the period in which it becomes known.
As a result of our strategic decision to exit our European Innerwear business and classify it as discontinued operations, we performed a full impairment analysis of the disposal group's goodwill in the first quarter of 2021. We revised forecasts for our European Innerwear business to include updated market conditions and the removal of strategic operating decisions that would no longer occur under our ownership. The revised forecasts indicated impairment of the full goodwill balance, resulting in a non-cash charge of $94 million that was recorded in 2021 as "Impairment of intangible assets and goodwill" in Note “Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In connection with our annual goodwill impairment testing performed during the third quarter of 2021, we performed a quantitative assessment utilizing an income approach to estimate the fair value of each reporting unit. The most significant assumptions include the weighted average cost of capital, revenue growth rate, terminal growth rate and operating profit margin, all of which are used to estimate the fair value of the reporting units. The tests indicated the reporting units had fair values that exceeded their carrying values, and no impairment of goodwill was identified as a result of our annual testing conducted in 2021.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
For a discussion of our net periodic benefit cost, plan obligations, plan assets and how we measure the amount of these costs, see Note “Defined Benefit Pension Plans” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The funded status of our defined benefit pension plans are recognized on our balance sheet. Differences between actual results in a given year and the actuarially determined assumed results for that year are deferred as unrecognized actuarial gains or losses in comprehensive income. We measure the funded status of our plans as of the date of our fiscal year end.
The net periodic benefit cost of the pension plans is determined using projections and actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate and the long-term rate of asset return. The net periodic pension income or expense is recognized in the year incurred. Gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from actuarial assumptions, are amortized over the average future expected life of participants. As benefits under the Hanesbrands Inc. Pension Plan are frozen, year over year fluctuations in our pension expense are not expected to have a material impact on our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Our policies regarding the establishment of pension assumptions are as follows:
•Discount rate assumptions are generally based on yield curves applicable to each country and the expected cash flows for each plan. For our U.S. defined benefit plans, we use the full series of spot rates along the Aon AA-Only Above Median Yield Curve and expected plan cash flows to determine liabilities and expense. Single equivalent discount rates are shown for disclosure purposes.
•Salary increase assumptions, where applicable, are generally based on historical experience and management expectations. This assumption is not applicable to the U.S. or Italy as benefits under these plans are either frozen or not tied to pay. The benefits under the Hanesbrands Inc. Pension Plan were frozen as of December 31, 2005.
•Long-term rate of return on plan assets assumptions, where applicable, are generally based on each plan’s investment mix and forward-looking capital market assumptions applicable to each country. Expected returns also reflect an incremental premium for actively managed investments and a reduction for trust-paid expenses. This assumption is not applicable to unfunded plans.
•Retirement and turnover assumptions are generally based on actual plan experience while standard actuarial mortality tables applicable to each country are used to estimate life expectancy. For our U.S. defined benefit plans, the 2021 mortality tables are from the Society of Actuaries’ Private Plan study published in 2019 (Pri-2012) projected generationally with Scale MP-2021 and reflecting Aon’s slow recovery adjustment, which modestly increases the standard mortality rates through 2023 based on recent U.S. pandemic experience.
The sensitivity of changes in actuarial assumptions on our annual pension expense and on our plans’ benefit obligations, all other factors being equal, is illustrated by the following:
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.