Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and subject to risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include those factors described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully review all of these factors, as well as the comprehensive discussion of forward-looking statements on page 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Harvard Bioscience is a leading developer, manufacturer and seller of technologies, products and services that enable fundamental research, discovery, and preclinical testing for drug development. Our customers range from renowned academic institutions and government laboratories to the world’s leading pharmaceutical, biotechnology and contract research organizations. With operations in North America, Europe, and China, we sell through a combination of direct and distribution channels to customers around the world.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our operations since its onset in March 2020. While the Company has improved revenues and operations during 2021, a higher degree of volatility and uncertainty in the global economy has been observed during this period, and with it uncertainty around economic impacts. Since the global outbreak of COVID-19, many customers, particularly academic research institutions, have reduced laboratory work which has negatively impacted, and will continue to negatively impact, our sales. While many of our customers, including academic labs, have reopened, a significant number of them remained closed or at significantly lower capacity levels during 2021. Additionally, to ensure business continuity while maintaining a safe environment for employees aligned with guidance from government and health organizations, we transitioned a significant portion of our workforce to work-from-home while implementing social distancing requirements and other measures to allow manufacturing and other personnel essential to production to continue work within our facilities. Business travel was significantly reduced during this period. While a portion of the workforce has returned to in-office work and travel is less restricted, we continue to have restrictions which represent disruptions which can impact productivity including sales and marketing activities.
The global supply chain experienced significant disruptions during 2021 due to electronic component and labor shortages and other macroeconomic factors, which have emerged since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to increased cost of freight, purchased materials and manufacturing labor costs, while also delaying customer shipments. We believe these supply chain trends will continue through 2022. These conditions in addition to the overall impact on the global economy have negatively impacted our results of operations and cash flows.
Revenues for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, were negatively impacted due to the conditions noted. If business interruptions resulting from COVID-19 were to be more prolonged or expanded in scope, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows would be further negatively impacted. We will continue to actively monitor this situation and will implement actions necessary to maintain business continuity.
See Part I, Item 1. “Business-Our History and Strategy” of this report for a discussion of recent significant acquisitions, divestitures and other developments.
July 2019 Restructuring Plan
In December 2019, we implemented the July 2019 Restructuring Plan (the “Restructuring Plan”) to deliver significant cost savings beginning in 2020 and to support delivery of the strategic action plan we announced in September 2019. The Restructuring Plan included consolidation of our Connecticut manufacturing plant with our existing Massachusetts site, downsizing of operations in the United Kingdom and a reduction in force across the business equal to approximately 10% of our headcount. The Restructuring Plan is expected to deliver annualized run-rate savings of $4.0 million to $5.0 million. The original initiatives under the Restructuring Plan were completed in the second half of 2020.
We continued to execute the Restructuring Plan during the COVID-19 pandemic and expanded the scope of the restructuring by realigning our organizational structure to reduce management layers and accelerated our efforts to move to a leaner organization and operation. As a result of this expanded scope, we eliminated additional headcount during 2020, and in the first quarter of 2021, communicated to employees our plan to consolidate certain engineering operations and eliminate two small facilities in Europe.
We incurred cash outlays of $9.0 million as a result of the actions taken under the Restructuring Plan and incremental cost reduction actions taken and other business improvements. The Restructuring Plan generated significant cost savings while removing waste and inefficiency and improving our overall skillset in our workforce. A portion of these savings have been reinvested in sales, marketing and other areas to support profitable growth, as well as additional labor costs added in 2021 to address the global supply chain and other macroeconomic impacts discussed throughout this MD&A.
Selected Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
In the table below, we provide an overview of selected operating metrics.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $118.9 million, an increase of approximately $16.8 million, or 16.5%, compared to revenues of $102.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, many customers, particularly academic research institutions, had been unable to maintain laboratory work resulting in a large number of academic labs were closed during 2020. Revenue improved significantly in 2021 due to academic labs reopening. We believe that academic lab activity was below pre-COVID levels for the majority of 2021, but activity was significantly higher than prior year. Revenue also increased due to improved sales of products from our Preclinical product family associated with improved sales processes, market growth in Asia, and product enhancements released in 2020.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased $9.7 million, or 16.6%, to $67.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $58.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the increase in revenue noted. Gross margin improved due to improved product mix and higher volume but was adversely impacted by higher supply chain, logistics and manufacturing labor costs . The global supply chain has experienced significant disruptions during 2021 due to electronic component and labor shortages and other macroeconomic factors, leading to the increased cost noted. We believe these supply chain trends will continue in 2022.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $4.7 million, or 23.7%, to $24.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $19.9 million during the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to investments in new marketing and sales support personnel and related costs as more of our employees returned from part-time to full-time status and higher variable sales costs associated with the increase in sales as compared to the prior period.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $24.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.8 million, or 3.4%, compared with $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to higher compensation costs as our employees returned from part-time to full-time status and higher stock-based compensation costs which were partially offset by lower restructuring and related initiative costs as compared to the prior period.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $2.1 million, or 24.3%, compared with $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to higher compensation costs as our employees returned from part-time to full-time status and increased project related costs aligned with our organic growth initiatives noted.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible asset expenses was $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $3.3 million, or 68.1%, compared with $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates under our new Credit Agreement entered into on December 22, 2020.
Debt extinguishment and related costs
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement which replaced our prior credit facility. In connection with our entry into the Credit Agreement, we paid $0.6 million in debt extinguishment costs, wrote off $0.8 million of unamortized debt issuance costs, and paid $0.5 million to terminate our interest rate swap agreements.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively. The effective tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were (106)% and (7)%, respectively. The difference between our effective tax rates in 2021 and 2020 compared to the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% is primarily due to changes in valuation allowances associated with our assessment of the likelihood of the recoverability of our deferred tax assets. We currently have valuation allowances against substantially all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, internally generated cash flow from operations and our revolving credit facility. Our expected cash outlays relate primarily to cash payments due under our Credit Agreement described below as well as capital expenditures, severance and other payments associated with ongoing restructuring and cost reduction initiatives.
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement that provides for a term loan of $40.0 million and a $25.0 million senior revolving credit facility (including a $10.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $10.0 million swingline loan sub-facility). Our borrowings under the Credit Agreement mature on December 22, 2025.
The Credit Agreement replaced the prior credit facility which consisted of a revolving credit facility and a term loan and was scheduled to expire on January 31, 2023. In connection with entering into the Credit Agreement, we paid off the prior credit facility with borrowings under the Credit Agreement and incurred $1.9 million in fees and expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, we held cash and cash equivalents of $7.8 million, compared with $8.3 million at December 31, 2020. Borrowings outstanding was $49.4 million as of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Total debt, net of cash and cash equivalents, was $41.6 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $41.1 million at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, cash held by our foreign subsidiaries was $2.8 million and $2.5 million.
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flow Statements
Cash provided by operations was $1.3 million and $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash flow from operations for year ended December 31, 2021, was lower than the prior year period due to higher levels of working capital. During 2021 we experienced longer supplier lead times due to global supply chain disruptions as well as an overall increase in customer demand and orders. Accordingly, inventory purchasing has increased to ensure continuity of supply for order fulfillment. Also, accounts receivable has increased due to revenue growth. Cash flow from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was positively impacted by reductions in working capital due to lower revenue and management efforts to offset the initial significant negative impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic had on revenue.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.3 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and consisted primarily of capital expenditures in manufacturing and information technology infrastructure.
Cash used in financing activities was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During this period, we made term loan installments payments under the Credit Agreement of $2.0 million, with net borrowings of $2.0 million under the revolving facility. We also received proceeds of $3.3 million from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases and paid $3.5 million for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Cash used in financing activities was $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During this period, we made net payments to reduce total debt by $5.6 million. Prior to entering the Credit Agreement, we made payments under the prior credit facility of $11.1 million to reduce term loan borrowings, with net borrowings of $2.8 million under the revolving facility. At the closing of the Credit Agreement, we repaid in full the prior credit facility, which included $43.9 million of term loan borrowings and $2.8 million of outstanding revolver borrowings. Under the Credit Agreement, we borrowed $49.4 million, consisting of a $40.0 million term loan and $9.4 million drawn on the revolving loan. We paid $1.9 million of costs associated with the debt refinancing. We also received proceeds of $0.7 million from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases and paid $1.1 million for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Borrowing
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement which provides for a term loan of $40.0 million and a $25.0 million senior revolving credit facility (including a $10.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $ 10.0 million swingline loan sub-facility). Obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets and are guaranteed by certain of our direct, domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries. We are compliant with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021. Our borrowings under the Credit Agreement will mature on December 22, 2025. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding our Credit Agreement.
We had borrowings of $49.4 million outstanding as of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Available borrowing capacity under the revolving line of credit was $13.6 million as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the interest rate on our borrowings was 3.0% and 3.25%, respectively.
Based on our current operating plans, we expect that our available cash, cash generated from current operations and debt capacity will be sufficient to finance current operations, any costs associated with restructuring activities and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. This assessment includes consideration of our best estimates of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results described above. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors.
Impact of Foreign Currencies
Our international operations in some instances operate in a natural hedge as we sell our products in many countries and a substantial portion of our revenues, costs and expenses are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the British pound, the euro, the Canadian dollar and the Swedish krona.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, changes in foreign currency exchange rates resulted in a favorable translation effect on our consolidated revenues and on our consolidated net loss. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates resulted in a favorable effect on revenues of approximately $1.7 million and an unfavorable effect on expenses of approximately $1.8 million.
The translation of foreign currency into U.S. dollars included as a component of comprehensive income during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in a loss of approximately $2.4 million, compared to a gain of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition, the currency exchange rate fluctuations included as a component of net loss resulted in approximately $(0.1) million and $(0.5) million in currency loss during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements impacting our business, see “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, investments, income taxes, litigation and other contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are comprised of existing technology, customer contracts and contractual relationships, and other definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Identifiable intangible assets resulting from the acquisitions of entities accounted for using the purchase method of accounting are estimated by management based on the fair value of assets received. Identifiable definite-lived intangible assets are being amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method and estimated useful lives ranging from four to fifteen years.
We amortize definite-lived assets over their estimated useful lives. We evaluate definite-lived and indefinite-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The carrying value is not recoverable if it exceeds the undiscounted cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. Our estimates of future cash flows attributable to our assets require significant judgment based on our historical and anticipated results and are subject to many factors. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include significant negative industry or economic trends, significant loss of clients, and significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business.
When we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of impairment, we measure the potential impairment based on a projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate determined by our management to be commensurate with the risk inherent in our current business model. An impairment loss is recognized only if the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. Different assumptions and judgments could materially affect the calculation of the fair value of our assets.
Income Taxes and Valuation Allowance
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our annual tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, tax reserve changes and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining the annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We regularly assess the likelihood of tax adjustments in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we have operations and account for the related financial statement implications. We have established tax reserves that we believe are appropriate given the possibility of tax adjustments. Determining the appropriate level of tax reserves requires judgment regarding the uncertain application of tax laws. Reserves are adjusted when information becomes available or when an event occurs indicating a change in the reserve is appropriate. Changes in tax reserves could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Significant judgment is also required in determining the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized and corresponding deferred tax asset valuation allowance. When estimating the necessary valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence for each jurisdiction including historical operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. If new information becomes available that would alter our estimate of the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized, we adjust the valuation allowance through income tax expense. Changes in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Excess and Obsolete Inventory
Inventories are priced at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. When necessary, the write-down of inventory to its net realizable value is recorded for obsolete or slow-moving inventory based on assumptions about future demand and marketability of products, the impact of new product introductions and specific identification of items, such as product discontinuance or engineering/material changes. In the future if these factors are less favorable than our projected expectations additional inventory write-downs may be required.