Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10−K contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those set forth because of general economic conditions and changes in the assumptions used in making such forward-looking statements. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Report. The analysis set forth below is provided pursuant to applicable Securities and Exchange Commission regulations and is not intended to serve as a basis for projections of future events. Refer also to “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” in Item 1 above.
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and is provided as a supplement to the accompanying financial statements and notes to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows during the periods included in the accompanying financial statements.
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, “Company,” “the Company,” “us,” and “our” refer to Hubilu Venture Corporation, a Delaware corporation, unless the context requires otherwise.
We intend the following discussion to assist in the understanding of our financial position as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. You should refer to the Financial Statements and related Notes in conjunction with this discussion.
Results of Operations
General
We are a startup enterprise that commenced operations on March 5, 2015, which, until June 2015, has been limited to organizational and business development activities. We are real estate advisory and consulting company that assists real estate investor professionals, as well as established companies, with advisory and consulting services focused on providing research, analysis and acquisition opportunities to them. Our mission is to assist investors and professionals in the early stage analysis of market opportunities and the evaluation of properties prior to them committing capital for the purchase or the leasing of real estate properties. We intend to focus our initial marketing efforts in the commercial markets; however, we will also look at residential and income producing markets. We intend to use the Internet as well as the services of independent sales consultants to market our services to investors and professionals in Southern California with our initial efforts focused in Beverly Hills and Los Angeles. We have had limited operations and have limited financial resources. Our auditors indicated in their report on our financial statements (the “Report”) that “the Company’s lack of business operations and early losses raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.” Our operations from March 2, 2015 (Date of Incorporation) to December 2019 were devoted primarily to development, operational activities, and acquisitions which included:
1. Formation of the Company;
2. Development of our business plan;
3. Evaluating various target real estate professionals and investors to market our services;
4. Research on marketing channels/strategies for our services;
5. Secured our website domain www.hubilu.com and beginning the development of our initial online website; and
6. Research on services and the pricing of our services.
Commencing in June 2015, we engaged our first client, 112 South Eucalyptus Avenue, LLC, to assist it in evaluating the best use of its property.
We intend to provide services to target investors and professionals with the mission to assist them in investment and property evaluation strategies and provide hands-on support to reduce evaluation time and resources and increase the speed for them to determine whether to proceed with a real estate lease or investment. Besides general property evaluation services, we intend to offer services to assist the principals with property development ideas and investment structure.
Our goal is to assist investors by providing them with the property opportunities, analysis and guidance to enhance their ability to purchase or lease real estate. We are not real estate brokers and do not intend to offer brokerage services. We intend to initially target businesses in Southern California.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $203,738 cash on hand. Management does not believe this amount will satisfy our cash requirements for the next twelve months. We plan to satisfy our future cash requirements - primarily the working capital required for operations by loans from our shareholders or additional equity financing. The additional equity financing will likely be in the form of private placements of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has borrowed $474,271 from a majority shareholder.
Management believes that if subsequent private placements are successful, we will generate sales revenue within the following twelve months thereof. However, additional equity financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all, and thus we could fail to satisfy our future cash requirements.
If we are unsuccessful in raising the additional proceeds through a private placement offering, we will then have to seek additional funds through debt financing, which would be highly difficult for a new development stage company with nominal assets to secure. Therefore, we are highly dependent upon the success of a future private placement offering and failure thereof would result in our having to seek capital from other resources such as debt financing, which may not even be available to us. However, if such financing were available, because we are a startup company with no operations to date, we would likely have to pay additional costs associated with high-risk loans and be subject to an above market interest rate. At such time these funds are required, management would evaluate the terms of such debt financing and determine whether the business could sustain operations and growth and manage the debt load. If we cannot raise additional proceeds via a private placement of our common stock or secure debt financing, we would be required to cease business operations. As a result, investors in our common stock would lose all of their investment.
We have no current plans, preliminary or otherwise, to merge with any other entity although we may consider such plans in the future.
At the present time, we intend to seek various investors to obtain additional equity financing. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining additional capital from these negotiations. If are unable to raise additional capital, we will either suspend marketing operations until we do raise the cash or cease operations entirely. Other than as described in this paragraph and the preceding paragraphs, we have no other financing plans.
Management does not plan to hire additional employees at this time. Our officers and directors, as well as independent contractors, will be responsible for providing consulting services.
Critical Accounting Policy and Estimates. Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources. In addition, these accounting policies are described at relevant sections in this discussion and analysis and in the notes to the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively together with notes thereto, which are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues. Our rental revenues increased $337,409 to $1,192,782 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $855,373 for the comparable period in 2020 due to the acquisition of 6 new properties which were rehabbed and rented out.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses decreased $75,297 to $525,362 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $600,659 for the comparable period in 2020. Operating expenses are comprised of general and administrative expenses, consulting fees, depreciation, professional fees, property taxes, rent, repairs and maintenance, transfer agent and filing fees and utilities. The components of operating expenses are discussed below.
General and administrative expenses decreased $242,906 to $75,141 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $318,047 for the comparable period in 2020. The decrease is due to less property management needs.
Depreciation increased $17,626 to $117,653 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $100,027 for the comparable period in 2020.
Professional fees decreased $52 to $395 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $447 for the comparable period in 2021. Professional fees consisted of legal fees and accounting fees.
Property taxes increased $49,041 to $123,203 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $74,041 for the comparable period in 2020. The increase is due to the acquisition of additional rental properties in 2021.
Rent increased $450 to $15,600 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $15,150 for the comparable period in 2020. The increase is due to rental being raised slightly.
Transfer agent and filing fees decreased $1,465 to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,465 for the comparable period in 2020. The decrease is due to less company filings.
Utilities increased $23,020 to $69,671 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $46,651 for the comparable period in 2020. The increase is due to the acquisition of more rental properties in 2020.
Net Loss. Our net loss decreased $221,663 to an income of $42,863 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a loss of $178,800 for the comparable period in 2020. The decrease is attributable to less expenses as set forth above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources. Since 2015, our majority shareholder provided us with $492,500 in related party advances. We have not been advanced any more money since 2018. Our majority shareholder has agreed not to seek repayment of its advances until we are financially able to repay them. In 2021, $18,229 was repaid to our majority shareholder leaving the balance at $474,271.
Our total assets are $14,110,229 as of December 31, 2021, consisting of $14,255,927 in investments in real estate, net of $356,036 in depreciation, $203,738 in cash, $6,600 in deposits, and $0 in prepaid expenses.
Our total liabilities are $14,934,746 as of December 31, 2021 and $10,421,298 as of December 31, 2020.
Our total stockholders’ deficit is $1,626,509 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and as of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit is $1,669,372.
Our net cash used by operations was $280,821 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our investing activities used a total of $487,927 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We had $266,180 in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is due to $18,229 provided by investors and $274,409 advanced for property indebtedness offset mortgage principal payments.
We do not now have funds sufficient for pursuing our plan of operation, but we are in the process of trying to increase rents to finance our operations through rental cash flow. If operating difficulties or other factors (many of which are beyond our control) delay our realization of revenues or cash flows from rental income, we may be limited in our ability to pursue our business plan. Moreover, if unexpected expenses arise due to unanticipated pressures or if we decide to expand our business plan beyond its currently anticipated level or otherwise, we will require additional financing to fund our operations, in addition to anticipated cash generated from our operations. Additional financing might not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. If adequate funds were not available or were not available on acceptable terms, our ability to fund our operations, take advantage of unanticipated opportunities, develop or enhance our business or otherwise respond to competitive pressures would be significantly limited. In a worst-case scenario, we might not be able to fund our operations or to remain in business, which could result in a total loss of our stockholders’ investment. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of our stockholders would be reduced, and these newly issued securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing stockholders.
The Company had no formal long-term lines or credit or other bank financing arrangements as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
The Company has no current plans for the purchase or sale of any plant or equipment.
The Company has no current plans to make any changes in the number of employees.
Concentrations
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist principally of rental income. Sales to eight customers accounted for 75% of consolidated sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 (Zinnia (115,270) 11%, Sunza (131,476) 18%, Elata (208,756) 11%, Boabab (136,942) 11%, Akebia (130,167) 18%, Lantana (218,840) 11%, Kapok (132,653) 10%, and Trilosa (118,678) 10%.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
The Company has a prospective income tax benefit resulting from a net operating loss carry forward that may offset any future operating profit.
Impact of Inflation
The Company believes that inflation has had a negligible effect on operations over the past quarter.
Capital Expenditures
The Company expended $487,927 on capital improvements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Plan of Operation
We were incorporated in the State of Delaware on March 2, 2015. We have never declared bankruptcy, have never been in receivership, and have never been involved in any legal action or proceedings. Since incorporation, we have not made any significant purchase or sale of assets. We are a real estate consulting and acquisition company that has just begun to generate revenues through our real estate acquisitions. If we are unable to successfully continue to find customers who will engage us to provide real estate consulting services or in acquiring cash flow positive properties, we will be dependent on related party advances or the sale of securities for our working capital.
Our business strategy is to market our website (www.hubilu.com) whereby potential real estate users and investors will be able to review our consulting services and engage us. We will develop our presence on various e-commerce sites focused on the real estate, consulting and advisory industries as well as on mainstream sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn. We are also focusing on expanding our referral network by targeting other advisors such as lawyers, accountants, insurance agents, financial planners and other service professionals.
The number of companies, which we will be able to provide services to will depend upon the success of our marketing efforts through our website and our referral network.
South Eucalyptus Avenue, LLC, our first client, retained us to assist it in maximizing its return on equity for its property, and to source new properties for it to buy. We are evaluating various options for the client including a sale or a 1031 exchange. We are also advising the client on the use of strategies utilizing an all-inclusive trust deed (AITD) whereby the seller of real estate, with equity greater than its tax base, can spread the tax liability over the life of the loan underlying the AITD. This strategy also allows the seller to have an ongoing income stream, which is the primary objective of selling a property using an AITD. We have conducted a preliminary valuation of the property and have shown the opportunity to several potential investors. In the event we are unable to attract an interested party to purchase the property, we will then introduce the seller to an experienced real estate broker who understands AITDs and how to market the property to buyers. We are also in the process of seeking new properties for the client to buy, either as a stand-alone purchase or as part of a 1031 exchange.
Our business is advising and consulting with real estate users and investors by providing consulting services to support to their leasing or acquisition strategies. We intend to advise them on their capital formation, consulting with jurisdictional issues, property taxes, zoning, corporate structure, administrative functions, such as bookkeeping, accounting, regulatory compliance and reporting, valuation and other administrative tasks that real estate users and investors may not be familiar with or desire to operate internally.
We intend to work collaboratively with real estate users and investors, as well as their existing advisors, to assist them in the proper structure around proposed leases, development or acquisitions. We believe that by providing guidance and support to our potential clients and assisting them in structuring their leases, developments or acquisitions we believe we will enable them to achieve increased returns. We intend to partner and work with professional and technical advisors that have knowledge and expertise in real estate investors. To the extent that our potential clients request our assistance in seeking capital or accessing the capital markets, we intend to introduce them to the appropriate advisors who have the requisite expertise in the various areas that may require such expertise.
Our founder has access to strategic relationships with real estate investors, financial firms, investment bankers, brokers, individual and institutional investors as well as accountants and attorneys. Our founder has invested his capital in the real estate markets and has experience with real estate investing and management. We believe that a properly structured real estate transaction eases the ability to attract the equity capital from investors thereby allowing the necessary capital to develop or acquire the properties.
Our business is focused on acquiring vacant residential income properties that we rehabilitate and rent at student housing market values while simultaneously consulting and advising with real estate investors, professionals, and companies, We believe that this model of student housing acquisitions and consulting with investors will generate positive cash flow in growing the company, which will increase the evaluation of our stock, creating value for our investors and also obtaining client loyalty . The following are key elements of our strategy:
● Acquisition process has a strategic methodology when acquiring and calculating cost in not only purchasing but in rehab and the value in renting out to students near the USC campus and expanding LA Metro/subway stations. This allows favorable returns.
We may conduct limited research and development of additional services to offer. Further we do not expect significant changes in the number of employees. Upon completion of our public offering, our specific goal is to offer consulting services to real estate users and investors. Our plan of operations is as follows:
Expand and Enhance Our Website
Time Frame: 1st to 3rd months.
Material costs: $3,000 to $5,000.
We intend to further develop and enhance our website at www.hubilu.com. Our sole director and president, David Behrend, will oversee the further development and expansion of our website and the consulting and advisory services we are offering to potential clients. We hired a web designer to help us with the development and functionality of the website and intend to continue to enhance it. We do not have any written agreements with any web designers at current time. The website expansion costs, including site design and implementation will be approximately $3,000 to $5,000. Updating and improving our website will continue throughout the lifetime of our operations.
Negotiate agreements with potential referral sources and clients
Time Frame: 3rd to 6th.
No material costs.
Now that our website is operational, we have contacted and started negotiations with potential clients and referral sources. In June 2015, we engaged our first client. We will negotiate terms and conditions of collaboration. At the beginning, we plan to focus primarily on local advisors such as attorneys, accountants, insurance agents, title officers and financial planners. We do not expect to compensate any referral sources and will offer reciprocal referrals to any source that is willing to refer us clients; however, we may decide to compensate referral sources on a case-by-case basis. Then we plan to expand our target market to other service providers and investment professionals such as investment bankers. This activity will be ongoing throughout our operations. Even though the negotiation with potential customers and referral sources will be ongoing during the life of our operations, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to find successful agreements, in which case our business may fail and we will have to cease our operations. We do not expect to enter into formal written agreements with our referral sources and intend for these agreements to be oral. We intend to enter into real estate consulting agreements with our clients that will set forth the scope of services we agree to with these clients and provide for the hourly or flat rate billing arrangements.
In the future, when/if we have available resources, operating history and experience, we plan to contact larger referrals sources that have more established clients. However, we anticipate encountering many market barriers in becoming a service provider to clients of large established professionals. Our competitors have gained customer loyalty and brand identification through their long-standing advertising and customer service efforts. This creates a barrier to market entry by forcing us to spend time and money to differentiate our product in the marketplace and overcome these loyalties. The large established service providers may require capital investments in personnel. Considering our lack of operating history and experience in being a real estate consulting firm, we may never become a consultant to large established clients.
Ongoing Marketing Campaign
Time Frame: 6th - 12th months.
Material costs: $10,000.
We intend to use marketing strategies, such as social media, networking and organic marketing to acquire potential customers and potential investors. We believe that we should begin to see results from our marketing campaign within 120 days from its initiation. We also will use Internet promotion tools on real estate and consulting websites, as well as on Facebook and Twitter, to advertise our services. We intend to spend $10,000 on marketing efforts during the next year. We intend our marketing efforts to be an ongoing activity that will continue during the life of our operations.
Even if we can obtain sufficient number of consulting agreements, or purchase enough assets at the end of the twelve-month period, there is no guarantee that we will be able to attract, and more importantly retain, enough customers to justify our expenditures. If we are unable to generate a significant amount of revenue and to successfully protect ourselves against those risks, then it would materially affect our financial condition and our business could be harmed.
Independent Contractors
Time Frame: 6th-12th months.
Material costs: $50,000.
We believe our officers have good knowledge and broad connections in the real estate consulting industry to introduce our services, including find new potential clients, set up agreements with customers and referral sources to engage our consulting services. We currently anticipate that the negotiation of additional agreements with potential customers will be ongoing during the life of our operations.
We believe our website is state-of-the-art and we developed it to use as part of our sales efforts. During the next 12 months, we will implement our marketing campaign to assist officers in sales and marketing. There is no assurance that we will generate any revenue in the next 12 months or ever generate any future revenue.
David Behrend, our president, is devoting approximately twenty-five hours per week to our operations. Once we expand our operations and attract more customers to use our services and acquire more assets, Mr. Behrend has agreed to commit more time as required. Mr. Behrend has agreed to limit his responsibilities at Camden Realty to providing brokerage services to customers that do not require consulting services.
Estimated Expenses for the Next Twelve Months
The following provides an overview of our estimated expenses to fund our plan of operation for the next twelve months. These expenses, which we estimate to be as follows:
We anticipate that the minimum additional capital necessary to fund our planned operations in this case for the 12-month period will be approximately $231,000 and will be needed for general administrative expenses, business development, marketing costs and costs associated with being a publicly reporting company. Thus, we will need to seek additional funding in the future. The most likely source of this additional capital is through the sale of additional shares of common or preferred stock or advances from our majority shareholder, or our other shareholders. Jacaranda Investments, Inc., our majority shareholder, has agreed to advance us any necessary capital. However, he has no firm commitment, arrangement or legal obligation to advance or loan funds to us.
If we can successfully complete the above goals within the estimated timeframes set forth and can raise proceeds additional proceeds that may be needed to secure additional personnel and marketing funds, those funds would be allocated as follows:
Our management may hire full or part- time employees or independent contractors over the next six (6) months; however, at the present, the services provided by our officers and director appears sufficient now. We believe that our operations are currently on a small scale that is manageable by these two individuals and can be supplemented by engaging independent contractors. Our management’s responsibilities are mainly administrative at this early stage. While we believe that the addition of employees is not required over the next six (6) months, the professionals we plan to utilize may be independent contractors. We do not intend to enter any employment agreements with any of these professionals. Thus, these persons are not intended to be employees of our company.
Our management does not expect to incur any material research costs in the next twelve months; we currently do not own any plants or equipment that we would seek to sell soon; we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements; and we have not paid for expenses on behalf of our officer or directors. Additionally, we believe that this fact shall not materially change.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, established Topic 842, Leases, by issuing Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, which requires lessors to classify leases as a sales-type, direct financing, or operating lease and requires lessees to recognize leases on-balance sheet and disclose key information about leasing arrangements. Topic 842 was subsequently amended by ASU No. 2018-01, Land Easement Practical Expedient for Transition to Topic 842; ASU No. 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases; and ASU No. 2018-11, Targeted Improvements. The Company adopted the new standard effective January 1, 2019 and elected the effective date method for the transition. The Company elected the following practical expedients:
● Transition method practical expedient - permits the Company to use the effective date as the date of initial application. Upon adoption, the Company did not have a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings. Financial information and disclosures for periods before January 1, 2019 were not updated.
● Short-term lease practical expedient - permits the Company not to recognize leases with a term equal to or less than 12 months.
Lessor Accounting
The accounting for lessors under the new standard remained relatively unchanged with a few targeted updates impacting the Company, which included: (i) narrower definition of initial direct costs that requires certain costs to be expensed rather than capitalized, and (ii) provisions for uncollectible rents to be recorded as a reduction in revenue rather than as bad debt expense.
Lessee Accounting
The new standard requires lessees to recognize a right-of-use asset and lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with a term longer than 12 months. Leases are classified as finance or operating at inception, with classification affecting the pattern and recording of expenses in the statement of operations. There was no impact on the Company’s financial statements on the adoption of Topic 842 given that its office lease does not exceed 12 months in duration.