ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the "Annual Report). In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in our Annual Report. We undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements. Certain tabular information may not foot due to rounding. Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday closest to December 31. "Fiscal 2021" represents the 52-week period ended January 1, 2022."Fiscal 2020" represents the 53-week period ended January 2, 2021."Fiscal 2019" represents the 52-week period ended December 28, 2019.
Overview
We provide parts cleaning, containerized waste management, used oil collection, wastewater vacuum services, antifreeze recycling, and field services, and we own and operate a used oil re-refinery where we re-refine used lubricating oils into high quality lubricant base oil and other products. We are the second largest provider of industrial and hazardous waste services to small and mid-sized customers in both the vehicle maintenance and manufacturing industries, and we have the second largest used oil re-refining capacity in North America. Our services help our customers manage their used chemicals and liquid and solid wastes, while also helping to minimize their regulatory burdens. We operate from a network of 91 branch facilities providing services to customers in 48 states and parts of Canada. We conduct business through two principal operating segments: Environmental Services and Oil Business.
Our Environmental Services segment revenues are generated primarily from providing parts cleaning, containerized waste management, wastewater vacuum, antifreeze recycling services, and field services. Revenues from this segment accounted for 62% of our total revenues for fiscal 2021. In the Environmental Services segment, we define and measure same-branch revenues for a given period as the subset of all our branches that have been open and operating throughout and between the periods being compared, and we refer to these as established branches. We calculate average revenues per working day by dividing our revenues by the number of non-holiday weekdays in the applicable fiscal year or fiscal quarter.
Our Oil Business segment consists primarily of our used oil collection and used oil re-refining activities, which accounted for 38% of our total revenue for fiscal 2021.
We have established prices for our services primarily based on the perceived value of those services in the marketplace. Our customer agreements typically provide for annual renewal and price increases. With respect to our oil product sales, some prices are set through contracts or purchase orders with customers, which may be based on the market prices of an underlying commodity or market indicator.
Our operating costs include the costs of the materials we use in our products and services, such as used oil collected from customers or purchased from third party collectors, solvent, and other chemicals. The used solvent that we retrieve from customers in our product reuse program is accounted for as a reduction in our net cost of solvent under operating costs, whether placed in inventory or sold to a purchaser for reuse. Changes in the price of crude oil can impact operating costs indirectly as it may impact the price we pay for solvent or our cost to obtain used oil, although we attempt to offset volatility in the oil markets by managing the spread between our costs to procure used oil and the prices we charge for our products and services. Operating costs also include transportation of solvents and waste, payments to third parties to recycle or dispose of the waste materials that we collect, and the costs of operating our re-refinery, recycling centers, non-hazardous waste processing facilities, hubs, and branch system including personnel costs (including commissions), facility rent, truck leases, fuel, and maintenance. Our operating costs as a percentage of sales generally increase in relation to the number of new branch openings. As new branches achieve route density and scale efficiencies, our operating costs as a percentage of sales generally decrease.
We use profit before corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses ("SG&A") as a key measure of segment profitability. We define profit before SG&A expense as revenue less operating costs and depreciation and amortization from operations.
Our selling, general, and administrative expenses include the costs of performing centralized business functions, including sales management at or above the regional level, business management, billing, receivables management, accounting and finance, information technology, environmental health and safety, and legal.
We operate a used oil re-refinery located in Indianapolis, Indiana, through which we re-refine used oil into high quality lubricant base oil and other products. We supply the base oil to firms that produce and market finished lubricants. Our re-refinery has an annual nameplate capacity of approximately 75 million gallons of used oil feedstock, allowing it to produce approximately 50 million gallons of lubricating base oil per year when operating at capacity.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those that both are important to the accurate portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results and require subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
In order to prepare financial statements that conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, commonly referred to as GAAP, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Certain estimates are particularly sensitive due to their significance to the financial statements and the possibility that future events may be materially different from our expectations.
We have identified the following accounting policies as those that require us to make the most subjective or complex judgments in order to fairly present our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Actual results in these areas could differ materially from management's estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ("GAAP") requires the use of certain estimates by management in determining the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Material items subject to such estimates and assumptions are the valuation of goodwill and other intangible assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and contingent consideration be recorded as of the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The most significant intangible assets acquired were the permits and customer relationship assets. Specific to these intangibles, the critical accounting estimates used in determining the fair value of the intangible assets were the estimates of market participant future cash flows driven by estimated revenue growth, operational performance including company specific synergies and estimated customer attrition. In addition, the net cash flows were discounted using an appropriate discount rate that requires judgment by management.
These judgments and estimates are subject to uncertainty as future cash flows may differ from those assumed in the valuation of these intangible assets. Due to the nature of valuing a business combination, any significant differences between the estimates made in determining the fair value of the tangible and intangible assets discussed above and the actual future cash flow of the acquired businesses may result in future impairments of the underlying assets. See Goodwill and Impairment of Long-Lived Assets sections below. Acquisition-related costs were recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred. Restructuring costs, if any, will be expensed in periods subsequent to the acquisition date.
Identifiable Intangible Assets
The fair value of intangible assets may be based on material judgments made by management. We sometimes engage third party valuation appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values and useful lives of the assets acquired. Such valuations and useful life determinations require us to make material estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies, and also include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows to be earned from the continued operation of the acquired business and discount rates applied in determining the present value of those cash flows. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates, or actual results. These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated economic lives.
Goodwill
In each of fiscal years 2019, and 2020, the Company performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether the quantitative impairment test was necessary. Based on the qualitative assessments in each year, the Company concluded it is more likely than not that the fair value of the Environmental Services reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount including goodwill, and therefore the quantitative test was not necessary and no impairment was indicated. The Oil Business reporting unit had zero goodwill throughout each fiscal years 2019, 2020, and 2021. During fiscal year 2021, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test to identify whether goodwill had been impaired. Based on the quantitative impairment test performed in fiscal year 2021, the Company concluded the fair value of the Environmental Services reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount and therefore goodwill was not considered impaired.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. During fiscal 2021, we recorded no impairment charges to long-lives assets. During fiscal 2020, we recorded impairment charges to long-lived assets relating to properties held for sale in Wilmington, Delaware and Ft. Pierce, Florida. Impairment charges recorded were approximately $1.4 million for the write-down of these properties to their fair market value. Assets to be disposed of are separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell, and are no longer being depreciated.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
We are closely monitoring the spread and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and are continually assessing its potential
effects on our business and our financial performance as well as the businesses of our customers and vendors. The Company
cannot predict the duration or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we cannot reasonably estimate the financial impact the
COVID-19 outbreak will have on our results and significant estimates going forward.
During 2020, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, some of our customers had permanently or temporarily closed their businesses, limited our access to their businesses, or had a decreased demand for our products and services due to a slowdown in the demand for their own products or services. While we experienced a material decrease in activity in both of our Environmental Services and our Oil Business segments during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw continued improvement in our business through-out the second half of the year compared to what we believed was the low point of this downturn during the second quarter of 2020.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted and is dependent on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic and the related length of its impact on the global economy, and any new information that may emerge concerning the
COVID-19 outbreak and the actions to contain it or treat its impact. In 2021, the continued impact on our business as a result of COVID-19 pandemic resulted in additional lost work hours which negatively impacted our ability to service our customers on a timely basis, the effect of which is included in the financial operations in this filing.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
Fiscal Year Ended January 1, 2022 versus Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2021
For discussion of our fiscal 2020 results of operations and comparison with fiscal 2019 results of operations, please refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
The following table sets forth certain operating data as a percentage of revenues for the periods indicated:
Revenues
In fiscal 2021, we generated $515.3 million of revenue compared to prior year revenue of $406.0 million, an increase of $109.4 million, or 26.9%. The Company's 2021 fiscal year comprised of 253 working days compared to 256 working days in fiscal 2020. On a sales-per-working day basis, revenue increased approximately 28.5% in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year.
Revenue from our Environmental Services segment increased $27.6 million, or 9.5%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in revenue was mainly due to continued increase in demand for our services compared to the prior year. We experienced volume increases in almost all of our service lines in the segment when compared to fiscal 2020. 2020 revenues were lower mainly due to the impacts of COVID-19 related volume declines in our field services, parts cleaning, containerized waste, and antifreeze product and service lines.
Revenue from our Oil Business increased $81.8 million, or 70.9%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in base oil prices was the main driver of the increase in revenue along with an increase in base oil sales volume compared to the prior year. During fiscal 2021, the average selling price for our base oil product increased approximately 94%, along with an increase of approximately 9% in base oil gallons sold compared to fiscal 2020. 2020 revenues were lower mainly due to impacts of COVID-19 related volume declines and shutdowns.
Operating costs
Operating costs increased $31.1 million, or 9.7%, to $352.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $321.6 million in fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly driven by higher disposal costs and transportation expenses compared to fiscal 2020.
We expect that in the future our operating costs in the Environmental Services business will continue to increase as our service volume increases; however, a decrease in crude oil prices could partially offset this cost increase because a decrease in price could cause a decline in the price we pay for parts cleaning solvent and diesel fuel. Whether or not we have an increase in service volume, an increase in the price of crude oil could result in an increase in operating costs in the Environmental Services segment since this will likely result in an increase in the price we pay for parts cleaning solvent and diesel fuel. In the Oil Business segment, our operating costs could increase or decrease in the future depending on changes in the price for crude oil which could directly impact cost for our used oil feedstock, our used oil collection costs and processing costs at our re-refinery.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $9.9 million, or 21.0%, from fiscal 2020 to $57.0 million in fiscal 2021. The increase was mainly driven by higher share-based compensation and management incentive compensation expense as well as higher legal fees, partially offset by lower retirement and severance costs. Overall, selling, general and administrative expenses, which includes depreciation and amortization from SG&A, as a percentage of revenues decreased slightly to 12.1% in fiscal 2021 from 12.7% in fiscal 2020 due to the increase in revenue, partially offset by higher overall SG&A expense.
Other (income) expense - net
Other (income) - net was $(1.0) million for fiscal 2021 driven mainly by the gain on sale of assets. Other (income) - net of $(5.4) million for fiscal 2020 primarily consists of a $6.5 million reversal of settlement claims related to a class action lawsuit, partially offset by $1.4 million of impairment charges relating to the closure of the Company's facility in Wilmington Delaware.
Interest expense - net
Interest expense - net was $0.9 million for fiscal 2021 with respect to our term loan and credit line, and related amortization of debt issuance costs, along with $0.6 million of finance lease interest expense. In fiscal 2020, the Company recorded interest expense of $1.6 million, of which $0.9 million of interest expense was on our term loan, and $0.3 million was amortization of debt issuance costs, along with $0.4 million of finance lease interest expense. No interest was capitalized in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
Provision for income taxes
The Company's effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 25.8% compared to 28.8% in fiscal 2020. The difference in the effective tax rate is principally attributable to the diminished impact of certain required adjustments to financial reporting income in determining taxable income in fiscal 2021 as compared to the impact of those adjustments in fiscal year 2020 due to financial reporting income in 2021 increasing substantially over financial reporting income in fiscal year 2020.
See footnote 15 - Income Taxes for more information.
Segment Information
The following table presents revenues by segment:
Revenue from our Environmental Services segment increased $27.6 million, or 9.5%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in revenue was mainly due to continued increase in demand for our services compared to the prior year. We experienced volume increases in almost all of our service lines in the segment when compared to fiscal 2020.
Revenue from our Oil Business segment increased $81.8 million, or 70.9%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in base oil prices was the main driver of the increase in revenue along with an increase in base oil sales volume compared to the prior year. During fiscal 2021, the average selling price for our base oil product increased approximately 94%, along with an increase of approximately 9% in base oil gallons sold compared to fiscal 2020.
Segment Profit (Loss) before Corporate Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
The following table presents profit by segment before corporate SG&A:
*Includes depreciation and amortization related to operating activity but not depreciation and amortization related to corporate selling, general, and administrative activity. For further discussion see Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
In fiscal 2021, Environmental Services profit before SG&A expense increased $11.1 million, or 17.3%. The increase was mainly due to higher revenue in comparison to fiscal 2020 driven by the continued increase in demand for our services compared to the prior year. Profit before corporate SG&A expense as a percentage of revenues in the Environmental Services segment increased to 23.6% in fiscal 2021 compared to 22.1% in fiscal 2020. The increase in margin was mainly due to higher revenue, partially offset by higher third-party disposal costs and labor cost.
The sale of used solvent generated by customers participating in our product reuse program for parts cleaning is not accounted for as revenues, but rather as a reduction in our net cost of solvent under operating costs. In both fiscal 2021 and 2020, the impact of used solvent sales was immaterial.
In fiscal 2021, Oil Business profit before corporate SG&A expense increased $69.4 million compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in profit before corporate SG&A expense was mainly due to an increase in the spread between the netback (sales price net of freight impact) on our base oil sales and the price paid/charged to our customers for the removal of their used oil. In 2020, we had an extended shutdown at our re-refinery due to a lack of demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The absence of such a shutdown in fiscal 2021 improved our results on a comparative basis.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, cash and cash equivalents were $56.3 million and $67.6 million, respectively. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations and funds available to borrow under our revolving bank credit facility.
Debt and Financing Arrangements
On March 18, 2021, Heritage-Crystal Clean, LLC, (the “Company”), entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Agreement"), by and among the Company, its parent, Heritage-Crystal Clean, Inc., and the Company’s subsidiaries identified therein and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association. The Agreement replaces the Company's previous Credit Agreement dated as of February 21, 2017. During the first quarter the Company paid down its previous term loan, in full, of $30.0 million. The new Agreement provides for borrowings of up to $100.0 million, in the form of a revolving facility, of which $15.0 million can be used in the form of a Swing Line loan.
Loans made under the Agreement, as amended, may be Base Rate Loans or LIBOR Rate Loans, at the election of the Borrower subject to certain exceptions. Base Rate Loans have an interest rate equal to (i) the higher of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (b) the London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 1%, or (c) Bank of America's prime rate, plus (ii) a variable margin of between 0.50% and 1.25% depending on the Company's total leverage ratio, calculated on a consolidated basis. LIBOR rate loans have an interest rate equal to (i) the LIBOR rate plus (ii) a variable margin of between 1.50% and 2.25% depending on the Company's total leverage ratio. Amounts borrowed under the Agreement are secured by a security interest in
substantially all of the Company's tangible and intangible assets. The Company incurred $0.8 million of debt issuance costs related to the amended credit agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains customary terms and provisions (including representations, covenants, and conditions) for transactions of this type. Certain covenants, among other things, restrict the Company's and its subsidiaries' ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make investments and sell assets. The Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, covenants and representations and warranties. Financial covenants include:
•An interest coverage ratio (based on interest expense and EBITDA) of at least 3.5 to 1.0;
•A total leverage ratio no greater than 3.0 to 1.0, provided that in the event of a permitted acquisition having an aggregate consideration equal to $10.0 million or more, at the Borrower’s election, the foregoing 3.00 to 1.00 shall be deemed to be 3.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter in which such permitted acquisition occurs and the three immediately following fiscal quarters and will thereafter revert to 3.00 to 1.00.
The Credit Agreement places certain limitations on acquisitions and the payment of dividends.
On July 27, 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it was intending to phase out the London Interbank Offered Rate by the end of 2021. The official phase out has now been extended to July 2023. We expect that widespread use of LIBOR will transition to alternative interest rates in the near future. Since loans made under our Credit Agreement may be based on LIBOR based loans, the phasing out of LIBOR may adversely affect interest rates that could result in higher borrowing costs and higher interest expense. As the Company does not have any outstanding borrowings under the financial instruments impacted by LIBOR, the effect on the financial statements is not material.
As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement. As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, the Company had $5.6 million and $4.0 million of standby letters of credit issued, respectively, and $94.4 million and $61.0 million was available for borrowing under the bank credit facility, respectively.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, available borrowings, and other sources of financings will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. We cannot guarantee this will be the case or that our assumptions regarding revenues and expenses underlying this belief will be accurate. If, in the future, we require more liquidity than is available to us under our credit facility, we may need to raise additional funds through debt or equity offerings. Adequate funds may not be available when needed or may not be available on terms favorable to us. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, dilution to existing stockholders may result. If we raise additional funds by obtaining loans from third parties, the terms of those financing arrangements may include negative covenants or other restrictions on our business that could impair our operational flexibility, and would also require us to fund additional interest expense. If funding is insufficient at any time in the future, we may be unable to develop or enhance our products or services, take advantage of business opportunities, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Summary of Cash Flow Activity
The most material items affecting the comparison of our operating activities for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are summarized below:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities -
•Earnings - Our increase in net income during fiscal 2021 favorably impacted our net cash provided by operating activities by $49.0 million compared to fiscal 2020.
•Accounts Receivable - The increase in accounts receivable had an unfavorable impact on cash provided by operating activities of $13.8 million for fiscal 2021.
•Accounts Payable- The increase in accounts payable in fiscal 2021 favorably affected cash flows from operating activities by $6.6 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities -
•Capital expenditures - We made capital expenditures as follows:
•Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired - During fiscal 2021, the Company used $45.5 million for acquisitions. See Note 3 - Business Combinations to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for more information.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities - During fiscal 2021 the Company paid down its previous term loan, in full, of $30.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual commitments consist of operating leases and short-term purchasing commitments. We anticipate that we will experience an increase in our lease commitments consistent with anticipated growth in operations, infrastructure, and personnel and additional resources devoted to building our network of hubs and branches.
The following table summarizes our existing obligations as of January 1, 2022:
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
(In thousands)
(1) We lease railcars, office space, warehouse and operating facilities, equipment and vehicles under non-cancelable operating lease agreements which expire at various dates through 2030.
(2) Finance leases include a fleet of mobile equipment.
(3) Our purchase obligations are open purchase orders as of January 1, 2022, and are primarily for capital expenditures, used oil, catalyst, disposal, and solvent. They represent expected payments to third party service providers and other commitments entered into during the normal course of our business. While our purchase obligations are generally cancellable with or without notice without penalty, certain vendor agreements provide for cancellation fees or penalties depending on the terms of the contract.
(4) Unrecognized tax benefits have not been included because no reasonable estimate can be made as to the likelihood, dollar amount, or timing of potential future cash expenditures.
We offer a guarantee for our services. To date, costs relating to this guarantee have not been material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the end of fiscal 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.