ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Hackett. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying Notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have omitted discussion of fiscal 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2020 and 2019 where it would be redundant with the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 (MD&A) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2021.
Hackett, originally incorporated on April 23, 1997, is a leading strategic advisory and technology consulting firm that enables companies to achieve world-class business performance. By leveraging the comprehensive Hackett database, the world’s leading repository of enterprise business process performance metrics and best practice intellectual capital, our business and technology solutions help clients improve performance and maximize returns on technology investments.
Hackett is a strategic advisory firm and a world leader in best practice research, benchmarking and business transformation services which empirically defines and enables world-class enterprise performance. Hackett empirically defines world-class performance in sales, general and administrative and certain supply chain activities with analysis gained through nearly 20,000 benchmark and performance studies over 28 years at over 7,000 of the world’s leading companies.
Hackett’s combined capabilities include executive advisory programs, benchmarking, business transformation and technology solutions, with corresponding offshore support. In addition, we are identifying new opportunities for our benchmarking and best practice intellectual property by leveraging new channels through strategic alliances to introduce new recurring revenue, high margin offerings that could redefine our organizational model that we have started to refer to as “IP as a Service” business.
In the following discussion, Strategy and Business Transformation Group includes the results of our North America IP as-a-service offerings, which include our Executive Advisory Programs and Benchmarking Services, and our Business Transformation Practices (S&BT). ERP, EPM and Analytics (EEA) Solutions includes the results of our North America Oracle EEA and SAP Solutions Practices. International includes results of our S&BT and EEA Practices, primarily in Europe.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Our Business
The level of revenue we achieve is based on our ability to deliver market leading services and solutions and to deploy skilled teams of professionals quickly. Our results of operations are affected by economic conditions, including macroeconomic conditions and levels of business confidence. Despite the disruption beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations during the first quarter of 2020. However, our net revenue and diluted earnings per share were negatively impacted for the remainder of 2020, due to adverse economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In each of the four quarters of 2021, our net revenue and diluted earnings per share grew when compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting a continuation of improved economic conditions. However, any reversal of these trends or a prolonged economic downturn as a result of the impact of COVID-19 variants, or otherwise, weak or uncertain economic conditions or similar factors could adversely affect our clients' financial condition which may further reduce our clients' demand for our services.
We continue to actively manage our business to respond to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. At the onset of the pandemic, we reduced employee headcount and restricted employee travel to only essential business needs. While headcount has increased and some select non-essential travel is being allowed, most of our employees continue to work remotely from home. We are generally following the requirements, recommendation and protocols published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and the World Health Organization, and state and local governments.
As a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented plans to manage our costs and preserve cash at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. We significantly limited the addition of new employees and third party contracted services, eliminated all travel except where necessary to meet customer needs, and limited discretionary spending. At the end of June 2020, we reduced our global workforce by approximately 10% and recorded a $5.0 million restructuring charge. During the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of and in consideration of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the changing nature of our use of office space for its workforce, we evaluated our existing office leases as part of our transformation initiatives related to real estate. This evaluation resulted in the complete and partial abandonment of certain leased office spaces and an asset impairment charge of $3.9 million for certain lease right-of-use assets and certain property, equipment and leasehold improvements. All client concessions and accounts receivable allowances have been appropriately reflected in our financial statements. To the extent that economic conditions do not continue to improve and our business is again disrupted the reinstatement of cost management actions will be considered. Future asset impairment charges, increases in allowance for doubtful accounts, or restructuring charges will be dependent on the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In light of the evolving health, social, economic and business environment, governmental regulations or mandates, and business disruptions that could occur, the potential impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our financial condition and operating results in the future remains uncertain.
For more information, see “Our results of operations have been adversely affected and could in the future be materially adversely impacted by the coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19),” under Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial position in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies that have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. These policies require management to exercise judgment on issues that are often difficult, subjective and complex due to the necessity of estimating the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
Determining revenue recognition requires management to exercise judgment on the interpretation of service contracts which may include one or multiple performance obligations. The judgement management must make include determining whether the control of the goods and services provided are transferred to our customers at a point in time or over the course of the service period utilizing a proportionate performance approach.
In fixed-fee billing arrangements, which would also include contracts with capped fees, we set the fees based on our estimates of the costs and timing for completing the engagements. We generally recognize revenue under fixed-fee or capped fee arrangements using a proportionate performance approach, which is based on work completed to-date as compared to estimates of the total services to be provided under the engagement. Estimates of total engagement revenue and cost of services are monitored regularly during the term of the engagement based on the best available information. If our estimates indicate a potential loss, such loss is recognized in the period in which the loss first becomes probable and reasonably estimable.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
Periodically, we review accounts receivable to assess our estimates of collectability. When establishing allowances for doubtful accounts, management must base their judgment on the information available at that point in time, which may include historical experiences, current economic trends and client credit worthiness, to determine the likelihood of collectability.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment. In assessing the recoverability of goodwill management makes estimates regarding market assumptions based on assumptions regarding various factors to determine if impairment tests are met. These estimates contain management’s judgment, using appropriate and customary assumptions available at the time. We performed our annual step one impairment test of our goodwill in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and determined that goodwill was not impaired.
Other intangible assets are tested for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying value of an asset may not be fully recoverable. If an evaluation is required, management estimates future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset and compares this to the asset’s carrying amount to determine if there has been an impairment. Estimates of future undiscounted cash flows are based on management’s view of growth rates for the related business, anticipated future economic conditions and estimates of residual values.
Income Taxes
Management’s judgement is required in the calculation of the income tax provision. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured by using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided if management believes it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. An increase or decrease in the valuation allowance may result from a change in circumstances, and therefore a change in management’s judgment about the realizability of the related deferred tax asset.
Management adopted a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return in regards to the de-recognition of income tax assets and liabilities, classification of current and deferred income tax assets and liabilities, accounting for interest and penalties associated with tax positions, accounting for income taxes in interim periods and income tax disclosures.
Please refer to Note 1 “Basis of Presentation and General Information” to our consolidated financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the discussion of all of our critical accounting policies.
Results of Operations
Our fiscal year generally consists of a 52-week period and periodically consists of a 53-week period as each fiscal year ends on the Friday closest to December 31. Fiscal years 2021 and 2020 ended on December 31, 2021 and January 1, 2021, respectively. References to a year included in this document refer to a fiscal year rather than a calendar year.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations and the percentage relationship to revenue before reimbursements of such results (in thousands, except per share amounts).
Comparison of 2021 to 2020
Overview. For fiscal year 2021, revenue before reimbursements increased 18% to $277.6 million, as compared to fiscal year 2020. Fiscal year 2021 results included a $5.3 million software sale transaction which was recorded in the second quarter of 2021 and a tax benefit for the exercise of 2.9 million SARs which was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021. Together, these items positively impacted dilutive earnings per share by $0.33.
Fiscal 2020 results included restructuring charges for the reduction of staff in the U.S. and Europe and the impairment of our operating lease right-of-use assets and certain property, equipment and leasehold improvements relating to the reduction in office space as we have transitioned towards a remote work environment. Together, these items negatively impacted dilutive earnings per share by $0.24.
Revenue. We are a global company with operations primarily in the United States and Western Europe. Our revenue is denominated in multiple currencies, primarily the U.S. Dollar, British Pound and Euro, and as a result is affected by currency exchange rate fluctuations. The impact of the currency fluctuation did not have a significant impact on comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Revenue is analyzed based on geographic location of engagement team personnel.
The following table sets forth revenue by group for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Our total Company revenue from continuing operations and before reimbursements increased 18%, to $277.6 million in 2021, as compared to $234.8 million in 2020. The 2021 revenue growth includes a $5.3 million software sale transaction which was recorded in the second quarter of 2021. Net revenue in 2020 were affected from the economic disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, in each of the four quarters of 2021, our net revenue and diluted earnings per share grew when compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting a continuation of improved economic conditions.
In 2021 and 2020, no customer accounted for more than 5% of our total revenue.
S&BT net revenue from continuing operations increased 22% in 2021, to $108.2 million, as compared to $88.7 million in 2020 due to increased rates and increased utilization driven by the improved demand for enterprise digital transformation initiatives experienced since the end of third quarter of 2020.
EEA net revenue from continuing operations increased 19% in 2021, to $145.6 million, as compared to $122.6 million in 2020, primarily driven by strong growth across all practices driven by increased demand. In addition, net revenue in 2021 included a $5.3 million software sale transaction which was recorded in the second quarter of 2021. EEA excluding the software sale transaction was $140.4 million.
Hackett international net revenue from continuing operations increased 1% in 2021, as compared to 2020. Europe continues to be impacted by lengthened client decision-making from economic uncertainty, which has been further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Total Company international net revenue from continuing operations accounted for 9% of our total revenue in 2021, as compared to 10% in 2020.
Reimbursable expenses are project and travel-related expenses passed through to a client with no margin associated with them. Reimbursable expenses as a percentage of net revenue were 0% in 2021, as compared to 2% in 2020. The low percentage of reimbursements to net revenue in 2021 and 2020 is running lower than historical rates and is directly attributable to the decreases in travel requirements resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the transition to a more remote service-based delivery model during 2021 and 2020. Reimbursements are project travel-related expenses passed through to a client with no associated impact to gross margins or profitability.
Cost of Service. Cost of service primarily consists of salaries, benefits and incentive compensation for consultants and subcontractor fees; acquisition-related cash and stock compensation costs; non-cash stock compensation expense; and reimbursable expenses associated with projects.
Personnel costs from continuing operations increased 7%, to $165.1 million in 2021, from $154.3 million in 2020. The higher costs were primarily a result of increased hiring and utilization of subcontractors to support revenue growth in 2021, as well as increases in incentive compensation accruals commensurate with Company performance. Personnel costs before reimbursable expenses and as a percentage of revenue before reimbursements was 59% in 2021, as compared to 66% in 2020.
Non-cash stock compensation expense from continuing operations was $6.4 million in 2021 and $6.3 million in 2020. See Note 10, “Stock Based Compensation” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Acquisition related non-cash stock compensation expense in 2021 and 2020 related to equity awards issued in relation to acquisitions.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”). SG&A costs from continuing operations, excluding non-cash compensation expense, acquisition related costs and the amortization of intangible assets increased 8% to $54.8 million in 2021, from $50.6 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher sales commissions and incentive compensation accruals associated with increased Company performance. SG&A costs as a percentage of revenue before reimbursements were 20% in 2021 and 22% in 2020.
Non-cash compensation expense included in total SG&A increased to $3.4 million in 2021, as compared to $2.4 million in 2020 due to increased Company performance. See Note 10, “Stock Based Compensation” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Amortization expense was $1.0 million in both 2021 and 2020. The amortization expense in both periods related to the amortization of the intangible assets acquired in our acquisitions and joint venture in 2017. The intangible assets related to the acquisitions will continue to amortize until 2022 and the intangible asset related to the joint venture completed amortizing in 2021.
Restructuring Charges and Asset Impairments. During 2020, we recorded restructuring costs of $6.6 million, which were primarily related to the reduction of staff in the U.S. and Europe as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of and in consideration of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the changing nature of our use of office space for our workforce, we evaluated our existing office space utilization as part of our transformation initiatives related to real estate. This evaluation resulted in the complete and partial abandonment of certain leased office spaces and a $3.9 million restructuring charge related to the asset impairment for certain lease right-of-use assets and certain property, equipment and leasehold improvements and other real estate related costs.
Interest Expense. In 2021 and 2020, we recorded interest expense of $95 thousand and $126 thousand, respectively. There was no outstanding debt in 2021 or 2020.
Income Taxes. During 2021, we recorded $4.8 million of income tax expense related to certain federal, foreign and state taxes which reflected an effective tax rate of 10.4% from continuing operations. During 2020, we recorded $2.9 million of income tax expense related to certain federal, foreign and state taxes which reflected an effective tax rate of 33.7% from continuing operations. The decrease in the tax rate for 2021 was primarily due to a tax benefit resulting from the exercise of 2.9 million SARs. The tax rate in 2020 included restructuring charges impacting countries with lower statutory income tax rates and changes in our overall profitability due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Discontinued Operations. The discontinued operations related to the discontinuance of our European REL Working Capital group in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and January 1, 2021, we had $45.8 million and $49.5 million, respectively, of cash and no outstanding debt under our credit facility. We currently believe that available funds (including the cash on hand and funds available for borrowing under our credit facility), and cash flows generated by operations will be enough to fund our cash requirements, including working capital, debt payments, lease obligations and capital expenditure for at least the next twelve months and beyond. We may decide to raise additional funds to support expansion, to develop new or enhance products and services, to respond to competitive pressures to return capital to shareholders or to acquire complementary businesses or technologies. There is no assurance, however, that additional financing will be available when needed or desired.
The following table summarizes our cash flow activity (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $46.4 million in 2021, as compared to $44.1 million in 2020. In 2021, the net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to net income adjusted for non-cash items, and an increase in contract liabilities and incentive compensation, partially offset by increased accounts receivable and contract assets. In 2020, the net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to net income adjusted for non-cash items, and decreased account receivables and contract assets, partially offset by lower accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million in 2021, as compared to $1.9 million in 2020. During 2021 and 2020, cash flows from investing activities included investments related to the continued development of our Quantum Leap benchmark technologies.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $46.7 million in 2021, as compared to $18.7 million in 2020. The usage of cash in 2021 was primarily related to the repurchase of Company common stock under our share repurchase program of $13.0 million, employee net vesting related tax withholding requirements of $21.6 million, including the exercise of 2.9 million SARs, and dividend payments of $12.9 million. The usage of cash in 2020 was primarily related to dividend payments of $14.9 million, the repurchase of Company common stock under our share repurchase program of $2.4 million and employee net vesting related tax withholding requirements of $2.1 million.
Material Cash Requirements
Debt Payments and Lease Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any outstanding borrowings under our revolving line of credit, leaving us with borrowing capacity of approximately $45.0 million. See Note 8, “Credit Facility,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
There were no material capital commitments as of December 31, 2021. The following table summarizes our future principal payments under our future lease commitments under our non-cancelable operating leases as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Capital Expenditures
There were no material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2021. Our capital expenditures primarily consist of investments related to the continued development of our Quantum Leap benchmark technologies and laptop purchases. During the years ended December 31, 2021, and January 1, 2021, our capital expenditures were $3.2 million and $1.9 million, respectively. We expect capital expenditures for the year ended December 30, 2022, to approximate the capital expenditures in 2021.
Taxes
Cash paid for income taxes was $9.1 million and $4.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and January 1, 2021, respectively. As a result of a tax deduction related to the exercise of 2.9 million SARs in 2021, we recorded an income tax receivable as of December 31, 2021, of $3.4 million, as compared to an income tax liability as of January 1, 2021 of $2.3 million. See Note 9, “Income Taxes” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Dividends and Share Repurchases
During the fiscal year 2021, our Board of Directors approved four quarterly dividends payments of $0.10 per share totaling $12.9 million. Subsequent to year end, the Board of Directors approved a 10% increase in the quarterly dividend payments from $0.10 per share to $0.11 per share. We expect dividend payments in 2022 to be approximately $14.0 million.
We have an ongoing authorization from our Board of Directors to repurchase shares of our common stock. During 2021, we repurchased 749 thousand shares of common stock at an average price per share of $17.41, for a total cost of $13.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $11.2 million share repurchase authorization remaining. Subsequent to fiscal year end, we repurchased 31 thousand shares of the Company’s common stock from members of our Board of Directors for a total of $0.6 million, or $20.50 per share. Including these repurchases, we had approximately $10.6 million available for future repurchases under the plan as of March 4, 2022.
Shares purchased under the repurchase plan do not include shares withheld to satisfy withholding tax obligations. These withheld shares are never issued and in lieu of issuing the shares, taxes were paid on our employee’s behalf. In 2021, 1.1 million shares were withheld and not issued for a cost of $21.6 million, bringing the total cumulative cash used to repurchase stock in 2021 to $34.6 million, which includes the net settlement of the 2.9 million SARs for a cost of $19.7 million. In 2020, 139 thousand shares were withheld and not issued for a cost of $2.1 million, bringing the total cumulative cash used to repurchase stock in 2020 to $4.5 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For discussion of recently issued accounting standards, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.