Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this section and elsewhere in this Report regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Please see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Overview
We are an early stage blank check company incorporated on January 22, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are actively pursuing discussions with potential business combination partners, and we have not yet entered into a definitive business combination agreement with any specific business combination target. However, our management team has engaged in discussions with potential business combination partners in their capacity as officers of Hennessy V, and we may pursue potential business combination partners that had previously been in discussions with Hennessy V’s management team. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our common or preferred stock in our initial business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change of control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or public warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness to finance our initial business combination, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes; and
● other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,966,000 and working capital of approximately $2,371,000. Further, we have begun to, and expect to continue to, incur significant costs in the pursuit of an initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering and, subsequent to completion of our initial public offering on October 1, 2021, identifying and completing a suitable initial business combination. Following our initial public offering, we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination, if at all. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after our initial public offering. After our initial public offering, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for professional and consulting fees and travel associated with evaluating various initial business combination candidates, as well as costs in connection with negotiating and executing a definitive agreement and related agreements and proxy materials. Our expenses have, and will likely continue to, increase substantially since the closing of our initial public offering on October 1, 2021.
We account for the public warrants and private placement warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering as warrant liabilities and not equity. As a result, we are required to measure the fair value of the warrants when they are issued and then at the end of each reporting period and to recognize changes in the fair value from the prior period in our operating results for each current period. Such amounts can be material and can be either other income or other expense. We account for all of the Class A common stock issued in our initial public offering as redeemable stock and not permanent equity and so we report negative stockholders’ equity and expect to continue to do so.
General and administrative expenses - For the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a loss from operations of approximately $665,000 consisting primarily of costs for being a public company of approximately $284,000, compensation of approximately $174,000 (approximately $84,000 of which is deferred), approximately $190,000 of franchise taxes and approximately $17,000 of costs associated with searching for a suitable business combination.
Other income (expense) - In addition to operating costs, we had net other income of approximately $3,186,000 consisting of interest income of approximately $7,000, costs associated with issuance of the public warrants and private placement warrants of approximately $722,000 and the reduction in fair value of our warrant liability of approximately $3,901,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs prior to the completion of our initial public offering were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares and up to $500,000 in loans from our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note, $195,000 of which was borrowed prior to, and then fully repaid at, the October 1, 2021 closing of our initial public offering. The net proceeds from: (1) the sale of our units in our initial public offering (including the additional units sold on October 21, 2021 pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option), after deducting offering expenses of approximately $990,000 and underwriting commissions of approximately $6,819,000 (excluding total deferred underwriting commissions of $11,933,000), and (2) the sale of the private placement warrants (including the additional private placement warrants sold on October 21, 2021 in connection with the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option) for a purchase price of approximately $10,819,000, was $343,940,000. Of this amount, approximately $340,930,000, which includes approximately $11,933,000 of total deferred underwriting commissions, was deposited into the trust account. The remaining approximately $3,010,000 will not be held in the trust account. The funds in the trust account will be invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds that meet certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940 and that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable), if any, to complete our initial business combination. We will make withdrawals from the trust account to pay our taxes, including franchise taxes and income taxes. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. Under the assumed par value capital method, Delaware taxes each $1,000,000 of assumed par value capital at the rate of $400; where assumed par value would be (1) our total gross assets divided by (2) our total issued shares of common stock, multiplied by (3) the number of our authorized shares. Based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding and our total gross assets, our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the trust account will be income and franchise taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, in addition to our costs associated with operating as a listed public company, our principal use of working capital will be to fund our activities to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $900,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting a successful initial business combination; $175,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $55,000 for Nasdaq Global Market continued listing fees, $360,000 for payments to our officers, $180,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support; and approximately $630,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses, insurance premiums and reserves. In addition, we may pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1,966,000 in cash and working capital of approximately $2,371,000. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans. We believe that we have sufficient working capital at December 31, 2021 to continue our operations for at least 12 months and likely longer. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to consummate an initial business combination will be successful.
Our sponsor, an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors may, but none of them is obligated to, loan us funds as may be required to fund our working capital requirements. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants issued to our sponsor, our direct anchor investors and our other anchor investors. The terms of such loans by our sponsor, an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor, an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors, if any, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following our initial public offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses with enterprise values that are greater than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, and, as a result, if the cash portion of the purchase price exceeds the amount available from the trust account, net of amounts needed to satisfy redemptions by public stockholders, we may be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. We may also obtain financing prior to the closing of our initial business combination to fund our working capital needs and transaction costs in connection with our search for and completion of our initial business combination. There is no limitation on our ability to raise funds through the issuance of equity or equity-linked securities or through loans, advances or other indebtedness in connection with our initial business combination, including pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop arrangements we may enter into following the consummation of our initial public offering. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any agreements for non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. In connection with our initial public offering, we entered into an Administrative Support Agreement with Hennessy Capital Group LLC, an affiliate of our sponsor, pursuant to which we pay Hennessy Capital Group LLC $15,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support.
Also, commencing on September 29, 2021, the date our securities were first listed on the Nasdaq Global Market, we have agreed to compensate each of our President and Chief Operating Officer as well as our Chief Financial Officer $29,000 per month prior to the consummation of our initial business combination, of which $14,000 per month is payable upon the completion of our initial business combination and $15,000 per month is payable currently for their services. During the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, approximately $90,000 was paid and approximately $84,000 was included in current liabilities as deferred compensation at December 31, 2021 for these obligations.
Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying or accruing these monthly fees.
In connection with identifying an initial business combination candidate and negotiating an initial business combination, we may enter into engagement letters or agreements with various consultants, advisors, professionals and others in connection with an initial business combination. The services under these engagement letters and agreements can be material in amount and in some instances can include contingent or success fees. Contingent or success fees (but not deferred underwriting compensation) would be charged to operations in the quarter that our initial business combination is consummated. In most instances (except with respect to our independent registered public accounting firm), these engagement letters and agreements are expected to specifically provide that such counterparties waive their rights to seek repayment from the funds in the trust account.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting estimates and policies:
Accounting estimates:
A critical accounting estimate to our financial statements is the estimated fair value of our warrant liability. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The estimated fair value of the warrant liability at October 1, 2021 was determined using Level 3 inputs. At October 1, 2021, we utilized an independent valuation consultant that used a binomial lattice simulation methodology to value the warrants. Inherent in a binomial options pricing model are assumptions related to expected share-price volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. We estimate the volatility of our shares based on historical volatility that matches the expected remaining life of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which we anticipates to remain at zero.
Since the hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets, at December 31, 2021, our public warrants were trading in an active market. As such, at December 31, 2021, we valued our public warrants based on publicly observable inputs (Level 1 inputs) from the trading in the public warrants in an active market ($0.84 per warrant on December 31, 2021). Since the private placement warrants are substantially similar to the public warrants but do not trade, we valued them based on the value of the public warrants (significant other observable inputs - Level 2).
The difference between the estimated fair value at October 1, 2021 ($1.05 per warrant or approximately $19,506,000) and the estimated fair value at December 31, 2021 ($0.84 per warrant or approximately $15,604,000) was $0.21 or approximately $3,901,000. For reference, each $0.10 change in fair value of our warrants translated to approximately $1,858,000.
Net Income or Loss per Common Share:
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Fair Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income or loss per common share is computed by dividing net income or loss applicable to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period plus, to the extent dilutive, the incremental number of common shares to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method.
We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in our initial public offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 18,576,712 Class A common shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted income (loss) per common share is the same as basic income (loss) per common share for the period presented.
We have two classes of shares: our Class A common stock and our Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata among the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the respective period.
The following table reflects the net income per share after allocating income between the shares based on outstanding shares.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments:
The fair value of our assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under FASB ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the balance sheets primarily due to their short-term nature.
Offering Costs:
We comply with the requirements of FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Costs incurred in connection with preparation for our initial public offering totaled approximately $19,741,000 including our costs of approximately $990,000 together with $18,750,000 of underwriters’ discount, have been allocated to equity instruments ($19,018,000) and warrant liability ($722,000), based on their relative values, and charged to equity or expense (in the case of the portion allocated to warrant liability) upon completion of our initial public offering.
Income Taxes:
We follow the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”) Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the balance sheet carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that included the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
FASB ASC 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties at December 31, 2021. We are currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from our position. We are subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
Redeemable Common Stock:
All of the 34,092,954 public shares sold as part of the units in our initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of public shares if we hold a stockholder vote or if there is a tender offer for shares in connection with a business combination. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), redemption provisions not solely within our control requires the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Although we did not specify a maximum redemption threshold, our charter provides that in no event will we redeem our public shares in an amount that would cause our net tangible assets (i.e., total assets less intangible assets and liabilities) to be less than $5,000,001 upon the closing of a business combination.
While redemptions cannot cause our net tangible assets to fall below $5,000,000, all shares of Class A common stock are redeemable and classified as such on our balance sheet until such time as a redemption event takes place. The value of Class A common stock that may be redeemed is equal to $10.00 per share (which is the assumed redemption price) multiplied by 34,092,954 shares of Class A common stock.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the securities at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Class A common stock are affected by adjustments to additional paid-in capital. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, all of the 34,092,954 public shares were classified outside of permanent equity. Class A common stock subject to redemption consist of:
Derivative warrant liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance FASB ASC 480 and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. Costs associated with issuing the warrants accounted for as liabilities are charged to operations when the warrants are issued. The fair value of the warrants was estimated using a binomial lattice simulation approach.