Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain statements, contained in this section and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements involve a number of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors include, but are not limited to, changes in the laws and regulations affecting the industry, changes in the demand and price for refrigerants (including unfavorable market conditions adversely affecting the demand for, and the price of refrigerants), the Company's ability to source refrigerants, regulatory and economic factors, seasonality, competition, litigation, the nature of supplier or customer arrangements that become available to the Company in the future, adverse weather conditions, possible technological obsolescence of existing products and services, possible reduction in the carrying value of long-lived assets, estimates of the useful life of its assets, potential environmental liability, customer concentration, the ability to obtain financing, the ability to meet financial covenants under our financing facilities, any delays or interruptions in bringing products and services to market, the timely availability of any requisite permits and authorizations from governmental entities and third parties as well as factors relating to doing business outside the United States, including changes in the laws, regulations, policies, and political, financial and economic conditions, including inflation, interest and currency exchange rates, of countries in which the Company may seek to conduct business, and integration of any other assets it acquires from third parties into its operations, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other risks detailed in this report and in the Company’s other subsequent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The words “believe”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “may”, “plan”, “should” and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date the statement was made.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the effects of a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic and the related actions by governments around the world to attempt to contain the spread of the virus have materially impacted the global economy.
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak and business disruption, we have four primary priorities:
● To ensure the health and safety of Hudson employees
● To keep our products in supply and to maintain the quality and safety of our products
● To best serve our customers across all channels as they adapt to the shifting demands of consumers during the crisis
● To best position ourselves to emerge strong when this crisis ends
We operate in a “critical infrastructure industry” and are an essential business as defined by the United States government as we procure, process, service and deliver refrigerants to the government and wholesale and retail organizations, which also service both residential
homes and commercial institutions throughout the United States. While the conditions in the United States and the economy have been impacted by the pandemic, we have been effectively running our operations, including the following:
-Keeping all plants open, while maintaining proper safety standards
-Directing certain office personnel to work remotely, efficiently and safely
-Maintaining ongoing relationships and business with existing customers and vendors in the supply chain
As of the date of this filing, we have activated our contingency plans. We have deployed national and regional teams to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and recommend risk mitigation actions; we have implemented travel restrictions; and we are following social distancing practices. We are endeavoring to follow guidance from authorities and health officials including, but not limited to, requiring associates to wear masks and other protective clothing as appropriate, and implementing additional cleaning and sanitization routines at system facilities.
During times of crisis, business continuity and adapting to the needs of our customers is critical. We have developed systemwide knowledge-sharing routines and processes which include the management of any supply chain challenges. As of the date of this filing, there has been no material impact on our ability to procure or distribute our products and services. We are moving with speed to best serve our customers impacted by COVID-19 and to ensure adequate inventory levels in key channels. We have shifted to more remote and paperless options for customer payments and receipts, including ACH payments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Several of the Company's accounting policies involve significant judgments, uncertainties and estimates. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that actual results differ from management's judgments and estimates, there could be a material adverse effect on the Company. On a continuous basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including, but not limited to, those estimates related to its inventory reserves, valuation allowance for the deferred tax assets relating to its net operating loss carry forwards (“NOLs”) and goodwill and intangible assets.
Inventory
For inventory, the Company evaluates both current and anticipated sales prices of its products to determine if a write down of inventory to net realizable value is necessary. Net realizable value represents the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion and disposal. The determination if a write-down to net realizable value is necessary is primarily affected by the market prices for the refrigerant gases we sell. Commodity prices generally are affected by a wide range of factors beyond our control, including weather, seasonality, the availability and adequacy of supply, government regulation and policies and general political and economic conditions. At any time, our inventory levels may be substantial.
Goodwill
The Company has made acquisitions that included a significant amount of goodwill and other intangible assets. The Company applies the purchase method of accounting for acquisitions, which among other things, requires the recognition of goodwill (which represents the excess of the purchase price of the acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired and identified intangible assets). We test our goodwill for impairment on an annual basis (the first day of the fourth quarter) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of an asset below its carrying value. Other intangible assets that meet certain criteria are amortized over their estimated useful lives.
An impairment charge is recorded based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value. An impairment charge would be recognized when the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of a reporting unit. These impairment evaluations use many assumptions and estimates in determining an impairment loss, including certain assumptions and estimates related to future earnings. If the Company does not achieve its earnings objectives, the assumptions and estimates underlying these impairment evaluations could be adversely affected, which could result in an asset impairment charge that would negatively impact operating results. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed our annual impairment test as of October 1 and determined in our qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, resulting in no goodwill impairment. There can be no assurances that future sustained declines in macroeconomic or business conditions affecting our industry will not occur, which could result in goodwill impairment charges in future periods.
There were no goodwill impairment losses recognized in any of the two years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Intangibles
Intangibles with determinable lives are amortized over the estimated useful lives of the assets currently ranging from 6 to 13 years. The Company reviews these useful lives annually to determine that they reflect future realizable value.
Income Taxes
The Company is taxed at statutory corporate income tax rates after adjusting income reported for financial statement purposes for certain items. Current income tax expense (benefit) reflects the tax results of revenues and expenses currently taxable or deductible. The Company utilizes the asset and liability method of accounting for deferred income taxes, which provides for the recognition of deferred tax assets or liabilities, based on enacted tax rates and laws, for the differences between the financial and income tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities.
The tax benefit associated with the Company’s net operating loss carry forwards (“NOLs”) is recognized to the extent that the Company expects to realize future taxable income. As a result of a prior “change in control”, as defined by the Internal Revenue Service, the Company’s ability to utilize its existing NOLs is subject to certain annual limitations. To the extent that the Company utilizes its NOLs, it will not pay tax on such income. However, to the extent that the Company’s net income, if any, exceeds the annual NOL limitation, it will pay income taxes based on the then existing statutory rates. In addition, certain states either do not allow or limit NOLs and as such the Company will be liable for certain state income taxes.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had NOLs of approximately $29.3 million, none of which have an expiration date and which are subject to annual limitations of 80% of tax earnings. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had state tax NOLs of approximately $21.0 million expiring in various years. We review the likelihood that we will realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets, and therefore the need for valuation allowances, on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of the year, and more frequently if events indicate that a review is required. In determining the requirement for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial results are considered, along with all other available positive and negative evidence.
Concluding that a valuation allowance is not required is difficult when there is significant negative evidence that is objective and verifiable, such as cumulative losses in recent years. We utilize a rolling twelve quarters of pre-tax income or loss adjusted for significant permanent book to tax differences, as well as non-recurring items, as a measure of our cumulative results in recent years. Based on our assessment as of December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, we concluded that due to the uncertainty that the deferred tax assets will not be fully realized in the future, we recorded a valuation allowance of approximately $11.3 million during 2018, and due to additional losses, increased the valuation allowance through 2019 and 2020 to $19.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, and due to additional income that resulted in the utilization of net operating losses of $16.8 million, we reduced the valuation allowance by $3.9 million resulting in an ending balance of $15.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
The Company evaluates uncertain tax positions, if any, by determining if it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company believes it had no uncertain tax positions and there are no open federal or state examinations.
Overview
The Company is a leading provider of sustainable refrigerant products and services to the Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning and Refrigeration (“HVACR”) industry. For nearly three decades, we have demonstrated our commitment to our customers and the environment by becoming one of the United States’ largest refrigerant reclaimers through multimillion dollar investments in the plants and advanced separation technology required to recover a wide variety of refrigerants and restoring them to Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute (“AHRI”) standard for reuse as certified EMERALD Refrigerants™.
The Company's products and services are primarily used in commercial air conditioning, industrial processing and refrigeration systems, and include refrigerant and industrial gas sales, refrigerant management services consisting primarily of reclamation of refrigerants and RefrigerantSide® Services performed at a customer's site, consisting of system decontamination to remove moisture, oils and other contaminants.
Sales of refrigerants continue to represent a significant majority of the Company’s revenues.
The Company also sells industrial gases to a variety of industry customers, predominantly to users in, or involved with, the US Military. In July 2016, the Company was awarded, as prime contractor, a five-year fixed price contract, including a five-year renewal option which has been exercised, awarded to it by the United States Defense Logistics Agency (“DLA”) for the management and supply of refrigerants, compressed gases, cylinders and related items to US Military commands and installations, Federal civilian agencies and foreign militaries. Primary users include the US Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps and Coast Guard. Our contract with DLA expires in July 2026.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $192.7 million, an increase of $45.1 million or 30.6% from the $147.6 million reported during the comparable 2020 period. The increase was mainly attributable to higher selling prices of certain refrigerants sold, partially offset by reduced volume as the Company was more selective in its sales of refrigerants. Starting in late March 2020, the COVID-19 virus pandemic negatively impacted our economy, including the closures to public venues, such as office buildings, gyms, schools and universities across the U.S., which negatively impacted our end markets and overall demand for refrigerants.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $121.1 million or 63% of sales. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $112.2 million or 76% of sales. The reduction in the cost of sales percentage from 76% to 63% is primarily due to higher selling prices and lower costs of certain refrigerants sold during the year 2021 when compared to the year 2020.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $26.6 million, representing a negligible variance when compared to $26.6 million reported during the comparable 2020 period. SG&A mainly consists of professional fees, payroll costs and other selling, general and administrative expense.
Amortization expense was $2.8 million and 2.9 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other expense for 2021 was $8.9 million, compared to the $11.3 million of other expense reported during the comparable 2020 period. Interest expense was lower due to reduced debt resulting from the Company paying down principal of its term loan debt. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.5 million related to the forgiveness of the Company’s PPP Loan. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million relating to the receipt of key man life insurance proceeds from the unexpected passing of Kevin J. Zugibe, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of the Company at that time.
Income tax expense for 2021 was $1.1 million compared to income tax benefit of $0.2 million for 2020. For 2021 and 2020, income tax expense for federal and state income tax purposes was determined by applying statutory income tax rates to pre-tax income after adjusting for certain items. As discussed previously, we concluded that due to the uncertainty that the deferred tax assets will not be fully realized in the future, we have recorded a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021.
The net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $32.3 million, an increase of $37.5 million from the $5.2 million of net loss reported during the comparable 2020 period, primarily due to higher revenues and reduced interest expense, as described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital, which represents current assets less current liabilities, of $55.5 million, an increase of $31.1 million from the working capital of $24.4 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily attributable to timing of borrowings, accounts receivable and inventory.
Inventory and trade receivables are principal components of current assets. At December 31, 2021, the Company had inventory of $94.1 million, an increase of $49.6 million from $44.5 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in the inventory balance is primarily due to increases in inventory cost in 2021, consistent with the increase in selling price of certain refrigerants. The Company’s ability to sell and replace its inventory on a timely basis and the prices at which it can be sold are subject, among other things, to current market conditions and the nature of supplier or customer arrangements and the Company’s ability to source CFC and HCFC based refrigerants (which are no longer being produced) and HFC refrigerants (which are currently in the process of being phased down).
At December 31, 2021, the Company had trade receivables, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, of $14.2 million, an increase of $4.4 million from $9.8 million at December 31, 2020. The Company’s trade receivables are concentrated with various wholesalers, brokers, contractors and end-users within the refrigeration industry that are primarily located in the continental United States. The Company has historically financed its working capital requirements through cash flows from operations, the issuance of debt and equity securities, and bank borrowings.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.2 million, a reduction of $12.9 million compared to the net cash provided by operating activities of $11.7 million for the comparable 2020 period. The variance is primarily due to increased inventory cost, as previously mentioned, offset by increased net income in 2021, primarily as a result of increased selling price of certain refrigerants sold.
Net cash used in investing activities for 2021 and 2020 was $1.9 million and $0.5 million, respectively. As described above, key man life insurance proceeds of $1.0 million during 2020 were offset by capital expenditures incurred in the ordinary course of business, mainly in our plant facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 was $5.3 million, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $12.5 million for 2020. The variance is mainly due to borrowings under the revolving credit facility to purchase inventory during 2021. In 2020, the Company received $2.5 million under the PPP loan, which was forgiven in 2021.
At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents were $3.5 million, or approximately $2.2 million higher than the $1.3 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, mainly due to timing and as a result of the transactions mentioned above.
Revolving Credit Facility (prior to refinancing on March 2, 2022)
On December 19, 2019, Hudson Technologies Company (“HTC”), Hudson Holdings, Inc. (“Holdings”) and Aspen Refrigerants, Inc. (“ARI”), as borrowers (collectively, the “Borrowers”), and Hudson Technologies, Inc. (the “Company”) as a guarantor, became obligated under a Credit Agreement (the “Wells Fargo Facility”) with Wells Fargo Bank, as administrative agent and lender (“Agent” or “Wells Fargo”) and such other lenders as may thereafter become a party to the Wells Fargo Facility. The Wells Fargo Facility was amended and restated on March 2, 2022 (see “-Revolving Credit Facility Amendment” below).
Under the terms of the Wells Fargo Facility, the Borrowers could borrow, from time to time, up to $60 million at any time consisting of revolving loans in a maximum amount up to the lesser of $60 million and a borrowing base that was calculated based on the outstanding amount of the Borrowers’ eligible receivables and eligible inventory, as described in the Wells Fargo Facility. The Wells Fargo Facility also contained a sublimit of $5 million for swing line loans and $2 million for letters of credit.
Amounts borrowed under the Wells Fargo Facility were used by the Borrowers to repay existing revolving indebtedness under its prior revolving credit facility, repay certain principal amounts under the Term Loan Facility (as defined below), and for working capital needs, certain permitted acquisitions, and to reimburse drawings under letters of credit.
Interest on loans under the Wells Fargo Facility was payable in arrears on the first day of each month. Interest charges with respect to loans were computed on the actual principal amount of loans outstanding during the month at a rate per annum equal to (A) with respect to Base Rate loans, the sum of (i) a rate per annum equal to the higher of (1) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (2) one month LIBOR plus 1.0%, and (3) the prime commercial lending rate of Wells Fargo, plus (ii) between 1.25% and 1.75% depending on average monthly undrawn availability and (B) with respect to LIBOR rate loans, the sum of the LIBOR rate plus between 2.25% and 2.75% depending on average monthly undrawn availability.
In connection with the closing of the Wells Fargo Facility, the Company also entered into a Guaranty and Security Agreement, dated as of December 19, 2019 (the “Revolver Guaranty and Security Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company and certain subsidiaries unconditionally guaranteed the payment and performance of all obligations owing by Borrowers to Wells Fargo, as Agent for the benefit of the revolving lenders. Pursuant to the Revolver Guaranty and Security Agreement, Borrowers, the Company and certain other subsidiaries granted to the Agent, for the benefit of the Wells Fargo Facility lenders, a security interest in substantially all of their respective assets, including receivables, equipment, general intangibles (including intellectual property), inventory, subsidiary stock, real property, and certain other assets. The Revolver Guaranty and Security Agreement also provided that the Agent shall receive the right to dominion over certain of the Borrowers’ bank accounts in the event of an Event of Default under the Wells Fargo Facility, or if undrawn availability under the Wells Fargo Facility falls below $9 million at any time.
The Wells Fargo Facility contained a financial covenant requiring the Company to maintain at all times minimum liquidity (defined as availability under the Wells Fargo Facility plus unrestricted cash) of at least $5 million, of which at least $3 million must be derived from availability. The Wells Fargo Facility also contained a springing covenant, which took effect only upon a failure to maintain undrawn availability of at least $7.5 million, requiring the Company to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (FCCR) of not less than 1.00 to 1.00, as of the end of each trailing period of twelve consecutive fiscal months commencing with the month prior to the triggering of the covenant. The FCCR (as defined in the Wells Fargo Facility) is the ratio of (a) EBITDA for such period, minus unfinanced capital expenditures made during such period, to (b) the aggregate amount of (i) interest expense required to be paid (other than interest paid-in-kind, amortization of financing fees, and other non-cash interest expense) during such period, (ii) scheduled principal payments (but excluding principal payments relating to outstanding revolving loans under the Wells Fargo Facility), (iii) all net federal, state, and local income taxes required to be paid during such period (provided, that any tax refunds received shall be applied to the period in which the cash outlay for such taxes was made), (iv) all restricted payments paid (as defined in the Wells Fargo Facility) during such period, and (v) to the extent not otherwise deducted from EBITDA for such period, all payments required to be made during such period in respect of any funding deficiency or funding shortfall with respect to any pension plan. The FCCR covenant ceases after the Borrowers have been in compliance therewith for two consecutive months.
The Wells Fargo Facility also contained customary non-financial covenants relating to the Company and the Borrowers, including limitations on Borrowers’ ability to pay dividends on common stock or preferred stock, and also includes certain events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other obligations, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, certain ERISA events, judgments in excess of specified amounts, impairments to guarantees and a change of control. The Wells Fargo Facility also contained certain covenants contained in the Fourth Amendment to the Prior Term Loan Facility described below.
On April 23, 2020, the Borrowers, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into a First Amendment to Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo (the “First Amendment”). The First Amendment authorized the Company and its subsidiaries to incur up to $2.5 million of indebtedness under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and contained other provisions relating to the treatment of such proceeds and any potential debt forgiveness, under the Wells Fargo Facility.
The commitments under the Wells Fargo Facility were to expire and the full outstanding principal amount of the loans, together with accrued and unpaid interest, would have been due and payable in full on December 19, 2022, unless the commitments were terminated and the outstanding principal amount of the loans were accelerated sooner following an event of default.
Prior Term Loan Facility (prior to refinancing on March 2, 2022)
On October 10, 2017, HTC, Holdings, and ARI, as borrowers, and the Company, as guarantor, became obligated under a Term Loan Credit and Security Agreement (as amended, the “Prior Term Loan Facility”) with U.S. Bank National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent (“Prior Term Loan Agent”) and funds advised by FS Investments and such other lenders as may thereafter
become a party to the Term Loan Facility (the “Prior Term Loan Lenders”). The Prior Term Loan Facility was repaid in full and terminated on March 2, 2022 (see “-Termination of Prior Term Loan Facility” below).
Under the terms of the Prior Term Loan Facility, the Borrowers immediately borrowed $105 million pursuant to a term loan (the “Prior Term Loan”).
The Prior Term Loan was to mature on October 10, 2023. Interest on the Prior Term Loan was generally payable on the earlier of the last day of the interest period applicable to such Eurodollar rate loan and the last day of the Term Loan Facility, as applicable. Interest is payable at the rate per annum of the Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Facility) plus 10.25%. The Borrowers had the option of paying 3.00% interest per annum in kind by adding such amount to the principal of the Prior Term Loans during no more than five fiscal quarters during the term of the Prior Term Loan Facility.
Borrowers and the Company granted to the Prior Term Loan Agent, for the benefit of the Prior Term Loan Lenders, a security interest in substantially all of their respective assets, including receivables, equipment, general intangibles (including intellectual property), inventory, subsidiary stock, real property, and certain other assets.
The Prior Term Loan Facility contained a financial covenant requiring the Company to maintain a specified total leverage ratio (“TLR”), tested as of the last day of the fiscal quarter. The TLR (as defined in the Prior Term Loan Facility) is the ratio of (a) funded debt as of such day to (b) EBITDA for the four consecutive fiscal quarters ending on the last day of such fiscal quarter. Funded debt (as defined in the Prior Term Loan Facility) includes amounts borrowed under the Wells Fargo Facility and the Term Loan Facility as well as capitalized lease obligations and other indebtedness for borrowed money maturing more than one year from the date of creation thereof. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the TLR was approximately 1.93 to 1 and 5.84 to 1, respectively.
The Prior Term Loan Facility also contained customary non-financial covenants relating to the Company and the Borrowers, including limitations on their ability to pay dividends on common stock or preferred stock, and also included certain events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other obligations, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, certain ERISA events, judgments in excess of specified amounts, impairments to guarantees and a change of control.
In connection with the closing of the Prior Term Loan Facility, the Company also entered into a Guaranty and Suretyship Agreement, dated as of October 10, 2017 (the “Prior Term Loan Guarantee”), pursuant to which the Company affirmed its unconditional guarantee of the payment and performance of all obligations owing by Borrowers to Prior Term Loan Agent, as agent for the benefit of the Prior Term Loan Lenders.
The Prior Term Loan Agent and the Agent entered into an intercreditor agreement governing the relative priority of their security interests granted by the Borrowers and the Guarantor in the collateral, providing that the Agent would have a first priority security interest in the accounts receivable, inventory, deposit accounts and certain other assets (the “Revolving Credit Priority Collateral”) and the Term Loan Agent would have a first priority security interest in the equipment, real property, capital stock of subsidiaries and certain other assets (the “Prior Term Loan Priority Collateral”).
On December 19, 2019, HTC, Holdings and ARI as borrowers and the Company as a guarantor, entered into a Waiver and Fourth Amendment to Term Loan Credit and Security Agreement (the “Fourth Amendment”) with U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent and administrative agent, and the various lenders thereunder.
The Fourth Amendment waived financial covenant defaults at June 30, 2019 and September 30, 2019 and amended the Term Loan Credit and Security Agreement dated October 10, 2017 (as previously amended, the “Prior Term Loan Facility”) to reset the maximum Total Leverage Ratio covenant contained in the Prior Term Loan Facility at the indicated dates as follows: (i) September 30, 2019 - 15.67:1.00; (ii) December 31, 2019 - 14.54:1.00; (iii) March 31, 2020 - 16.57:1.00; (iv) June 30, 2020 - 10.87:1.00; (v) September 30, 2020 - 8.89:1.00; (vi) December 31, 2020 - 8.89:1.00; (vii) March 31, 2021 - 7.75:1.00; (viii) June 30, 2021 - 7.03:1.00; (ix) September 30, 2021 - 6.08:1.00; and (x) December 31, 2021 - 5.36:1.00. The Fourth Amendment also reset the minimum liquidity requirement (consisting of cash plus undrawn availability on the Borrowers’ revolving loan facility) of $5 million, measured monthly. Furthermore, the Fourth Amendment added a minimum LTM Adjusted EBITDA covenant as of the indicated dates as follows: (i) September 30, 2019 - $7.887 million; (ii) December 31, 2019 - $7.954 million; (iii) March 31, 2020 - $7.359 million; (iv) June 30, 2020 - $11.745 million; (v) September 30, 2020 - $12.021 million; (vi) December 31, 2020 - $12.300 million; (vii) March 31, 2021 -
$14.295 million; (viii) June 30, 2021 - $14.566 million; (ix) September 30, 2021 - $15.431 million; and (x) December 31, 2021 - $16.267 million.
The Fourth Amendment also (i) continued the limitation on acquisitions and dividends, (ii) required a principal repayment of $14,000,000 upon execution of the Fourth Amendment and (iii) increased the scheduled quarterly principal repayments to $562,000 effective March 31, 2020 and $1,312,000 effective December 31, 2020.
The Fourth Amendment also terminated the exit fee payable to the term loan lenders, which would have been payable in full in cash upon the earlier to occur of (x) repayment in full of the term loans, or (y) any acceleration of the term loans. In lieu of the exit fee, the Fourth Amendment reinstated a prepayment premium equal to the following percentages of the principal amount prepaid, depending upon the date of prepayment: (i) through March 31, 2020 - 0.50%; (ii) from April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021 - 2.50%; and (iii) from April 1, 2021 and thereafter - 5.00%.
The Fourth Amendment also added a new covenant providing that in the event of a breach of a financial covenant contained in the Term Loan Facility or any failure to make a required principal repayment (a “Trigger Event”), then on or prior to six months after a Trigger Event, the Company shall commence a process to (x) sell its businesses and/or assets, and/or (y) consummate a refinancing transaction with respect to the Term Loan Facility (a “Transaction”), in each case, subject to enumerated time milestones contained in the Fourth Amendment, and which requires that Transaction shall, in any event, be consummated on or prior to the eighteen (18) month anniversary of the Trigger Event.
As closing conditions to the execution and delivery of the Fourth Amendment, the Company was required to: (i) amend its Bylaws in a manner acceptable to the Term Loan Facility lenders; (ii) appoint two new independent directors to the board of directors (the “Special Directors”); and (iii) pay an amendment fee of 0.50% of the amount of the outstanding loans under the Term Loan Facility.
On April 23, 2020, HTC, Holdings and ARI as borrowers and the Company as a guarantor, entered into a Fifth Amendment to Term Loan Credit and Security Agreement (the “Fifth Amendment”) with U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent and administrative agent, and the various lenders thereunder. The Fifth Amendment authorized the Company and its subsidiaries to incur up to $2.5 million of indebtedness under the CARES Act and contained other provisions relating to the treatment of such proceeds and any potential debt forgiveness, under the Prior Term Loan Facility.
The Company evaluated the Fourth and Fifth Amendments in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 470, Debt, to determine if the Amendments were (1) a troubled debt restructuring, and if not, (2) a modification or an extinguishment of debt. The Company concluded that the Fourth Amendment was a troubled debt restructuring for accounting purposes due to the removal of the exit fee; as such, the Company capitalized an additional $0.5 million of deferred financing costs, which are being amortized over the remaining term. The future undiscounted cash flows of the term loan, as amended, exceeded the carrying value, and accordingly, no gain was recognized and no adjustment was made to the carrying value of the debt.
The Company was in compliance with all covenants, under the Wells Fargo Facility and the Prior Term Loan Facility, as amended, as of December 31, 2021.
New Term Loan Facility (Effective March 2, 2022)
On March 2, 2022, Hudson Technologies Company (“HTC”), an indirect subsidiary of Hudson Technologies, Inc. (the “Company”), and the Company’s subsidiary Hudson Holdings, Inc., as borrowers (collectively, the “Borrowers”), and the Company, as guarantor, became obligated under a Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Facility”) with TCW Asset Management Company LLC, as administrative agent (“Term Loan Agent”) and the lender parties thereto (the “Term Loan Lenders”).
Under the terms of the Term Loan Facility, the Borrowers have immediately borrowed $85 million pursuant to a term loan (the “Term Loan”). Amounts borrowed under the Term Loan Facility were used by the Borrowers to repay the outstanding principal amount and related fees and expenses under the Prior Term Loan Facility (as defined below) and for other corporate purposes.
The Term Loan matures on March 2, 2027, or earlier upon certain acceleration or cross default events. Principal payments on the Term Loan are required on a quarterly basis, commencing with the quarter ending March 31, 2022, in the amount of 5% of the original principal amount of the outstanding Term Loan per annum. The Term Loan Facility also requires annual payments of 50% of Excess
Cash Flow (as defined in the Term Loan Facility); provided that commencing with the year ending December 31, 2023 such payments may be reduced depending upon the Company’s leverage ratio (as defined in the Term Loan Facility) for the applicable year. The Term Loan Facility also requires mandatory prepayments of the Term Loans in the event of certain asset dispositions, debt issuances, and other events. The Term Loan may be prepaid at the option of the Borrowers subject to a prepayment premium of 3% in year one, 2% in year two, 1% in year three, and zero in year four and thereafter.
Interest on the Term Loan is generally payable monthly, in arrears. Interest charges with respect to the Term Loan are computed on the actual principal amount of the Term Loan outstanding at a rate per annum equal to (A) with respect to Base Rate loans, the sum of (i) a rate per annum equal to the higher of (1) 2.0%, (2) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (3) one month term SOFR plus 1.0%, and (4) the prime commercial lending rate quoted by The Wall Street Journal, plus (ii) between 6.0% and 7.0% depending on the applicable leverage ratio and (B) with respect to SOFR loans, the sum of the applicable SOFR rate plus between 7.0% and 8.0% depending on the applicable leverage ratio.
Borrowers and the Company granted to the Term Loan Agent, for the benefit of the Term Loan Lenders, a security interest in substantially all of their respective assets, including receivables, equipment, general intangibles (including intellectual property), inventory, subsidiary stock, real property, and certain other assets.
The Term Loan Facility contains a fixed charge coverage ratio covenant and a leverage ratio covenant, each tested quarterly. The Term Loan Facility also contains customary non-financial covenants relating to the Company and the Borrowers, including limitations on Borrowers’ ability to pay dividends on common stock or preferred stock, and also includes certain events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other obligations, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, certain ERISA events, judgments in excess of specified amounts, impairments to guarantees and a change of control.
In connection with the closing of the Term Loan Facility, the Company also entered into a Guaranty and Security Agreement, dated as of March 2, 2022 (the “Term Loan Guarantee”), pursuant to which the Company affirmed its unconditional guarantee of the payment and performance of all obligations owing by Borrowers to Term Loan Agent, as agent for the benefit of the Term Loan Lenders.
The Term Loan Agent and the Agent (as defined below) have entered into an intercreditor agreement governing the relative priority of their security interests granted by the Borrowers and the Guarantor in the collateral, providing that the Agent shall have a first priority security interest in the accounts receivable, inventory, deposit accounts and certain other assets (the “Revolving Credit Priority Collateral”) and the Term Loan Agent shall have a first priority security interest in the equipment, real property, capital stock of subsidiaries and certain other assets (the “Term Loan Priority Collateral”).
Termination of Prior Term Loan Facility
In conjunction with entry into the new Term Loan Facility as described above, on March 2, 2022 the Company's existing term loans set forth in the Term Loan Credit and Security Agreement with U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent and administrative agent, and the various lenders thereunder, as amended (the “Prior Term Loan Facility”), which had a principal balance of approximately $63.9 million after payment of a $16.0 million excess cash flow amount thereunder, was repaid in full, together with associated required lender fees and expenses of $3.3 million, and the Prior Term Loan Facility was terminated.
Revolving Credit Facility Amendment (Effective March 2, 2022)
On March 2, 2022, Hudson Technologies Company (“HTC”) and Hudson Holdings, Inc. (“Holdings”), as borrowers (collectively, the “Borrowers”), and Hudson Technologies, Inc (the “Company”) as a guarantor, entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended Wells Fargo Facility”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and lender (“Agent” or “Wells Fargo”) and such other lenders as have or may thereafter become a party to the Wells Fargo Facility. The Amended Wells Fargo facility amended and restated the prior Wells Fargo Facility.
Under the terms of the Amended Wells Fargo Facility, the Borrowers may borrow up to $90 million consisting of: (i) $15 million immediately borrowed in the form of a “first in last out” term loan (the “FILO Tranche”) and (ii) from time to time, up to $75 million at any time consisting of revolving loans (the “Revolving Loans”) in a maximum amount up to the lesser of $75 million and a borrowing base that is calculated based on the outstanding amount of the Borrowers’ eligible receivables and eligible inventory, as described in the
Amended Wells Fargo Facility. The Amended Wells Fargo Facility also contains a sublimit of $9 million for swing line loans and $2 million for letters of credit.
Amounts borrowed under the Amended Wells Fargo Facility may be used for working capital needs, certain permitted acquisitions, and to reimburse drawings under letters of credit.
Interest under the Amended Wells Fargo Facility is payable in arrears on the first day of each month. Interest charges with respect to Revolving Loans are computed on the actual principal amount of Revolving Loans outstanding at a rate per annum equal to (A) with respect to Base Rate loans, the sum of (i) a rate per annum equal to the higher of (1) 1.0%, (2) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (3) one month term SOFR plus 1.0%, and (4) the prime commercial lending rate of Wells Fargo, plus (ii) between 1.25% and 1.75% depending on average monthly undrawn availability and (B) with respect to SOFR loans, the sum of the applicable SOFR rate plus between 2.36% and 2.86% depending on average quarterly undrawn availability. Interest charges with respect to the FILO Tranche are computed on the actual principal amount of FILO Tranche loans outstanding at a rate per annum equal to (A) with respect to Base Rate FILO Tranche loans, the sum of (i) a rate per annum equal to the higher of (1) 1.0%, (2) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (3) one month term SOFR plus 1.0%, and (4) the prime commercial lending rate of Wells Fargo, plus (ii) 6.5% and (B) with respect to SOFR FILO Tranche loans, the sum of the applicable SOFR rate plus 7.50%.
In connection with the closing of the Amended Wells Fargo Facility, the Company also entered into a First Amendment to Guaranty and Security Agreement, dated as of March 2, 2022 (the “Amended Revolver Guaranty and Security Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company and certain subsidiaries are continuing to unconditionally guarantee the payment and performance of all obligations owing by Borrowers to Wells Fargo, as Agent for the benefit of the revolving lenders. Pursuant to the Revolver Guaranty and Security Agreement, as amended, Borrowers, the Company and certain other subsidiaries are continuing to grant to the Agent, for the benefit of the Wells Fargo Facility lenders, a security interest in substantially all of their respective assets, including receivables, equipment, general intangibles (including intellectual property), inventory, subsidiary stock, real property, and certain other assets.
The Amended Wells Fargo Facility contains a financial covenant requiring the Company to maintain at all times minimum liquidity (defined as availability under the Amended Wells Fargo Facility plus unrestricted cash) of at least $5 million, of which at least $3 million must be derived from availability. The Amended Wells Fargo Facility also contains a springing covenant, which takes effect only upon a failure to maintain undrawn availability of at least $11.25 million or upon an election by the Borrowers to increase the inventory component of the borrowing base, requiring the Company to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (FCCR) of not less than 1.00 to 1.00, as of the end of each trailing period of twelve consecutive months commencing with the month prior to the triggering of the covenant. The FCCR (as defined in the Wells Fargo Facility) is the ratio of (a) EBITDA for such period, minus unfinanced capital expenditures made during such period, to (b) the aggregate amount of (i) interest expense required to be paid (other than interest paid-in-kind, amortization of financing fees, and other non-cash interest expense) during such period, (ii) scheduled principal payments (but excluding principal payments relating to outstanding Revolving Loans under the Amended Wells Fargo Facility), (iii) all net federal, state, and local income taxes required to be paid during such period (provided, that any tax refunds received shall be applied to the period in which the cash outlay for such taxes was made), (iv) all restricted payments paid (as defined in the Amended Wells Fargo Facility) during such period, and (v) to the extent not otherwise deducted from EBITDA for such period, all payments required to be made during such period in respect of any funding deficiency or funding shortfall with respect to any pension plan. The FCCR covenant ceases after the Borrowers have been in compliance therewith for two consecutive months.
The Amended Wells Fargo Facility also contains customary non-financial covenants relating to the Company and the Borrowers, including limitations on Borrowers’ ability to pay dividends on common stock or preferred stock, and also includes certain events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other obligations, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, certain ERISA events, judgments in excess of specified amounts, impairments to guarantees and a change of control.
The commitments under the Wells Fargo Facility will expire and the full outstanding principal amount of the loans, together with accrued and unpaid interest, are due and payable in full on March 2, 2027, unless the commitments are terminated and the outstanding principal amount of the loans are accelerated sooner following an event of default or in the event of certain other cross-defaults.
The Company’s ability to comply with these covenants in future quarters may be affected by events beyond the Company’s control, including general economic conditions, weather conditions, regulations and refrigerant pricing. Therefore, we cannot make any assurance that we will continue to be in compliance during future periods.
The Company believes that it will be able to satisfy its working capital requirements for the foreseeable future from anticipated cash flows from operations and available funds under the Wells Fargo Facility. Any unanticipated expenses, including, but not limited to, an increase in the cost of refrigerants purchased by the Company, an increase in operating expenses or failure to achieve expected revenues from the Company’s RefrigerantSide® Services and/or refrigerant sales or additional expansion or acquisition costs that may arise in the future would adversely affect the Company’s future capital needs. There can be no assurance that the Company’s proposed or future plans will be successful, and as such, the Company may require additional capital sooner than anticipated, which capital may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all.
CARES Act Loan
On April 23, 2020 the Company received a loan in the amount of $2.475 million from Meridian Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) pursuant to the CARES Act. The loan had a term of two years, was unsecured, and bore interest at a fixed rate of one percent per annum, with the first nine months of principal and interest deferred. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, in applying for the loan the Company made a good faith assertion based upon the degree of uncertainty introduced to the capital markets and the industries affecting the Company's customers and the Company's dependency to curtail expenses to fund ongoing operations. The PPP loan proceeds have been used in part to help offset payroll costs as stipulated in the legislation. All or a portion of the PPP loan may be forgiven by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) upon application by the Company and upon documentation of expenditures in accordance with the SBA requirements. Under the CARES Act, loan forgiveness is available for the sum of documented payroll costs and other covered areas, such as rent payments, mortgage interest and utilities, as applicable. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company received forgiveness of the loan from the SBA, resulting in $2.475 million of Other Income recorded in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Inflation
Inflation, historically or the current rise, has not had a material impact on the Company's operations.
Reliance on Suppliers and Customers
The Company participates in an industry that is highly regulated, and changes in the regulations affecting our business could affect our operating results. Currently the Company purchases virgin HCFC and HFC refrigerants and reclaimable, primarily HCFC and CFC, refrigerants from suppliers and its customers. Under the Act the phase-down of future production of certain virgin HCFC refrigerants commenced in 2010 and has been fully phased out by the year 2020, and production of all virgin HCFC refrigerants is scheduled to be phased out by the year 2030. To the extent that the Company is unable to source sufficient quantities of refrigerants or is unable to obtain refrigerants on commercially reasonable terms or experiences a decline in demand and/or price for refrigerants sold by it, the Company could realize reductions in revenue from refrigerant sales, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and financial position.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, one customer accounted for 10% of the Company’s revenues; no other customer accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s revenues. At December 31, 2021, there were $3.1 million of outstanding receivables from this customer. For the year ended December 31, 2020, one customer accounted for 14% of the Company’s revenues; no other customer accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s revenues. At December 31, 2020, there were $2.9 million of outstanding receivables from this customer.
The loss of a principal customer or a decline in the economic prospects of and/or a reduction in purchases of the Company's products or services by any such customer could have a material adverse effect on the Company's operating results and financial position.
Seasonality and Weather Conditions and Fluctuations in Operating Results
The Company's operating results vary from period to period as a result of weather conditions, requirements of potential customers, non-recurring refrigerant and service sales, availability and price of refrigerant products (virgin or reclaimable), changes in reclamation
technology and regulations, timing in introduction and/or retrofit or replacement of refrigeration equipment, the rate of expansion of the Company's operations, and by other factors. The Company's business is seasonal in nature with peak sales of refrigerants occurring in the first nine months of each year. During past years, the seasonal decrease in sales of refrigerants has resulted in losses particularly in the fourth quarter of the year. In addition, to the extent that there is unseasonably cool weather throughout the spring and summer months, which would adversely affect the demand for refrigerants, there would be a corresponding negative impact on the Company. Delays or inability in securing adequate supplies of refrigerants at peak demand periods, lack of refrigerant demand, increased expenses, declining refrigerant prices and a loss of a principal customer could result in significant losses. There can be no assurance that the foregoing factors will not occur and result in a material adverse effect on the Company's financial position and significant losses. The Company believes that to a lesser extent there is a similar seasonal element to RefrigerantSide® Service revenues as refrigerant sales.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which revises guidance for the accounting for credit losses on financial instruments within its scope, and in November 2018, issued ASU No. 2018-19 and in April 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-04 and in May 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-05, and in November 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-11, which each amended the standard. The new standard introduces an approach, based on expected losses, to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments and modifies the impairment model for available-for-sale debt securities. The new approach to estimating credit losses (referred to as the current expected credit losses model) applies to most financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain other instruments, including trade and other receivables, loans, held-to-maturity debt securities, net investments in leases and off-balance-sheet credit exposures. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. Entities are required to apply the standard’s provisions as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is adopted. The Company is still evaluating the impact of this ASU.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, which provides relief from accounting analysis and impacts that may otherwise be required for modifications to agreements necessitated by reference rate reform. It also provides optional expedients to enable the continuance of hedge accounting where certain hedging relationships are impacted by reference rate reform. This optional guidance is effective immediately, and available to be used through December 31, 2022. We are assessing the impact that reference rate reform and the related adoption of this guidance will have on our financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, "Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity", which is intended to simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. ASU 2020-06 is not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements.