Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Item 7, including but not limited to the sections under “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” contains forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of Part I and Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” In this document, the words “we,” “our,” “ours” and “us” refer to Holly Energy Partners, L.P. (“HEP”) and its consolidated subsidiaries or to HEP or an individual subsidiary and not to any other person.
OVERVIEW
HEP is a Delaware limited partnership. Through our subsidiaries and joint ventures we own and/or operate petroleum product and crude oil pipelines, terminal, tankage and loading rack facilities and refinery processing units that support the refining and marketing operations of HollyFrontier Corporation (“HFC”) and other refineries in the Mid-Continent, Southwest and Northwest regions of the United States. HEP, through its subsidiaries and joint ventures, owns and/or operates petroleum product and crude pipelines, tankage and terminals in Texas, New Mexico, Washington, Idaho, Oklahoma, Utah, Nevada, Wyoming and Kansas as well as refinery processing units in Utah and Kansas. HFC owned 57% of our outstanding common units and the non-economic general partner interest as of December 31, 2021.
We generate revenues by charging tariffs for transporting petroleum products and crude oil through our pipelines, by charging fees for terminalling and storing refined products and other hydrocarbons, providing other services at our storage tanks and terminals and charging a tolling fee per barrel or thousand standard cubic feet of feedstock throughput in our refinery processing units. We do not take ownership of products that we transport, terminal or store, and therefore we are not directly exposed to changes in commodity prices.
We believe global refined product demand and US crude production should support high utilization rates for the refineries we serve, which in turn will support volumes in our product pipelines, crude gathering system and terminals.
On August 2, 2021, HEP, The Sinclair Companies (“Sinclair”), and Sinclair Transportation Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of Sinclair (“STC”), entered into a Contribution Agreement (the “Contribution Agreement”) pursuant to which HEP will acquire all of the outstanding shares of STC in exchange for 21 million newly issued common units of HEP and cash consideration equal to $325 million (the “HEP Transaction”), subject to downward adjustment if, as a condition to obtaining antitrust clearance for the Sinclair Transactions (as defined below), HEP agrees to divest a portion of its equity interest in UNEV Pipeline, LLC and the sales price for such interests does not exceed the threshold provided in the Contribution Agreement.
The Sinclair Transactions are expected to close in 2022, subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory clearance, including the expiration or termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act (the “HSR Act”). On August 23, 2021, each of HFC and Sinclair filed its respective premerger notification and report regarding the Sinclair Transactions with the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (the “FTC”) under the HSR Act. On September 22, 2021, HFC and Sinclair each received a request for additional information and documentary material (“Second Request”) from the FTC in connection with the FTC’s review of the Sinclair Transactions. Issuance of the Second Request extends the waiting period under the HSR Act until 30 days after both HFC and Sinclair have substantially complied with the Second Request, unless the waiting period is terminated earlier by the FTC or the parties otherwise commit not to close the Sinclair Transactions for some additional period of time. HFC and Sinclair are cooperating with the FTC staff in its review and are working diligently to satisfy the closing conditions as soon as possible. In addition, the HEP Transaction is conditioned on the closing of the transactions contemplated by that certain Business Combination Agreement, dated as of August 2, 2021, by and among HFC, Sinclair and certain other parties, which will occur immediately following the HEP Transaction (the “HFC Transaction,” and together with the HEP Transaction, the “Sinclair Transactions”). See Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 1. Financial Statements” for additional information.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Our business depends in large part on the demand for the various petroleum products we transport, terminal and store in the markets we serve. The initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global macroeconomy created diminished demand, as well as lack of forward visibility, for refined products and crude oil transportation, and for the terminalling and storage services that we provide. Since the declines in demand at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we began to see improvement in demand for these products and services beginning late in the second quarter of 2020 that continued through the fourth quarter of 2021, with aggregate volumes approaching pre-pandemic levels. We expect our customers will continue to adjust refinery production levels commensurate with market demand and ultimately expect demand to return to pre-COVID-19 levels.
- 52 -
Most of our employees have returned to work at our locations, and we continue to follow Centers for Disease Control and local government guidance. We will continue to monitor developments in the COVID-19 pandemic and the dynamic environment it has created to properly address these policies going forward.
In 2022, HEP expects to hold its quarterly distribution constant at $0.35 per unit, or $1.40 on an annualized basis. HEP remains committed to its distribution strategy focused on funding all capital expenditures and distributions within operating cash flow and maintaining distributable cash flow coverage of 1.3x or greater with the goal of reducing leverage to 3.0-3.5x.
On March 27, 2020, the United States government passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), an approximately $2 trillion stimulus package that included various provisions intended to provide relief to individuals and businesses in the form of tax changes, loans and grants, among others. At this time, we have not sought relief in the form of loans or grants from the CARES Act; however, we have benefited from certain tax deferrals in the CARES Act and may benefit from other tax provisions if we meet the requirements to do so.
The extent to which HEP’s future results are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on various factors and consequences beyond our control, such as the duration and scope of the pandemic, the effects of any new variant strains of the underlying virus, additional actions by businesses and governments in response to the pandemic and the speed and effectiveness of responses to combat the virus. However, we have long-term customer contracts with minimum volume commitments, which have expiration dates from 2022 to 2036. These minimum volume commitments accounted for approximately 76% of our total revenues in 2021. We are currently not aware of any reasons that would prevent such customers from making the minimum payments required under the contracts or potentially making payments in excess of the minimum payments. In addition to these payments, we also expect to collect payments for services provided to uncommitted shippers. There have been no material changes to customer payment terms due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic, and the volatile regional and global economic conditions stemming from it, could also exacerbate the risk factors identified in this Form 10-K under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A. The COVID-19 pandemic may also materially adversely affect our results in a manner that is either not currently known or that we do not currently consider to be a significant risk to our business.
Investment in Joint Venture
On October 2, 2019, HEP Cushing LLC (“HEP Cushing”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of HEP, and Plains Marketing, L.P., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Plains All American Pipeline, L.P. (“Plains”), formed a 50/50 joint venture, Cushing Connect Pipeline & Terminal LLC (the “Cushing Connect Joint Venture”), for (i) the development, construction, ownership and operation of a new 160,000 barrel per day common carrier crude oil pipeline (the “Cushing Connect Pipeline”) that will connect the Cushing, Oklahoma crude oil hub to the Tulsa, Oklahoma refining complex owned by a subsidiary of HFC and (ii) the ownership and operation of 1.5 million barrels of crude oil storage in Cushing, Oklahoma (the “Cushing Connect JV Terminal”). The Cushing Connect JV Terminal went in service during the second quarter of 2020, and the Cushing Connect Pipeline was placed into service at the end of the third quarter of 2021. Long-term commercial agreements have been entered into to support the Cushing Connect Joint Venture assets.
The Cushing Connect Joint Venture has contracted with an affiliate of HEP to manage the construction and operation of the Cushing Connect Pipeline and with an affiliate of Plains to manage the operation of the Cushing Connect JV Terminal. The total Cushing Connect Joint Venture investment will generally be shared equally among the partners. However, we are solely responsible for any Cushing Connect Pipeline construction costs that exceed the budget by more than 10%. HEP estimates its share of the cost of the Cushing Connect JV Terminal contributed by Plains and Cushing Connect Pipeline construction costs are approximately $70 million to $75 million, including $4 million to $6 million of Cushing Connect Pipeline construction costs exceeding the budget by more than 10% to be borne solely by HEP.
Agreements with HFC
We serve HFC's refineries under long-term pipeline, terminal, tankage and refinery processing unit throughput agreements expiring from 2022 to 2036. Under these agreements, HFC agrees to transport, store, and process throughput volumes of refined product, crude oil and feedstocks on our pipelines, terminal, tankage, loading rack facilities and refinery processing units that result in minimum annual payments to us. These minimum annual payments or revenues are subject to annual rate adjustments on July 1st each year based on the PPI or the FERC index. On December 17, 2020, FERC established a new price index for the five-year period commencing July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2026, in which common carriers charging indexed rates are permitted to adjust their indexed ceilings annually by Producer Price Index plus 0.78%. FERC received requests for rehearing of its December 17, 2020 order, and on January 20, 2022, FERC revised the index level used to determine annual changes to interstate oil pipeline rate ceilings to Producer Price Index minus 0.21%. The order requires the recalculation of the July 1, 2021
- 53 -
index ceilings to be effective as of March 1, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, these agreements with HFC required minimum annualized payments to us of $352.8 million.
If HFC fails to meet its minimum volume commitments under the agreements in any quarter, it will be required to pay us the amount of any shortfall in cash by the last day of the month following the end of the quarter. Under certain of the agreements, a shortfall payment may be applied as a credit in the following four quarters after minimum obligations are met.
A significant reduction in revenues under the HFC agreements could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
On June 1, 2020, HFC announced plans to permanently cease petroleum refining operations at its Cheyenne refinery and to convert certain assets at that refinery to renewable diesel production. HFC subsequently began winding down petroleum refining operations at its Cheyenne refinery on August 3, 2020.
On February 8, 2021, HEP and HFC finalized and executed new agreements for HEP's Cheyenne assets with the following terms, in each case effective January 1, 2021: (1) a ten-year lease with two five-year renewal option periods for HFC’s use of certain HEP tank and rack assets in the Cheyenne refinery to facilitate renewable diesel production with an annual lease payment of approximately $5 million, (2) a five-year contango service fee arrangement that will utilize HEP tank assets inside the Cheyenne refinery where HFC will pay a base tariff to HEP for available crude oil storage and HFC and HEP will split any profits generated on crude oil contango opportunities and (3) a $10 million one-time cash payment from HFC to HEP for the termination of the existing minimum volume commitment.
Under certain provisions of an omnibus agreement that we have with HFC (“Omnibus Agreement”), we pay HFC an annual administrative fee ($2.6 million in 2021), for the provision by HFC or its affiliates of various general and administrative services to us. This fee does not include the salaries of personnel employed by HFC who perform services for us on behalf of HLS or the cost of their employee benefits, which are separately charged to us by HFC. We also reimburse HFC and its affiliates for direct expenses they incur on our behalf.
Under HLS’s Secondment Agreement with HFC, certain employees of HFC are seconded to HLS to provide operational and maintenance services for certain of our processing, refining, pipeline and tankage assets, and HLS reimburses HFC for its prorated portion of the wages, benefits, and other costs of these employees for our benefit.
We have a long-term strategic relationship with HFC that has historically facilitated our growth. Our future growth plans include organic projects around our existing assets and select investments or acquisitions that enhance our service platform while creating accretion for our unitholders. While in the near term, any acquisitions would be subject to economic conditions discussed in “Overview - Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business” above, we also expect over the longer term to continue to work with HFC on logistic asset acquisitions in conjunction with HFC’s refinery acquisition strategies.
Furthermore, we plan to continue to pursue third-party logistic asset acquisitions that are accretive to our unitholders and increase the diversity of our revenues.
A more detailed discussion of our financial condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020 and operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is presented in the following sections. Discussions of year-over-year comparisons for 2020 and 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Unaudited)
Income, Distributable Cash Flow and Volumes
The following tables present income, distributable cash flow and volume information for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
- 54 -
- 55 -
- 56 -
(1)Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) is calculated as net income attributable to the partners plus (i) interest expense, net of interest income, (ii) state income tax and (iii) depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as EBITDA plus (i) loss on early extinguishment of debt, (ii) goodwill impairment, (iii) pipeline tariffs not included in revenues due to impacts from lease accounting for certain pipeline tariffs minus (iv) gain on sales-type leases, (v) gain on significant asset sales, (vi) HEP's pro-rata share of gain on business interruption settlement and (vii) pipeline lease payments not included in operating costs and expenses. Portions of our minimum guaranteed pipeline tariffs for assets subject to sales-type lease accounting are recorded as interest income with the remaining amounts recorded as a reduction in net investment in leases. These pipeline tariffs were previously recorded as revenues prior to the renewal of the throughput agreement, which triggered sales-type lease accounting. Similarly, certain pipeline lease payments were previously recorded as operating costs and expenses, but the underlying lease was reclassified from an operating lease to a financing lease, and these payments are now recorded as interest expense and reductions in the lease liability. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not calculations based upon generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). However, the amounts included in the EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA calculations are derived from amounts included in our consolidated financial statements. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income attributable to the partners or operating income, as indications of our operating performance or as alternatives to operating cash flow as a measure of liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented here because they are widely used financial indicators used by investors and analysts to measure performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also used by our management for internal analysis and as a basis for compliance with financial covenants.
(2)Distributable cash flow is not a calculation based upon GAAP. However, the amounts included in the calculation are derived from amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements, with the general exception of maintenance capital expenditures. Distributable cash flow should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income or operating income as an indication of our operating performance or as an alternative to operating cash flow as a measure of liquidity. Distributable cash flow is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Distributable cash flow is presented here because it is a widely accepted financial indicator used by investors to compare partnership performance. It is also used by management for internal analysis and for our performance units. We believe that this measure provides investors an enhanced perspective of the operating performance of our assets and the cash our business is generating.
- 57 -
(3)Maintenance capital expenditures are capital expenditures made to replace partially or fully depreciated assets in order to maintain the existing operating capacity of our assets and to extend their useful lives. Maintenance capital expenditures include expenditures required to maintain equipment reliability, tankage and pipeline integrity, safety and to address environmental regulations.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Summary
Net income attributable to the partners for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $214.9 million, a $44.5 million increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Results for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflect special items that collectively increased net income attributable to HEP by a total of $18.9 million. These items include a gain on sales type leases of $24.7 million, a gain on significant asset sales of $5.3 million and a goodwill impairment charge of $11.0 million related to our Cheyenne reporting unit. In addition, net income attributable to HEP for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a goodwill impairment charge of $35.7 million related to our Cheyenne reporting unit, a charge of $25.9 million related to the early redemption of our previously outstanding $500 million aggregate principal amount of 6% Senior Notes due in 2024, a gain on sales-type leases of $33.8 million and a $6.1 million gain related to HEP's pro-rata share of a business interruption insurance claim settlement resulting from a loss at HFC's Woods Cross refinery. Excluding these items, net income attributable to the partners for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $196.0 million ($1.86 per basic and diluted limited partner unit) compared to $192.1 million ($1.82 per basic and diluted limited partner unit) in 2020.
- 58 -
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $494.5 million, a $3.4 million decrease compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was mainly attributable to lower on-going revenues from our Cheyenne assets as a result of the conversion of the HFC Cheyenne refinery to renewable diesel production, lower volumes on our product pipelines servicing HFC's Navajo refinery and Delek's Big Spring refinery, and recording certain tariffs and fees as interest income under sales-type lease accounting that were previously recorded as revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by higher revenues from our crude pipeline systems in Wyoming and Utah and our Woods Cross and El Dorado refinery processing units mainly due to higher recovery of natural gas costs.
Revenues from our refined product pipelines were $107.4 million, a decrease of $9.5 million, on shipments averaging 158.1 mbpd compared to 161.5 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2020. The volume and revenue decreases were mainly due to lower volumes on pipelines servicing HFC's Navajo refinery and Delek's Big Spring refinery.
Revenues from our intermediate pipelines were $30.1 million, an increase of $0.1 million, on shipments averaging 125.2 mbpd compared to 137.1 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in volumes was mainly due to lower throughputs on our intermediate pipelines servicing HFC's Tulsa and Navajo refineries while revenue remained relatively constant mainly due to contractual minimum volume guarantees.
Revenues from our crude pipelines were $125.6 million, an increase of $6.7 million, on shipments averaging 408.6 mbpd compared to 387.7 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases were mainly attributable to increased volumes on our crude pipeline systems in Wyoming and Utah partially offset by lower volumes on our pipeline systems servicing HFC's Navajo refinery. Volumes also increased due to the addition of volumes on our Cushing Connect Pipeline in Oklahoma which went into service at the end of the third quarter of 2021.
Revenues from terminal, tankage and loading rack fees were $142.3 million, a decrease of $9.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Refined products and crude oil terminalled in the facilities averaged 442.9 mbpd compared to 442.2 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenues decreased mainly due to lower on-going revenues on our Cheyenne assets as a result of the conversion of HFC's Cheyenne refinery to renewable diesel production and recording certain tariffs and fees as interest income under sales-type lease accounting that were previously recorded as revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues from refinery processing units were $89.1 million, an increase of $8.8 million on throughputs averaging 69.6 mbpd compared to 61.4 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in volumes was mainly due to increased throughput for both our Woods Cross and El Dorado processing units. Revenues increased mainly due to higher recovery of natural gas costs as well as higher throughputs.
Operations Expense
Operations (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $22.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was mainly due to an increase in employee costs, maintenance costs, pipeline rental costs and natural gas costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by $5.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly due to the retirements in Cheyenne operations and sale of El Paso 6-inch pipeline assets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $2.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to costs related to the HEP Transaction.
Equity in Earnings of Equity Method Investments
See the summary chart below for a description of our equity in earnings of equity method investments:
- 59 -
Equity in earnings of Osage Pipe Line Company, LLC increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, mainly due to higher throughput volumes. Equity in earnings of Cheyenne Pipeline LLC increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, mainly due to the recognition in revenue of prior contractual minimum commitment billings. Equity in earnings of Cushing Connect Terminal Holdings LLC increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as the terminal started operations in the second quarter of 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $53.8 million, a decrease of $5.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly due to lower outstanding balances under our senior secured revolving credit facility. Our aggregate weighted-average interest rates were 3.7% and 3.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $29.9 million, an increase of $19.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to recording certain tariffs and fees as interest income under sales-type lease accounting that were previously recorded as revenue in 2020 as underlying agreements were classified as sales-type leases when the agreements were modified or renewed. See Note 5 of our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of lease accounting.
State Income Tax
We recorded state income tax expense of $32,000 and $167,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. All state income tax expense is solely attributable to the Texas margin tax.
Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Summary
Net income attributable to the partners for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $170.5 million, a $54.4 million decrease compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect special items that collectively decreased net income attributable to HEP by a total of $21.7 million. These items include a goodwill impairment charge of $35.7 million related to our Cheyenne reporting unit, a charge of $25.9 million related to the early redemption of our previously outstanding $500 million aggregate principal amount of 6% Senior Notes due in 2024, a gain on sales type leases of $33.8 million and a $6.1 million gain related to HEP's pro-rata share of a business interruption insurance claim settlement resulting from a loss at HFC's Woods Cross refinery. In addition, net income attributable to HEP for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a gain on sales-type leases of $35.2 million. Excluding these items, net income attributable to the partners for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $192.1 million ($1.82 per basic and diluted limited partner unit) compared to $189.7 million ($1.80 per basic and diluted limited partner unit) in 2019.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $497.8 million, a $34.9 million decrease compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease was mainly attributable to an 18% reduction in overall crude and product pipeline volumes predominantly in our Southwest and Northwest regions.
Revenues from our refined product pipelines were $116.9 million, a decrease of $15.4 million, on shipments averaging 161.5 mbpd compared to 195.5 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2019. The volume and revenue decreases were mainly due to lower volumes on pipelines servicing HFC's Navajo refinery, Delek's Big Spring refinery and our UNEV pipeline largely as a result of demand destruction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the recording of certain pipeline tariffs as interest income as the related throughput contract renewals were determined to be sales-type leases.
Revenues from our intermediate pipelines were $30.0 million, an increase of $0.5 million, on shipments averaging 137.1 mbpd compared to 140.6 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues from our crude pipelines were $118.9 million, a decrease of $11.8 million, on shipments averaging 387.7 mbpd compared to 501.2 mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases were mainly attributable to decreased volumes on our crude pipeline systems in the Permian Basin, Wyoming and Utah largely as a result of demand destruction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenues from terminal, tankage and loading rack fees were $151.7 million, a decrease of $8.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Refined products and crude oil terminalled in the facilities averaged 442.2 mbpd compared to 483.2
- 60 -
mbpd for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue and volume decreases were mainly as a result of demand destruction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic across many of our facilities.
Revenues from refinery processing units were $80.3 million, an increase of $0.6 million on throughputs averaging 61.4 mbpd compared to 68.8 mbpd for 2019. The decrease in volumes was mainly due to reduced throughput for both our Woods Cross and El Dorado processing units largely as a result of demand destruction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues remained relatively constant due to contractual minimum volume guarantees.
Operations Expense
Operations (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $14.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was mainly due to lower rental expenses, property taxes and variable costs such as electricity and chemicals associated with lower volumes.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $2.9 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to the acceleration of depreciation on certain of our Cheyenne tanks.
General and Administrative
General and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $0.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly due to lower legal expenses.
Equity in Earnings of Equity Method Investments
See the summary chart below for a description of our equity in earnings of equity method investments:
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $59.4 million, a decrease of $17.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was mainly due to market interest rate decreases under our senior secured revolving credit facility and refinancing our $500 million aggregate principal amount of 6% senior notes due 2024 to $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5% Senior Notes due 2028. Our aggregate weighted-average interest rates were 3.8% and 5.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
State Income Tax
We recorded state income tax expense of $167,000 and 41,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. All state income tax expense is solely attributable to the Texas margin tax.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
We have a $1.2 billion senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Agreement”) expiring in July 2025. The Credit Agreement is available to fund capital expenditures, investments, acquisitions, distribution payments and working capital and for general partnership purposes. The Credit Agreement is also available to fund letters of credit up to a $50 million sub-limit and continues to provide for an accordion feature that allows us to increase commitments under the Credit Agreement up to a maximum amount of $1.7 billion.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received advances totaling $480.5 million and repaid $554.0 million, resulting in a net decrease of $73.5 million under the Credit Agreement and an outstanding balance of $840.0 million at December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had no letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Agreement, and the available capacity under the Credit Agreement was $360.0 million.
- 61 -
On February 4, 2020, we closed a private placement of $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5% senior unsecured notes due in 2028 (the “5% Senior Notes”). On February 5, 2020, we redeemed the existing $500 million 6% Senior Notes at a redemption cost of $522.5 million, at which time we recognized a $25.9 million early extinguishment loss consisting of a $22.5 million debt redemption premium and unamortized financing costs of $3.4 million. We funded the $522.5 million redemption with proceeds from the issuance of our 5% Senior Notes and borrowings under our Credit Agreement.
We have a continuous offering program under which we may issue and sell common units from time to time, representing limited partner interests, up to an aggregate gross sales amount of $200 million. As of December 31, 2021, HEP had issued 2,413,153 units under this program, providing $82.3 million in gross proceeds.
Under our registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) using a “shelf” registration process, we currently have the authority to raise up to $2.0 billion by offering securities, through one or more prospectus supplements that would describe, among other things, the specific amounts, prices and terms of any securities offered and how the proceeds would be used. Any proceeds from the sale of securities are expected to be used for general business purposes, which may include, among other things, funding acquisitions of assets or businesses, working capital, capital expenditures, investments in subsidiaries, the retirement of existing debt and/or the repurchase of common units or other securities.
We believe our current sources of liquidity, including cash balances, future internally generated funds, and funds available under the Credit Agreement, as well as our access to additional bank financing, and public or private capital markets, will provide sufficient resources to meet our working capital liquidity, capital expenditure and quarterly distribution needs for the foreseeable future, including funding the cash portion of the HEP Transaction. Future securities issuances, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
In February, May, August and November 2021, we paid regular quarterly cash distributions of $0.3500, $0.3500, $0.3500 and $0.3500, respectively, on all units in an aggregate amount of $149.4 million. In February 2022, we paid a regular quarterly cash distribution of $0.3500 on all units in an aggregate amount of $37.0 million.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $7.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash flows provided by operating activities of $294.1 million were less than the cash flows used for investing and financing activities of $78.5 million and $223.2 million, respectively. Working capital increased by $3.2 million to a surplus of $17.5 million at December 31, 2021 from a surplus of $14.2 million at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows-Operating Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash flows provided by operating activities decreased by $21.5 million from $315.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $294.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was mainly due to higher payments for operating expenses partially offset by higher cash receipts from customers and lower payments for interest expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Cash flows from operating activities increased by $18.6 million from $297.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $315.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was mainly due to lower payments for interest and operating expenses partially offset by lower cash receipts from customers in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year.
Cash Flows-Investing Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash flows used for investing activities increased by $18.7 million from $59.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we invested $90.0 million and $59.3 million, respectively, in additions to properties and equipment. In addition, we received proceeds from sales of assets of $7.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Cash flows used for investing activities increased by $13.5 million from $46.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $59.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we invested $59.3 million and $30.1 million, respectively, in additions to properties and equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made payments of $2.4 million related to our 50% interest in Cushing Connect Pipeline & Terminal LLC.
- 62 -
Cash Flows-Financing Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash flows used for financing activities decreased by $23.9 million from $247.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $223.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $480.5 million and repaid $554.0 million in advances under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, we paid $149.4 million in regular quarterly cash distributions to HEP unitholders and $10.7 million to our noncontrolling interests. We received $23.2 million in contributions from our noncontrolling interests during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $258.5 million and repaid $310.5 million in advances under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, we paid $174.4 million in regular quarterly cash distributions to HEP unitholders and $9.8 million to our noncontrolling interests. We also received net proceeds of $491.3 million from the issuance of our 5% Senior Notes and paid $522.5 million to retire our 6% Senior Notes.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Cash flows used for financing activities increased by $6.6 million from $240.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $247.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $258.5 million and repaid $310.5 million in advances under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, we paid $174.4 million in regular quarterly cash distributions to HEP unitholders and $9.8 million to our noncontrolling interest. We received $23.9 million in contributions from our noncontrolling interests during the year ended December 31, 2020. We also received net proceeds of $491.3 million from the issuance of our 5% Senior Notes and paid $522.5 million to retire our 6% Senior Notes. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $365.5 million and repaid $323.0 million in advances under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, we paid $273.2 million in regular quarterly cash distributions to HEP unitholders and $9.0 million to our noncontrolling interests.
Capital Requirements
Our pipeline and terminalling operations are capital intensive, requiring investments to maintain, expand, upgrade or enhance existing operations and to meet environmental and operational regulations. Our capital requirements have consisted of, and are expected to continue to consist of, maintenance capital expenditures and expansion capital expenditures. “Maintenance capital expenditures” represent capital expenditures to replace partially or fully depreciated assets to maintain the operating capacity of existing assets. Maintenance capital expenditures include expenditures required to maintain equipment reliability, tankage and pipeline integrity, safety and to address environmental regulations. “Expansion capital expenditures” represent capital expenditures to expand the operating capacity of existing or new assets, but exclude acquisitions. Expansion capital expenditures include expenditures to grow our business and to expand existing facilities, such as projects that increase throughput capacity on our pipelines and in our terminals. Repair and maintenance expenses associated with existing assets that are minor in nature and do not extend the useful life of existing assets are charged to operating expenses as incurred.
Each year the board of directors of HLS, our ultimate general partner, approves our annual capital budget, which specifies capital projects that our management is authorized to undertake. Additionally, at times when conditions warrant or as new opportunities arise, additional projects may be approved. The funds allocated for a particular capital project may be expended over a period in excess of a year, depending on the time required to complete the project. Therefore, our planned capital expenditures for a given year consist of expenditures approved for capital projects included in the current year’s capital budget as well as, in certain cases, expenditures approved for capital projects in capital budgets for prior years. Our current 2022 capital forecast is comprised of approximately $15 million to $20 million for maintenance capital expenditures, $35 million to $50 million for refinery unit turnarounds and $5 to $10 million for expansion capital expenditures, excluding any expenditures related to the HEP Transaction. In addition to our capital budget, we may spend funds periodically to perform capital upgrades or additions to our assets where a customer reimburses us for such costs. The upgrades or additions would generally benefit the customer over the remaining life of the related service agreements.
We expect that our currently planned sustaining and maintenance capital expenditures, as well as expenditures for capital development projects, will be funded with cash generated by operations. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets.
Under the terms of the transaction to acquire HFC’s 75% interest in UNEV, we issued to HFC a Class B unit comprising a noncontrolling equity interest in a wholly-owned subsidiary subject to redemption to the extent that HFC is entitled to a 50% interest in our share of annual UNEV earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization above $30 million beginning July 1, 2015, and ending in June 2032, subject to certain limitations. However, to the extent earnings thresholds are not achieved, no redemption payments are required. No redemption payments have been required to date.
- 63 -
Credit Agreement
We have a $1.2 billion senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Agreement”) expiring in July 2025. The Credit Agreement is available to fund capital expenditures, investments, acquisitions, distribution payments and working capital and for general partnership purposes. The Credit Agreement is also available to fund letters of credit up to a $50 million sub-limit and continues to provide for an accordion feature that allows us to increase commitments under the Credit Agreement up to a maximum amount of $1.7 billion. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $840.0 million under the Credit Agreement, no letters of credit outstanding, and the available capacity was $360.0 million.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our assets, and indebtedness under the Credit Agreement is guaranteed by our material wholly-owned subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement requires us to maintain compliance with certain financial covenants consisting of total leverage, senior secured leverage and interest coverage. It also limits or restricts our ability to engage in certain activities. If, at any time prior to the expiration of the Credit Agreement, HEP obtains two investment grade credit ratings, the Credit Agreement will become unsecured and many of the covenants, limitations, and restrictions will be eliminated.
We may prepay all loans at any time without penalty, except for tranche breakage costs. If an event of default exists under the Credit Agreement, the lenders will be able to accelerate the maturity of all loans outstanding and exercise other rights and remedies. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Indebtedness under the Credit Agreement bears interest, at our option, at either (a) the reference rate as announced by the administrative agent plus an applicable margin (ranging from 0.50% to 1.50%) or (b) at a rate equal to LIBOR plus an applicable margin (ranging from 1.50% to 2.50%). In each case, the applicable margin is based upon the ratio of our funded debt (as defined in the Credit Agreement) to EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as defined in the Credit Agreement). The weighted-average interest rates on our Credit Agreement borrowings for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 2.30% and 2.58%, respectively. We incur a commitment fee on the unused portion of the Credit Agreement at an annual rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.50% based upon the ratio of our funded debt to EBITDA for the four most recently completed fiscal quarters.
Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5% Senior Notes due in 2028.
On February 4, 2020, we closed the private placement of $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5% senior unsecured notes due in 2028 (the “5% Senior Notes”). On February 5, 2020, we redeemed the existing $500 million 6% Senior Notes at a redemption cost of $522.5 million, at which time we recognized a $25.9 million early extinguishment loss consisting of a $22.5 million debt redemption premium and unamortized financing costs of $3.4 million. We funded the $522.5 million redemption with proceeds from the issuance of our 5% Senior Notes and borrowings under our Credit Agreement.
The 5% Senior Notes are unsecured and impose certain restrictive covenants, including limitations on our ability to incur additional indebtedness, make investments, sell assets, incur certain liens, pay distributions, enter into transactions with affiliates, and enter into mergers. We were in compliance with the restrictive covenants for the 5% Senior Notes as of December 31, 2021. At any time when the 5% Senior Notes are rated investment grade by either Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s and no default or event of default exists, we will not be subject to many of the foregoing covenants. Additionally, we have certain redemption rights at varying premiums over face value under the 5% Senior Notes.
Indebtedness under the 5% Senior Notes is guaranteed by all of our existing wholly-owned subsidiaries (other than Holly Energy Finance Corp. and certain immaterial subsidiaries).
- 64 -
Long-term Debt
The carrying amounts of our long-term debt are as follows:
Long-term Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Long-term debt consists of outstanding principal under the Credit Agreement and the 5% Senior Notes. Interest on the Credit Agreement is calculated using the rate in effect at December 31, 2021.
Site service fees consist of site service agreements with HFC, expiring in 2058 through 2066, for the provision of certain facility services and utility costs that relate to our assets located at HFC’s refinery facilities. We are presenting obligations for the full term of these agreements; however, the agreements can be terminated with 180 day notice if we cease to operate the applicable assets.
The pipeline finance lease amounts above reflect the exercise of the second 10-year extension, expiring in 2027, on our lease agreement for the refined products pipeline between White Lakes Junction and Kuntz Station in New Mexico.
Most of our right-of-way agreements are renewable on an annual basis, and the right-of-way agreements payments above include only obligations under the remaining non-cancelable terms of these agreements at December 31, 2021. For the foreseeable future, we intend to continue renewing these agreements and expect to incur right-of-way expenses in addition to the payments listed.
Other contractual obligations include capital lease obligations related to vehicles leases, office space leases, and other.
Impact of Inflation
After being relatively moderate in recent years, inflation in the United States increased significantly during 2021. However, inflation did not have a material impact on our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. PPI has increased an average of 2.9% annually over the past five calendar years, including an increase of 8.9% in 2021 and a decrease of 1.3% in 2020.
The substantial majority of our revenues are generated under long-term contracts that provide for increases or decreases in our rates and minimum revenue guarantees annually for increases or decreases in the PPI. Most of these annual PPI percentage rate increases or decreases go into effect on July 1st of the following year. Certain of these contracts have provisions that limit the level of annual PPI percentage rate increases or decreases. A significant and prolonged period of high inflation or a significant and prolonged period of negative inflation could adversely affect our cash flows and results of operations if costs increase at a rate greater than the fees we charge our shippers.
- 65 -
Environmental Matters
Our operation of pipelines, terminals, and associated facilities in connection with the transportation and storage of refined products and crude oil is subject to stringent and complex federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment, or otherwise relating to the protection of the environment. As with the industry generally, compliance with existing and anticipated laws and regulations increases our overall cost of business, including our capital costs to construct, maintain, and upgrade equipment and facilities. While these laws and regulations affect our maintenance capital expenditures and net income, we believe that they do not affect our competitive position given that the operations of our competitors are similarly affected. However, these laws and regulations, and the interpretation or enforcement thereof, are subject to frequent change by regulatory authorities, and we are unable to predict the ongoing cost to us of complying with these laws and regulations or the future impact of these laws and regulations on our operations. Violation of environmental laws, regulations, and permits can result in the imposition of significant administrative, civil and criminal penalties, injunctions, and construction bans or delays. A major discharge of hydrocarbons or hazardous substances into the environment could, to the extent the event is not insured, subject us to substantial expense, including both the cost to comply with applicable laws and regulations and claims made by employees, neighboring landowners and other third parties for personal injury and property damage.
Contamination resulting from spills of refined products and crude oil is not unusual within the petroleum pipeline industry. Historic spills along our existing pipelines and terminals as a result of past operations have resulted in contamination of the environment, including soils and groundwater. Site conditions, including soils and groundwater, are being evaluated at a few of our properties where operations may have resulted in releases of hydrocarbons and other wastes, none of which we believe will have a significant effect on our operations since the remediation of such releases would be covered under environmental indemnification agreements.
Under the Omnibus Agreement and certain transportation agreements and purchase agreements with HFC, HFC has agreed to indemnify us, subject to certain monetary and time limitations, for environmental noncompliance and remediation liabilities associated with certain assets transferred to us from HFC and occurring or existing prior to the date of such transfers.
We have an environmental agreement with Delek with respect to pre-closing environmental costs and liabilities relating to the pipelines and terminals acquired from Delek in 2005, under which Delek will indemnify us subject to certain monetary and time limitations.
There are environmental remediation projects in progress that relate to certain assets acquired from HFC. Certain of these projects were underway prior to our purchase and represent liabilities retained by HFC. As of December 31, 2021, we have an accrual of $3.9 million that relates to environmental clean-up projects for which we have assumed liability or for which the indemnity provided for by HFC has expired. The remaining projects, including assessment and monitoring activities, are covered under the HFC environmental indemnification discussed above and represent liabilities of HFC.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We consider the following policies to be the most critical to understanding the judgments that are involved and the uncertainties that could impact our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are generally recognized as products are shipped through our pipelines and terminals, feedstocks are processed through our refinery processing units or other services are rendered. The majority of our contracts with customers meet the definition of a lease since (1) performance of the contracts is dependent on specified property, plant, or equipment and (2) the possibility is remote that one or more parties other than the customer will take more than a minor amount of the output associated with the specified property, plant, or equipment. Prior to the adoption of the new lease standard (see below), we bifurcated the consideration received between lease and service revenue. The new lease standard allows the election of a practical expedient whereby a lessor does not have to separate non-lease (service) components from lease components under certain conditions. The majority of our contracts meet these conditions, and we have made this election for those contracts. Under this practical expedient, we treat the combined components as a single performance obligation in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, which largely codified ASU 2014-09, if the non-lease (service) component is
- 66 -
the dominant component. If the lease component is the dominant component, we treat the combined components as a lease in accordance with ASC 842, which largely codified ASU 2016-02.
Several of our contracts include incentive or reduced tariffs once a certain quarterly volume is met. Revenue from the variable element of these transactions is recognized based on the actual volumes shipped as it relates specifically to rendering the services during the applicable quarter.
The majority of our long-term transportation contracts specify minimum volume requirements, whereby, we bill a customer for a minimum level of shipments in the event a customer ships below their contractual requirements. If there are no future performance obligations, we will recognize these deficiency payments in revenue.
In certain of these throughput agreements, a customer may later utilize such shortfall billings as credit towards future volume shipments in excess of its minimum levels within its respective contractual shortfall make-up period. Such amounts represent an obligation to perform future services, which may be initially deferred and later recognized as revenue based on estimated future shipping levels, including the likelihood of a customer’s ability to utilize such amounts prior to the end of the contractual shortfall make-up period. We recognize these deficiency payments in revenue when we do not expect we will be required to satisfy these performance obligations in the future based on the pattern of rights projected to be exercised by the customer.
Leases
We adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2019, and elected to adopt using the modified retrospective transition method and practical expedients, both of which are provided as options by the standard and further defined below.
Lessee Accounting - At inception, we determine if an arrangement is or contains a lease. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our payment obligation under the leasing arrangement. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”) to determine the present value of lease payments as most of our leases do not contain an implicit rate. Our IBR represents the interest rate which we would pay to borrow, on a collateralized basis, an amount equal to the lease payments over a similar term in a similar economic environment. We use the implicit rate when readily determinable.
Operating leases are recorded in operating lease right-of-use assets and current and noncurrent operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet. Finance leases are included in properties and equipment, current finance lease liabilities and noncurrent finance lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
When renewal options are defined in a lease, our lease term includes an option to extend the lease when it is reasonably certain we will exercise that option. Leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on our balance sheet, and lease expense is accounted for on a straight-line basis. In addition, as a lessee, we separate non-lease components that are identifiable and exclude them from the determination of net present value of lease payment obligations.
Lessor Accounting - Customer contracts that contain leases are generally classified as either operating leases, direct finance leases or sales-type leases. We consider inputs such as the lease term, fair value of the underlying asset and residual value of the underlying assets when assessing the classification.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of our cost of an acquired business over the fair value of the assets acquired, less liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized. We test goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment annually and between annual tests if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may exceed fair value. Our goodwill impairment testing first entails a comparison of our reporting unit fair values relative to their respective carrying values, including goodwill. If carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value for a reporting unit, we measure goodwill impairment as the excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit over the estimated fair value of the reporting unit.
The changes due to our new agreements with HFC related to our Cheyenne assets resulted in an increase in the net book value of our Cheyenne reporting unit during the first quarter of 2021 due to sales-type lease accounting, which led us to determine indicators of potential goodwill impairment for our Cheyenne reporting unit were present. Therefore, we performed an interim quantitative review of our Cheyenne reporting unit goodwill for the first quarter of 2021.
- 67 -
The estimated fair value of our Cheyenne reporting unit was derived using a combination of income and market approaches. The income approach reflects expected future cash flows based on anticipated gross margins, operating costs and capital expenditures. The market approaches include both the guideline public company and guideline transaction methods. Both methods utilize pricing multiples derived from historical market transactions of other like-kind assets. These fair value measurements involve significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs). See Note 6 for further discussion of Level 3 inputs.
Our interim impairment testing of our Cheyenne reporting unit goodwill identified an impairment charge of $11.0 million, which was recorded in the three months ended March 31, 2021.
Our annual goodwill impairment testing was performed on a qualitative basis during the third quarter of 2021. We assessed qualitative factors such as macroeconomic conditions, cost factors, and reporting unit financial performance and determined it was not more likely than not that fair value of our reporting units was less than the respective carrying value. Therefore, in accordance with GAAP, further testing was not required.
In 2020, our annual goodwill testing was performed on a quantitative basis with the estimated fair value of our reporting units derived using a combination of both income and market approaches as described above. Our annual testing of goodwill did not identify any impairments other than our Cheyenne reporting unit, which reported goodwill impairment charges of $35.7 million for the year ending December 31, 2020.
We evaluate long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets, for potential impairment by identifying whether indicators of impairment exist and, if so, assessing whether the long-lived assets are recoverable from estimated future undiscounted cash flows. The actual amount of impairment loss, if any, to be recorded is equal to the amount by which a long-lived asset’s carrying value exceeds its fair value.
RISK MANAGEMENT
The market risk inherent in our debt positions is the potential change arising from increases or decreases in interest rates as discussed below.
At December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding principal balance of $500 million on our 5% Senior Notes. A change in interest rates generally would affect the fair value of the 5% Senior Notes, but not our earnings or cash flows. At December 31, 2021, the fair value of our 5% Senior Notes was $502.7 million. We estimate a hypothetical 10% change in the yield-to-maturity applicable to the 5% Senior Notes at December 31, 2021, would result in a change of approximately $12.9 million in the fair value of the underlying 5% Senior Notes.
For the variable rate Credit Agreement, changes in interest rates would affect cash flows, but not the fair value. At December 31, 2021, borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement were $840.0 million. A hypothetical 10% change in interest rates applicable to the Credit Agreement would not materially affect our cash flows.
Borrowings under our variable rate Credit Agreement bear interest at a variable rate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”). The ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (“IBA”) announced that it will cease calculating and publishing all USD LIBOR tenors on June 30, 2023, and ceased calculating and publishing certain USD LIBOR tenors on December 31, 2021. Further, U.K. and U.S. regulatory authorities issued statements encouraging banks to cease entering into new USD LIBOR based loans by no later than December 31, 2021 and to continue to transition away from USD LIBOR based loans in preparation of IBA ceasing to calculate and publish LIBOR based rates on June 30, 2023. These developments may cause fluctuations in LIBOR rates and pricing of USD LIBOR based loans that are not transitioned to an alternative reference rate. While we do not expect the transition to an alternative reference rate to have a significant impact on our business or operations, it is possible that the use of alternative reference rates or other reforms could cause the market value of, the applicable interest rate on and the amount of interest paid on our variable rate indebtedness to be materially different than expected and could cause our interest expense to increase.
Our operations are subject to normal hazards of operations, including fire, explosion and weather-related perils. We maintain various insurance coverages, including business interruption insurance, subject to certain deductibles. We are not fully insured against certain risks because such risks are not fully insurable, coverage is unavailable, or premium costs, in our judgment, do not justify such expenditures.
- 68 -
We have a risk management oversight committee that is made up of members from our senior management. This committee monitors our risk environment and provides direction for activities to mitigate, to an acceptable level, identified risks that may adversely affect the achievement of our goals.