ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise stated or the context otherwise indicates, references in this report to “Hess Midstream Operations LP,” “the Partnership,” “us,” “we” or similar terms, when referring to periods between the IPO date on April 10, 2017 and December 16, 2019, refer to Hess Midstream Operations LP (formerly known as Hess Midstream Partners LP, the predecessor registrant to Hess Midstream LP), including its consolidated subsidiaries. All references to “Hess Midstream LP,” “the Company,” “us,” “our,” “we” or similar terms, when referring to periods subsequent to December 16, 2019, refer to Hess Midstream LP, including its consolidated subsidiaries.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a fee-based, growth-oriented, limited partnership formed by Hess Infrastructure Partners GP LLC (“HIP GP LLC”) and our general partner to own, operate, develop and acquire a diverse set of midstream assets and provide fee-based services to Hess and third-party customers. We are managed and controlled by Hess Midstream GP LLC, the general partner of our general partner. Our assets are primarily located in the Bakken and Three Forks shale plays in the Williston Basin area of North Dakota, which we collectively refer to as the Bakken.
Our Ongoing Response to Global Pandemic and Market Conditions
The coronavirus (“COVID-19”) global pandemic continues to have a profound impact on society and industry. The Company and Hess have implemented a variety of health and safety measures including enhanced cleaning procedures and modified work practices such as travel restrictions, health screenings, vaccination policies, reduced personnel at work sites wherever this can be done safely, and remote working arrangements for office workers. In addition, we implemented extensive COVID-19 protocols to keep the workforce safe during the planned maintenance turnaround at the Tioga Gas Plant, which was executed safely and successfully in the third quarter of 2021.
In addition to the global health concerns of COVID-19, the pandemic severely impacted demand for oil. In 2020, worldwide crude oil prices declined significantly due in part to reduced global demand stemming from COVID-19. As a result of the sharp decline in crude oil prices, Hess reduced its rig count from 6 rigs to 1 rig in the Bakken in 2020. Third parties in the Bakken also curtailed production and reduced their drilling activity. While economic conditions improved in 2021 and Hess increased its rig count to 3 rigs in September 2021, we continued to see lower oil throughput volumes in our systems throughout this period due to reduced drilling activity. Our contract structure largely offset the impact of the reduction in volumes on our revenues in 2021 and 2020 and is expected to continue to offset such impact through the Initial Term of our commercial agreements, as our minimum volume commitments provide minimum levels of cash flows and the fee recalculation mechanisms under our agreements support our cash flow stability. See “Other Factors Expected to Significantly Affect Our Future Results.”
Significant 2021 Activities
In 2020, we completed construction of a 150 MMcf/d natural gas processing capacity expansion at our Tioga Gas Plant (“TGP”). In the third quarter of 2021, we safely and successfully completed the planned maintenance turnaround at TGP, during which a series of plant tie-ins for the TGP expansion were also completed. The expansion was placed in service in October 2021. Total processing capacity of 400 MMcf/d became available concurrent with the completion of a third-party residue export expansion in February 2022.
2021 Equity Transactions
On March 15, 2021, the Sponsors sold an aggregate of 6,900,000 of our Class A Shares, inclusive of the underwriters’ option to purchase up to 900,000 of additional shares, which was fully exercised, in an underwritten public offering at a price of $21.00 per Class A share, less underwriting discounts. On October 8, 2021, the Sponsors sold an aggregate of 8,625,000 of our Class A Shares, inclusive of the underwriters’ option to purchase up to 1,125,000 of additional shares, which was fully exercised, in an underwritten public offering at a price of $26.00 per Class A share, less underwriting discounts. The Sponsors received net proceeds from the two offerings of approximately $356.5 million in total, after deducting underwriting discounts. The Company did not receive any proceeds in the offerings.
Additionally, on August 10, 2021, the Partnership repurchased an aggregate of 31,250,000 of its Class B Units from the Sponsors at a purchase price of $24.00 per Class B unit, for total consideration of $750.0 million. The Repurchase Transaction was funded through issuance by the Partnership of $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% senior unsecured notes due 2030.
As a result of the 2021 Equity Transactions, our public ownership increased from 6.0% at December 31, 2020 to 12.9% at December 31, 2021 on a consolidated basis. We also utilized the excess free cash flow beyond our growing distributions to provide increased return of capital to our shareholders through a 10% increase in our quarterly distribution levels. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Note 3, Equity Transactions, Note 8, Debt and Interest Expense, Note 9, Partners' Capital and Distributions and Note 16, Subsequent Events for additional details.
2019 Restructuring
On December 16, 2019, the Company and the Partnership completed the transactions (the “Restructuring”) contemplated by the Partnership Restructuring Agreement, dated October 3, 2019, by and among the Company, the Partnership and the other parties thereto. As a result of the Restructuring, the Company was delegated control of the Partnership and replaced the Partnership as its publicly traded successor. Prior to the Restructuring, the Partnership was indirectly controlled by HIP GP LLC, the general partner of Hess Infrastructure Partners LP (“HIP”). HIP was originally formed as a joint venture between Hess and GIP and owned an 80% economic interest in certain of the Partnership’s existing assets (the “Joint Interest Assets”), a 100% interest in certain other businesses, including Hess’ Bakken water services business (“Hess Water Services”) and a 100% interest in Hess Midstream Partners GP LP (“MLP GP LP”), which held all of the Partnership’s outstanding incentive distribution rights and the general partner interest in the Partnership, and controlled the Partnership.
Pursuant to the Restructuring, the Partnership acquired HIP, including HIP’s 80% interest in the Joint Interest Assets, 100% interest in Hess Water Services and the outstanding economic general partner interest and incentive distribution rights in the Partnership. The Partnership’s organizational structure converted from a master limited partnership into an “Up-C” structure in which the Partnership’s public unitholders received newly issued Class A Shares in Hess Midstream LP in a one-for-one exchange. The Partnership changed its name to “Hess Midstream Operations LP” and became a consolidated subsidiary of the Company. After consummation of the Restructuring, the Sponsors and their affiliates received an aggregate of 898,000 Class A Shares in the Company, all of the Class B Units representing noncontrolling limited partner interests in the Partnership and received aggregate cash consideration of $601.8 million. The Sponsors own 100% interest in the general partner of the Company and, through their ownership of the general partner, continue to have the right to elect the entire board of directors.
The acquisition of HIP by the Partnership, including its 80% economic interest in the Joint Interest Assets and 100% interest in Hess Water Services, was accounted for as an acquisition of a business under common control. Accordingly, our results for the year ended December 31, 2019 are presented as if the acquisition occurred at the beginning of the year.
2019 Acquisitions
On March 1, 2019, HIP acquired 100% of the membership interest in Hess Water Services for cash consideration of $225.0 million.
On March 22, 2019, we acquired the crude oil, gas and water gathering assets of Summit Midstream Partners’ Tioga Gathering System for cash consideration of $89.2 million, with the potential for additional contingent payments in future periods subject to certain future performance metrics. As of December 31, 2021, the contingent liability was $2.9 million.
Business Strategies
Our principal business objective is to grow our business and distributable cash flow supported by fee-based contracts and disciplined financial strategy. We expect to achieve this objective through the following business strategies:
•Focus on Cash Flow Stability and Growth Supported by Long-Term, Fee-Based Contracts and a Disciplined Financial Strategy. We seek to grow our distributable cash flow to be able to fund our expansion capital and provide consistent and ongoing return of capital to shareholders while maintaining balance sheet strength. Our commercial agreements include dedications covering substantially all of Hess’ existing and future owned or controlled production in the Bakken, minimum volume commitments, inflation escalators and fee recalculation mechanisms, all of which are intended to provide us with cash flow stability and downside risk protection.
•Capitalize on Hess’ Bakken Production Growth. Our midstream infrastructure footprint services Hess’ leading acreage position in the Bakken. We believe our volumes and investment opportunities will continue to expand as Hess drills new wells in the Bakken. We intend to invest additional capital to continue extending and expanding our strategically positioned infrastructure, including additional gas capture capabilities, to meet Hess’ current and future production growth and enable Hess to continue to meet or exceed North Dakota’s wellhead gas capture targets in the short-term and achieve zero routine flaring from its operations in the Bakken by end of 2025.
•Leverage Core Asset Base to Attract Additional Third-Party Business. We currently handle volumes from third-party producers and midstream companies under our commercial agreements with Hess, and we are pursuing both additional projects and strategic relationships with third-party customers with operations in the Bakken in order to maximize our utilization rates.
•Grow Through Accretive Acquisitions from Our Sponsors and Third Parties. We plan to pursue acquisitions of complementary midstream assets from our Sponsors as well as from third parties.
Climate Change and Energy Transition
We are aligned with Hess in its aim to help meet the world's growing energy needs while reducing its greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions. In 2021, Hess announced new five-year GHG reduction targets for 2025, which are to reduce operated Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions intensity by approximately 44% and methane emissions intensity by approximately 52% from 2017. Hess also announced in January 2022 its commitment to achieve zero routine flaring from its operations by end of 2025. We play an important part in Hess' emissions reduction efforts by providing the infrastructure to move oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas to market and reduce wellhead flaring as well as through actions to reduce our own GHG emissions, which are included in Hess’ overall emissions footprint.
We are focused on identifying GHG reduction opportunities, evaluating and implementing technologies as appropriate and evaluating capital and infrastructure requirements. In collaboration with Hess, we have prioritized the following emissions reduction initiatives:
•
Continuing to optimize field development and infrastructure plans for our Bakken operations through the following:
− Tioga Gas Plant expansion and debottlenecking to provide an additional 150 MMcf/d in processing capacity, which was completed and placed in service in October 2021;
− Installing additional compression capacity in 2022, with more planned for the future;
− Utilizing advanced modeling tools to maximize the capabilities of our infrastructure.
•
Examining and implementing alternatives to flaring, such as utilizing natural gas that would have been flared for onsite power generation or conversion to liquified natural gas.
•
Pursuing studies to improve energy efficiency.
•
Examining potential power purchase agreement arrangements to address Hess’ and our electricity needs through renewable energy, thereby offsetting or eliminating our collective Scope 2 GHG emissions.
Segments
Our assets and operations are organized into the following three reportable segments: (i) gathering, (ii) processing and storage and (iii) terminaling and export.
Gathering
Our gathering segment includes Hess North Dakota Pipeline Operations LP, or Gathering Opco, and Hess Water Services Holdings LLC, which own the following assets:
•Natural Gas Gathering and Compression. A natural gas gathering and compression system located primarily in McKenzie, Williams and Mountrail Counties, North Dakota connecting Hess and third-party owned or operated wells to the Tioga Gas Plant, Little Missouri 4 (“LM4”) gas processing plant and third-party pipeline facilities. The system also includes the Hawkeye Gas Facility.
•Crude Oil Gathering. A crude oil gathering system located primarily in McKenzie, Williams and Mountrail Counties, North Dakota, connecting Hess and third-party owned or operated wells to the Ramberg Terminal Facility, the Tioga Rail Terminal and the Johnson’s Corner Header System. The system also includes the Hawkeye Oil Facility.
•Produced Water Gathering and Disposal. A produced water gathering system and disposal facilities located primarily in Williams and Mountrail counties, North Dakota.
Processing and Storage
Our processing and storage segment includes Hess TGP Operations LP, or HTGP Opco, and Hess Mentor Storage Holdings LLC, or Mentor Holdings, which own the following assets, respectively:
•Tioga Gas Plant. A natural gas processing and fractionation plant located in Tioga, North Dakota.
•Equity Investment in LM4 Joint Venture. A 50% equity method investment in LM4 joint venture that owns a natural gas processing plant located in McKenzie County, North Dakota, that was placed in service in the third quarter of 2019. Targa Resources Corp. is the operator of the plant.
•Mentor Storage Terminal. A propane storage cavern and rail and truck loading and unloading facility located in Mentor, Minnesota.
Terminaling and Export
Our terminaling and export segment includes Hess North Dakota Export Logistics Operations LP, or Logistics Opco, which owns each of the following assets:
•Ramberg Terminal Facility. A crude oil pipeline and truck receipt terminal located in Williams County, North Dakota that is capable of delivering crude oil into an interconnecting pipeline for transportation to the Tioga Rail Terminal and to multiple third-party pipelines and storage facilities.
•Tioga Rail Terminal. A crude oil and NGL rail loading terminal in Tioga, North Dakota that is connected to the Tioga Gas Plant, the Ramberg Terminal Facility and our crude oil gathering system.
•Crude Oil Rail Cars. A total of 550 crude oil rail cars, constructed to DOT-117 safety standards, which we operate as unit trains consisting of approximately 100 to 110 crude oil rail cars.
•Johnson’s Corner Header System. An approximately six-mile crude oil pipeline header system located in McKenzie County, North Dakota that receives crude oil by pipeline from Hess and third parties and delivers crude oil to third-party interstate pipeline systems.
Significant 2021 Financial and Operating Results
Significant financial and operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include:
•Safely and successfully completed the planned TGP maintenance turnaround.
•Completed the repurchase of an aggregate of 31,250,000 Class B Units of the Partnership from the Sponsors for $750 million.
•Consolidated net income of $617.8 million.
•Net income attributable to Hess Midstream LP after deduction for noncontrolling interest of $46.4 million, or $1.81 basic earnings per Class A Share.
•Net cash provided by operating activities of $795.5 million.
•Adjusted EBITDA of $908.5 million.
•Distributable cash flow of $798.6 million.
•Paid cash distributions of $1.4672 per Class A share in total for the first three quarters of 2021 and declared a cash distribution of $0.5167 per Class A share for the fourth quarter of 2021, which was paid in February 2022.
Revenues and other income in 2021 were $1,203.8 million compared with $1,091.9 million in 2020. Current year revenues and other income were up $111.9 million compared with the prior year primarily due to higher tariff rates and MVC levels of $171.1 million, partially offset by lower pass-through revenues, including electricity, produced water trucking and disposal costs, rail transportation and certain other fees of $59.2 million. Total costs and expenses in 2021 were $476.6 million, down from $515.4 million in the prior year. The decrease was attributable to lower pass-through costs, including electricity, produced water trucking and disposal costs, rail transportation and certain other fees of $59.2 million, partially offset by higher other operating and maintenance expenses of $10.1 million primarily attributable to the TGP turnaround, higher depreciation of $8.7 million and higher general and administrative expenses of $1.6 million. Interest expense, net of interest income, increased $10.7 million primarily attributable to the $750.0 million 4.25% fixed-rate senior notes issued in connection with the Repurchase Transaction. Income tax expense increased $7.3 million driven by higher income before income tax expense and increased ownership of the Partnership by Hess Midstream LP following the 2021 Equity Transactions. As a result, consolidated net income increased $132.9 million and Adjusted EBITDA increased $159.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Throughput volumes for gas processing and gas gathering in 2021 compared with 2020 remained flat primarily due to the TGP turnaround. Throughput volumes decreased 21% for crude oil gathering and 20% for crude oil terminaling in 2021 compared with 2020 due to reduced drilling activity. The impact of the reduction in physical volumes in 2021 compared with 2020 was offset by higher tariff rates and MVC shortfall fee payments. Water gathering volumes increased 4% compared with the prior year.
For additional discussion of the results of operations at the segment level, see “Results of Operations” below. For additional information regarding Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow, our non-GAAP financial measures, see “How We Evaluate Our Operations” and “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
How We Generate Revenues
We generate substantially all of our revenues by charging fees for gathering, compressing and processing natural gas and fractionating NGLs; gathering, terminaling, loading and transporting crude oil and NGLs; storing and terminaling propane; and gathering and disposing of produced water. We have entered into long-term, fee-based commercial agreements with Hess dated effective January 1, 2014, for oil and gas services agreements, and effective January 1, 2019, for water services agreements.
Except for the water services agreements and except for a certain gathering sub-system, as described below, each of our commercial agreements with Hess has an initial 10-year term and we have the unilateral right to renew each of these agreements for one additional 10-year term. In September 2018, we amended our gas gathering and gas processing and fractionation agreements to enable us to provide certain services to Hess in respect of volumes to be delivered to and processed at the LM4 plant. The amended and restated gas gathering agreement also extends the initial term of the gathering agreement with respect to a certain gathering sub-system by five years to provide for a 15-year initial term and decreases the secondary term for that gathering sub-system by five years to provide for a five-year secondary term. Initial term for the water services agreements is 14 years and the secondary term is 10 years. On December 30, 2020, we exercised our renewal options to extend the terms of certain crude oil gathering, terminaling, storage, gas processing and gas gathering commercial agreements with Hess for the Secondary Term through December 31, 2033. There were no changes to any provisions of the existing commercial agreements as a result of the exercise of the renewal options. For the remaining water gathering and disposal agreements as well as the remaining gas gathering agreement, we have the sole option to renew these agreements for an additional term that is exercisable at a later date.
These agreements include dedications covering substantially all of Hess’ existing and future owned or controlled production in the Bakken, minimum volume commitments, inflation escalators and fee recalculation mechanisms, all of which are intended to provide us with cash flow stability and growth, as well as downside risk protection. In particular, Hess’ minimum volume commitments under our commercial agreements provide minimum levels of cash flows and the fee recalculation mechanisms under the agreements allow fees to be adjusted annually to provide us with cash flow stability during the initial term of the agreements. During the secondary term of the agreements, the fee recalculation model will be replaced by an inflation-based fee structure. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Note 5, Related Party Transactions for additional description of our commercial agreements.
Our revenues also include revenues from third-party volumes contracted with Hess and delivered to us under these commercial agreements with Hess, as well as pass-through third-party rail transportation costs, third-party produced water trucking and disposal costs, electricity fees and certain other third-party fees, for which we recognize revenues in an amount equal to the costs. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our gas revenues comprised approximately 75% of total affiliate revenues, excluding passthrough revenues. Together with Hess, we are pursuing strategic relationships with third-party producers and other midstream companies with operations in the Bakken in order to maximize our utilization rates.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to analyze our operating results and profitability. These metrics include (i) volumes, (ii) operating and maintenance expenses, (iii) Adjusted EBITDA, and (iv) distributable cash flow.
Volumes. The amount of revenues we generate primarily depends on the volumes of crude oil, natural gas, NGLs and produced water that we handle at our gathering, processing, terminaling, storage and disposal facilities. These volumes are affected primarily by the supply of and demand for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs in the markets served directly or indirectly by our assets, including changes in crude oil prices, which may further affect volumes delivered by Hess. Although Hess has committed to minimum volumes under our commercial agreements described above, our results of operations will be impacted by our ability to:
•utilize the remaining uncommitted capacity on, or add additional capacity to, our existing assets, and optimize our existing assets;
•identify and execute expansion projects, and capture incremental throughput volumes from Hess and third parties for these expanded facilities;
•increase throughput volumes at our Ramberg Terminal Facility, Tioga Rail Terminal and the Johnson’s Corner Header System by interconnecting with new or existing third-party gathering pipelines; and
•increase gas processing throughput volumes by interconnecting with new or existing third-party gathering pipelines.
Operating and Maintenance Expenses. Our management seeks to maximize the profitability of our operations by effectively managing operating and maintenance expenses. These expenses are comprised primarily of costs charged to us under our omnibus agreement and employee secondment agreement, third-party contractor costs, utility costs, insurance premiums, third-party service provider costs, related property taxes and other non-income taxes and maintenance expenses, such as expenditures to repair, refurbish and replace storage facilities and to maintain equipment reliability, integrity and safety. These expenses generally remain relatively stable across broad ranges of throughput volumes but can fluctuate from period to period depending on the mix of activities performed during that period and the timing of substantial expenses, such as gas plant turnarounds. We seek to manage our maintenance expenditures by scheduling periodic maintenance on our assets in order to minimize significant variability in these expenditures and minimize their impact on our cash flow.
Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before net interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization and our proportional share of depreciation of our equity affiliates, as further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, such as transaction costs, other income and other non-cash, non-recurring items, if applicable. We define distributable cash flow as Adjusted EBITDA less net interest, excluding amortization of deferred financing costs, cash paid for federal and state income taxes and maintenance capital expenditures. Distributable cash flow does not reflect changes in working capital balances. We use Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow to analyze our performance and liquidity.
Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow are non-GAAP supplemental financial measures that management and external users of our consolidated financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies, may use to assess:
•our operating performance as compared to other publicly traded companies in the midstream energy industry, without regard to historical cost basis or, in the case of Adjusted EBITDA, financing methods;
•the ability of our assets to generate sufficient cash flow to make distributions to our shareholders;
•our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures; and
•the viability of acquisitions and other capital expenditure projects and the returns on investment of various investment opportunities.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. The GAAP measures most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow are net income (loss) and net cash provided by (used in) operating activities. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow should not be considered as alternatives to GAAP net income (loss), income (loss) from operations, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow have important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some but not all items that affect net income and net cash provided by operating activities. You should not consider Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Additionally, because Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definition of these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The results of operations are discussed in further detail following this overview (in millions, unless otherwise noted).
Year ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gathering
Revenues increased $68.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020, of which $59.6 million is attributable to higher tariff rates, $16.4 million is attributable to higher water services revenue and $11.2 million is attributable to higher gas gathering and compression volumes and MVC levels. This increase is partially offset by $15.7 million lower pass-through revenues primarily attributable to lower third-party produced water trucking and disposal due to more water gathered by pipe and more operated water disposal facilities coming on-line and being utilized. In addition, $2.8 million is attributable to lower crude oil gathering volumes driven by reduced drilling activity, partially offset by MVC shortfall fees.
Operating and maintenance expenses decreased $14.3 million, of which $15.7 million is attributable to lower pass-through costs primarily related to lower third-party produced water trucking and disposal costs and $3.9 million is attributable to lower project-based maintenance activity. This decrease is partially offset by $5.3 million higher employee costs allocated to us under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements. Depreciation expense increased $5.0 million due to new compressors, produced water disposal facilities and other new gathering assets being brought into service. General and administrative expenses increased $1.0 million primarily attributable to higher charges from Hess under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements.
Processing and Storage
Revenues and other income increased $65.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020, of which $52.2 million is attributable to higher tariff rates, $7.1 million is attributable to higher pass-through revenue, including electricity and other fees related to temporary gas offloads during the TGP turnaround and $6.1 million is attributable to higher MVC levels. This increase was partially offset by $0.3 million lower other income.
Operating and maintenance expenses increased $17.5 million, of which $10.4 million is attributable to higher TGP turnaround activity, $7.1 million is attributable to higher pass-through costs, including electricity and other fees related to temporary gas offloads during the TGP turnaround, and $4.7 million is attributable to higher third-party processing fees. This increase is partially offset by $4.7 million attributable to lower employee costs allocated to us under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements. Depreciation expense increased $3.6 million primarily due to the TGP expansion and turnaround assets being placed in service.
Terminaling and Export
Revenues and other income decreased $21.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020, of which $50.6 million is attributable to lower rail transportation pass-through revenues. This decrease is partially offset by $19.1 million attributable to higher tariff rates and $9.6 million attributable to higher MVC levels.
Operating and maintenance expenses decreased $52.3 million, of which $50.6 million is attributable to lower rail transportation pass-through costs and $1.7 million is attributable to lower other rail services costs due to lower rail usage and certain rail transportation fees being paid directly by end customers.
Interest and Other
General and administrative expenses increased $1.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher professional fees. Interest expense, net of interest income, increased $10.7 million primarily attributable to the $750.0 million 4.25% fixed-rate senior notes issued in connection with the Repurchase Transaction. Income tax expense increased $7.3 million driven by higher income before income tax expense and increased ownership of the Partnership by the Company following the 2021 Equity Transactions.
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gathering
Revenues increased $139.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, of which $56.1 million is attributable to higher gas gathering and compression volumes and $16.1 million is attributable to higher crude oil gathering volumes driven by higher Hess production, higher gas capture and increasing MVC levels. In addition, $44.8 million of the increase in revenues is attributable to higher tariff rates, $17.1 million is attributable to higher operated water services revenue and $4.9 million is attributable to higher pass-through electricity fees and produced water trucking and disposal revenue.
Operating and maintenance expenses increased $12.0 million, of which $4.9 million is attributable to higher pass-through electricity and produced water pass-through trucking and disposal fees, $4.6 million is attributable to higher maintenance costs on our expanded infrastructure, and $2.5 million is attributable to higher insurance and property taxes due to additional assets placed in service. Depreciation expense increased $14.4 million due to new compressors, produced water disposal facilities and other new gathering assets being brought into service, as well as due to gathering assets acquired from Summit Midstream Partners, LP at the end of the first quarter of 2019. General and administrative expenses decreased $2.0 million primarily attributable to lower charges from Hess under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements.
Processing and Storage
Revenues and other income increased $75.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019, of which $46.2 million is attributable to higher volumes driven by higher Hess production, higher gas capture and LM4 being in service for the full year in 2020. Additionally, $28.0 million of the increase in revenues is attributable to higher tariff rates and $1.1 million is attributable to higher pass-through electricity fees. Operating and maintenance expenses increased $37.8 million, of which $19.3 million is attributable to LM4 processing fees, $8.8 million is attributable to higher employee costs allocated to us under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements, $7.1 million is attributable to higher maintenance activity due to TGP turnaround, $1.5 million is attributable to higher insurance and property tax and $1.1 million is attributable to higher pass-through electricity fees. The increase in general and administrative expenses of $1.7 million is primarily attributable to higher charges from Hess under our omnibus and employee secondment agreements.
Terminaling and Export
Revenues and other income increased $29.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019, of which $10.5 million is attributable to higher rail transportation pass-through revenues. In addition, $9.9 million of the increase is attributable to higher tariff rates and $8.9 million of the increase is attributable to higher throughput volumes at our terminals driven by higher Hess production and increasing MVC levels. Operating and maintenance expenses increased $10.8 million primarily attributable to higher rail transportation pass-through costs.
Interest and Other
General and administrative expenses decreased $30.9 million, primarily due to costs associated with the Restructuring. Interest expense, net of interest income, increased $32.3 million primarily attributable to the $550 million 5.125% fixed-rate senior notes issued in connection with the Restructuring and higher borrowings under our credit facilities. Income tax expense increased $7.4 million as a result of being a separate taxable entity for the full year in 2020.
Other Factors Expected to Significantly Affect Our Future Results
We currently generate substantially all of our revenues under fee-based commercial agreements with Hess, including third parties contracted with affiliates of Hess. These contracts provide cash flow stability and minimize our direct exposure to commodity price fluctuations, since we generally do not own any of the crude oil, natural gas, or NGLs that we handle and do not engage in the trading of crude oil, natural gas, or NGLs. However, commodity price fluctuations indirectly influence our activities and results of operations over the long-term, since they can affect production rates and investments by Hess and third parties in the development of new crude oil and natural gas reserves. The markets for oil and natural gas are volatile and will likely continue to be volatile in the future. In the second quarter of 2020, as a result of the sharp decline in crude oil prices, Hess reduced its rig count from six rigs to one rig in the Bakken. In addition, third parties in the Bakken also curtailed production and reduced drilling activity. Our contract structure has largely offset and is expected to continue to offset potential impact of the reduction in volumes on our financial performance metrics through the initial term of our commercial agreements, as our minimum volume commitments provide minimum levels of cash flows and the fee recalculation mechanisms under our agreements support our cash flow stability. Subsequently, in the first quarter of 2021, Hess increased its rig count in the Bakken to two rigs and added a third operated rig in September 2021, and we expect to be above minimum volume commitment levels in 2023 and 2024. To the extent our plans include revenues for volumes, including third-party volumes contracted through Hess, above currently established MVC levels, such revenues could decline to the MVC levels as a result of market volatility.
The throughput volumes at our facilities depend primarily on the volumes of crude oil and natural gas produced by Hess in the Bakken, which, in turn, is ultimately dependent on Hess’ exploration and production margins. Exploration and production margins depend on the price of crude oil, natural gas, and NGLs. These prices are volatile and influenced by numerous factors beyond our or Hess’ control, including the domestic and global supply of and demand for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. During the first quarter of 2020, worldwide crude oil prices declined significantly due in part to reduced global demand stemming from the COVID-19 global pandemic. Sustained periods of low prices for oil and natural gas could materially and adversely affect the quantities of oil and natural gas that Hess can economically produce. The commodities trading markets, as well as global and regional supply and demand factors, may also influence the selling prices of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. While the second term of our commercial agreements includes continuing MVC, the fees change to an inflation-based fixed fee structure, which may provide less downside risk protection. Furthermore, our ability to execute our growth strategy in the Bakken, including attracting third-party volumes, will depend on crude oil and natural gas production in that area, which is also affected by the supply of and demand for crude oil and natural gas.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow to net income and net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, for each of the periods indicated.
(1)Represents cash interest paid, net, attributable to controlling interest prior to the Restructuring.
(2)Distributable cash flow prior to the Restructuring is calculated net of any amounts attributable to noncontrolling interest. Distributable cash flow prior to the Restructuring for 2019 represents a period of nine months ended September 30, 2019, during which distributions were paid under the old structure. Subsequent to the Restructuring, we make cash distributions to holders of Class A Shares, including to our general partner as holder of an aggregate of 898,000 Class A Shares, and the Partnership makes cash distributions to holders of units of the Partnership, including to the Sponsors as holders of all of the Class B Units, pro rata. Therefore, distributable cash flow subsequent to the Restructuring includes amounts attributable to noncontrolling interest. Distributable cash flow subsequent to the Restructuring for 2019 represents a period of three months ended December 31, 2019.
(3)Excludes amortization of deferred financing costs.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include:
•cash on hand;
•cash generated from operations;
•borrowings under our revolving credit facility;
•issuances of additional debt securities; and
•issuances of additional equity securities.
We believe that cash generated from these sources will be sufficient to meet our operating requirements, our planned capital expenditures, debt service requirements, our quarterly cash distribution requirements, future internal growth projects or potential acquisitions.
Our partnership agreement requires that we distribute all of our available cash to shareholders. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made distributions of $49.4 million, to the holders of our equity securities representing limited partner interests in us. In addition, the Partnership made distributions of $479.6 million to the Sponsors as holders of the Class B Units of the Partnership. On January 24, 2022, we declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.5167 per Class A Share that was paid on February 14, 2022 to shareholders of record on February 3, 2022, and the Partnership made distributions of $0.5167 per Class B Unit of the Partnership to the Sponsors.
On August 10, 2021, the Partnership repurchased 31,250,000 of its Class B Units from the Sponsors for an aggregate purchase price of $750.0 million, which was funded through issuance by the Partnership of $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.250% unsecured senior notes due 2030.
Fixed-Rate Senior Notes
In August 2021, the Partnership issued $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.250% fixed-rate senior notes due 2030 to qualified institutional investors. The notes are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Partnership. Interest is payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15. The Partnership used the proceeds to fund the Repurchase Transaction.
In December 2019, the Partnership issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.125% fixed-rate senior notes due 2028 to qualified institutional investors. The notes are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Partnership. Interest is payable semi-annually on June 15 and December 15. The Partnership used the net proceeds to finance the acquisition of HIP, including to repay borrowings under HIP’s credit facilities, and pay related fees and expenses.
In December 2019, in connection with the Restructuring, the Partnership assumed $800.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.625% outstanding fixed-rate senior notes of HIP in a par-for-par exchange for newly issued 5.625% senior notes due 2026 of the Partnership and paid approximately $2.0 million of exchange consent fees. The notes are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Partnership. Interest is payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15.
Each of the indentures for the senior notes described above contains customary covenants that restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to (i) declare or pay any dividend or make any other restricted payments; (ii) transfer or sell assets or subsidiary stock; (iii) incur additional debt; or (iv) make restricted investments, unless, at the time of and immediately after giving pro forma effect to such restricted payments and any related incurrence of indebtedness or other transactions, no default has occurred and is continuing or would occur as a consequence of such restricted payment and if the leverage ratio does not exceed 4.25 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants under the indentures.
In addition, the covenants included in the indentures governing the senior notes contain provisions that allow the Company to satisfy the Partnership’s reporting obligations under the indentures, as long as any such financial information of the Company contains information reasonably sufficient to identify the material differences, if any, between the financial information of the Company, on the one hand, and the Partnership and its subsidiaries on a stand-alone basis, on the other hand and the Company does not directly own capital stock of any person other than the Partnership and its subsidiaries, or material business operations that would not be consolidated with the financial results of the Partnership and its subsidiaries. The Company is a holding company and has no independent assets or operations. Other than the interest in the Partnership and the effect of federal and state income taxes that are recognized at the Company level, there are no material differences between the consolidated financial statements of the Partnership and the consolidated financial statements of the Company.
Credit Facilities
In December 2019, the Partnership entered into senior secured syndicated credit facilities (the “Credit Facilities”) consisting of a $1,000.0 million 5-year revolving credit facility and a fully drawn $400.0 million 5-year Term Loan A facility. Facility fees accrue on the total capacity of the revolving credit facility. Borrowings under the 5-year Term Loan A facility generally bear interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.55% to 2.50%, while the applicable margin for the 5-year syndicated revolving credit facility ranges from 1.275% to 2.000%. Pricing levels for the facility fee and interest rate margins are based on the Partnership’s ratio of total debt to EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facilities). If the Partnership obtains an investment grade credit rating, the pricing levels will be based on the Partnership’s credit ratings in effect from time to time. At December 31, 2021, borrowings of $104.0 million were drawn and outstanding under the Partnership’s revolving credit facility, and borrowings of $390.0 million, excluding deferred issuance costs, were drawn and outstanding under the Partnership’s Term Loan A facility.
The Credit Facilities can be used for borrowings and letters of credit for general corporate purposes. The Credit Facilities are guaranteed by each direct and indirect wholly owned material domestic subsidiary of the Partnership, and are secured by first priority perfected liens on substantially all of the assets of the Partnership and its direct and indirect wholly owned material domestic subsidiaries, including equity interests directly owned by such entities, subject to certain customary exclusions. The Credit Facilities contain representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default that the Partnership considers to be customary for an agreement of this type, including a covenant that requires the Partnership to maintain a ratio of total debt to EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facilities) for the prior four fiscal quarters of not greater than 5.00 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter (5.50 to 1.00 during the specified period following certain acquisitions) and, prior to the Partnership obtaining an investment grade credit rating, a ratio of secured debt to EBITDA for the prior four fiscal quarters of not greater than 4.00 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. As of December 31, 2021, the Partnership was in compliance with these financial covenants.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows (in millions):
Operating Activities. Cash flows provided by operating activities increased $153.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The change in operating cash flows resulted from an increase in revenues and other income of $111.9 million, a decrease in expenses, other than depreciation, amortization, equity-based compensation and other non-cash gains and losses of $37.9 million and an increase in distributions from equity investments of $7.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in cash provided by changes in working capital of $3.7 million.
Cash flows provided by operating activities increased $171.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The change in operating cash flows resulted from an increase in revenues and other income of $243.6 million and distributions from equity investments of $9.7 million, partially offset by an increase in expenses, other than depreciation, amortization, equity-based compensation and other non-cash gains and losses of $55.7 million and a decrease in cash provided by changes in working capital of $26.6 million.
Investing Activities. Cash flows used in investing activities decreased $137.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in investing cash outflows resulted from lower payments for capital expenditures of $137.9 million primarily due to completion of the TGP expansion, partially offset by lower proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $0.1 million.
Cash flows used in investing activities decreased $196.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in investing cash outflows resulted from the acquisition of Summit Midstream Partners’ Tioga Gathering System in 2019 for $89.2 million, net of cash acquired, the acquisition of Hess Water Services in 2019 for $225 million, of which $68.9 million was included in cash outflows from investing activities, lower payments for our investment in LM4 of $33.0 million, lower payments for capital expenditures of $5.3 million, and proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment of $0.1 million.
Financing Activities. Cash flows used in financing activities increased $291.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020. In 2021, we issued $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes that we used to fund the $750 million Class B unit Repurchase Transaction. In 2021, we also had lower borrowings under our credit facilities of $252.3 million, net of any changes in financing costs, higher distributions to shareholders and noncontrolling interest of $35.3 million, and $2.1 million of transaction costs related to the Repurchase Transaction compared to the same period last year. The remaining change of $1.6 million represents a final settlement received from Hess in 2020 related to our previous acquisition of Hess Water Services.
Cash flows used in financing activities increased $262.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decrease in borrowings of $613.4 million and an increase in distributions to shareholders and noncontrolling interest of $408.3 million. The remaining change resulted from payments of cash consideration related to the Restructuring of $601.8 million and acquisition of Hess Water Services for $225 million, as described above, of which $156.1 million was included in the cash outflows from financing activities as a distribution to Hess in 2019, partially offset by the final settlement amount of $1.6 million received from Hess in 2020.
Capital Expenditures
Our operations can be capital intensive, requiring investments to expand, upgrade, maintain or enhance existing operations and to meet environmental and operational regulations. Our partnership agreement requires that we distinguish between maintenance capital expenditures and expansion capital expenditures. Maintenance capital expenditures are capital expenditures made to maintain, over the long term, our operating capacity, operating income or revenue. Examples of maintenance capital expenditures are expenditures to repair, refurbish or replace existing assets, to maintain equipment reliability, integrity and safety and to address environmental laws and regulations. In contrast, expansion capital expenditures are expenditures incurred for acquisitions or capital improvements that we expect will increase our operating capacity, operating income or revenue over the long term. Examples of expansion capital expenditures include the acquisition of equipment, construction, development or acquisition of additional capacity, or expenditures for connecting additional wells to our gathering systems, to the extent such capital expenditures are expected to expand our long-term operating capacity, operating income or revenue.
The following table sets forth a summary of maintenance and expansion capital expenditures and reconciles capital expenditures on an accrual basis to additions to property, plant and equipment on a cash basis:
Expansion capital expenditures in 2021 are primarily attributable to continued expansion of our compression capacity and gas capture capabilities to meet Hess’ and third parties’ current and future production growth and enable Hess to continue to meet or exceed North Dakota’s wellhead gas capture targets. The activities focused on the construction of two new greenfield compressor stations and associated pipeline infrastructure, which are expected to provide an additional 85 MMcf/d of gas compression capacity when brought online in 2022. Maintenance capital expenditures in 2021 are primarily related to the TGP turnaround.
In 2020, we completed construction and preservation activities for the 150 MMcf/d TGP expansion, which was brought in service in the fourth quarter of 2021. Capital expenditures in 2020 also relate to continued expansion of our compression capacity and gas capture capabilities.
Capital expenditures in 2019 are primarily attributable to continued expansion of our gathering and compression capacity, as well as amounts attributable to engineering, procurement, civil construction and fabrication activities for the TGP expansion that began in 2019. Additionally, in 2019, we acquired Hess Water Services for cash consideration of $225.0 million, of which $68.9 million was recognized as additions to property, plant, and equipment and $156.1 million was recognized as a distribution to Hess. In 2019, we also acquired Summit Midstream Partners’ Tioga Gathering System for cash consideration of $89.2 million, with the potential for additional payments in future periods subject to certain future performance metrics. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Note 4, Acquisitions.
Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements within the next twelve months include accounts payables, accrued liabilities, the current portion of long-term debt, interest, purchase obligations, which include a portion of our planned capital expenditure program in 2022, and other liabilities.
Our long-term contractual obligations and commitments include:
•Debt and interest: See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Note 8, Debt and Interest Expense.
•Purchase obligations: See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements that would result in off-balance sheet liabilities.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Accounting policies and estimates affect the recognition of assets and liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and revenues and expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. The accounting methods used can affect net income, partners’ capital and various financial statement ratios. However, the accounting methods generally do not change cash flows or liquidity. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact our financial condition and results of operations.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at the lower of historical cost less accumulated depreciation, subject to the results of impairment testing. We capitalize all construction-related direct labor and material costs, as well as indirect construction costs. Indirect construction costs include general engineering, taxes and the cost of funds used during construction of material projects. Costs, including complete asset replacements and enhancements or upgrades that increase the original efficiency, productivity or capacity of property, plant and equipment, are also capitalized. The costs of repairs, minor replacements and other projects, which do not increase the original efficiency, productivity or capacity of property, plant and equipment, are expensed as incurred. The determination of cost componentization and related estimated useful lives is a significant element in arriving at the results of operations. The estimates affect depreciation expense in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets, as described below.
Depreciation Expense
We calculate depreciation using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives after considering salvage values of our assets. When assets are placed into service, we make estimates with respect to their useful lives that we believe are reasonable. Depreciation lives related to our significant assets primarily range between 12 to 35 years. However, factors such as maintenance levels, economic conditions impacting the demand for these assets, and regulatory or environmental requirements are inherently uncertain and could cause us to change our estimates, and impact our future calculation of depreciation. The determination of estimated useful lives is a significant element in arriving at depreciation expense. The estimates affect depreciation expense and cost componentization in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets. These estimates and assumptions have not changed during the periods included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate the net book values of the assets may not be recoverable. Factors that indicate potential impairment include a significant decrease in the market value of the asset, operating or cash flow losses associated with the use of the asset, and a significant change in the asset’s physical condition or use. Impairment is indicated when the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ net book value. Undiscounted cash flows are based on identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. If impairment occurs, a loss is recognized for the difference between fair value and net book value. Such fair value is generally determined by discounting anticipated future net cash flows, an income valuation approach, or by a market-based valuation approach, which are Level 3 fair value measurements. Assumptions and estimates about future cash flows and fair values are complex and subject to significant uncertainty. These assumptions and estimates can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends that are outside of our control and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts. No impairments of long-lived assets were recorded during the periods included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The determination of impairments could be a significant element in arriving at the results of operations. Impairment charges would impact total costs and expenses and net Property, Plant & Equipment in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets.
Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we may become party to lawsuits, administrative proceedings and governmental investigations, including environmental, regulatory and other matters, the outcomes of which are inherently uncertain. Damages or penalties may be sought from us in some matters for which the likelihood of loss may be probable or possible but the amount of loss is not currently estimable. Costs that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations are expensed. Contingent liabilities are recorded when probable and reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgement and is subject to inherent uncertainty. On the basis of existing information, we believe that the resolution of any such matters, individually or in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations. Estimates related to contingencies affect operating expenses in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations and liabilities in our balance sheets.