ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company, developing our portfolio of proprietary Humaneered® anti-inflammatory immunology and immuno-oncology monoclonal antibodies. Our proprietary, patented Humaneered technology platform is a method for converting existing antibodies (typically murine) into engineered, high-affinity human antibodies designed for therapeutic use, particularly with acute and chronic conditions. We have developed or in-licensed targets or research antibodies, typically from academic institutions, and then applied our Humaneered technology to optimize them. Our lead product candidate, lenzilumab (known as “LENZ” in the U.S.), and our other two product candidates, ifabotuzumab (“iFab”) and HGEN005, are Humaneered monoclonal antibodies. Our Humaneered antibodies are closer to human antibodies than chimeric or conventionally humanized antibodies and have a high affinity for their target. In addition, we believe our Humaneered antibodies offer further important advantages, such as high potency, a slow off-rate and a lower likelihood to induce an inappropriate immune response or infusion related reaction.
We are focusing our efforts on the development of our lead product candidate, lenzilumab. Lenzilumab is a monoclonal antibody that has been demonstrated to neutralize human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (“GM-CSF”), a cytokine that we believe is of critical importance in the hyperinflammatory cascade, sometimes referred to as cytokine release syndrome (“CRS”) or cytokine storm, associated with COVID-19, chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (“CAR-T”) therapy and acute Graft versus Host Disease (“aGvHD”) associated with bone marrow transplants.
We have completed a Phase 3 registrational trial with lenzilumab in newly hospitalized COVID-19 patients and announced positive topline data from the study known as “LIVE-AIR” in March 2021. Following completion of the LIVE-AIR study, we commenced a series of efforts to attain authorization to commercialize lenzilumab for use in hospitalized COVID-19 patients in the United States and other territories. We filed an application for Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) with U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) at the end of May 2021. We also submitted an application for marketing authorization of lenzilumab in hospitalized COVID-19 patients to Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (“MHRA”) of the United Kingdom and conducted a series of exploratory discussions with representatives of European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) regarding our potential submission of lenzilumab for marketing authorization in the European Union. In addition, we commenced significant manufacturing efforts in support of potential commercialization, as described in “Item 1. Business-Manufacturing and Raw Materials.”
On September 8, 2021, FDA declined our EUA request, stating in its letter that it was unable to conclude that the known and potential benefits of lenzilumab outweigh the known and potential risks of its use as a treatment for COVID-19. In addition to raising similar concerns around efficacy, MHRA requested further information related to clinical, manufacturing and quality processes. Despite these regulatory setbacks, we continue to believe in its potential therapeutic benefits and remain committed to bringing lenzilumab to patients hospitalized with COVID-19.
The next anticipated step in our development program for lenzilumab in COVID-19 is the release of results from the Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (“ACTIV”)-5 and Big Effect Trial, in the “B” arm of the trial (“BET-B”), referred to as the ACTIV-5/BET-B trial, which is sponsored and funded by the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”). This study is evaluating lenzilumab in combination with remdesivir, compared to placebo and remdesivir, in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, as more fully described below. We provided lenzilumab for the study.
A retrospective analysis of the LIVE-AIR study suggested that patients under the age of 85 and with a baseline CRP below 150 mg/L (the “CRP subgroup”) appeared to derive the greatest benefit from lenzilumab, therefore, the ACTIV-5/BET-B study protocol was modified to include baseline CRP below 150 mg/L as the primary analysis population. The ACTIV-5/BET-B study has reached its target enrollment with over 400 patients enrolled that met this criterion. Topline results from ACTIV-5/BET-B are expected to be released late in the first quarter or early in the second quarter of 2022. If confirmatory of the findings of the CRP subgroup from the LIVE-AIR study, we plan to include the results from ACTIV-5/BET-B in an amendment to EUA submission, and to include these results in a responsive submission to MHRA along with certain performance process qualification (“PPQ”) data around drug product batches, in the second quarter of 2022. In addition, as a result of feedback received from representatives of EMA, if the ACTIV-5/BET-B data are confirmatory of the results of the findings of the CRP subgroup from the LIVE-AIR study, we intend to submit a Conditional Marketing Authorization (“CMA”) for lenzilumab with an Accelerated Approval request to EMA later in 2022.
We believe that we have built a strong intellectual property position in the area of GM-CSF neutralization through multiple approaches and mechanisms, as they pertain to COVID-19, CAR-T, aGvHD and multiple other oncology/transplantation, inflammation, fibrosis and autoimmune conditions which may be driven by GM-CSF.
Development Programs
In addition to our lead product candidate, lenzilumab, our development portfolio features our other two product candidates, ifabotuzumab and HGEN005, all of which are Humaneered monoclonal antibodies. Please refer to “Item 1. Business-Our Pipeline” for a detailed discussion of our development programs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our management believes judgment is involved in determining revenue recognition, the fair value-based measurement of stock-based compensation and accruals. Our management evaluates estimates and assumptions as facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. If our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material adverse effect on our statements of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. Some of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
∙ contract research organizations and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
∙ contract manufacturers in connection with the production of lenzilumab, including cancellation and termination charges and charges for product that does not meet specifications; and
∙ vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing these costs, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed for which we have not been invoiced and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation expense for stock options is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value as calculated by the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires various highly judgmental assumptions including expected volatility and expected term. The expected volatility is based on the combined historical stock volatilities of our own common stock and that of several of our publicly listed peers over a period equal to the expected terms of the options as we do not have a sufficient trading history to rely solely on the volatility of our own common stock. To estimate the expected term, we have opted to use the simplified method, which is the use of the midpoint of the vesting term and the contractual term. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model changes significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on historical experience and our expectations regarding future pre-vesting termination behavior of employees. To the extent our actual forfeiture rate is different from our estimate, stock-based compensation expense is adjusted accordingly.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue to date has been generated primarily through license agreements and research and development collaboration agreements. We have recorded revenue from licensing of $3.6 million and $0.3 million for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Commencing January 1, 2018, we recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)” (“ASC 606”). The core principle of ASC 606 is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods and/or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and/or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue under technology licenses and collaborative agreements typically consists of nonrefundable and/or guaranteed license fees, collaborative research funding, and various milestone and future product royalty or profit-sharing payments.
The fair value of deliverables under the arrangement may be derived using a best estimate of selling price if vendor specific objective evidence and third-party evidence is not available. Deliverables under the arrangement will be separate units of accounting if a delivered item has value to the customer on a standalone basis and if the arrangement includes a general right of return for the delivered item, delivery or performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially in our control.
We recognize upfront license payments as revenue upon delivery of the license only if the license has standalone value from any undelivered performance obligations and that value can be determined. The undelivered performance obligations typically include manufacturing or development services or research and/or steering committee services. If the fair value of the undelivered performance obligations can be determined, then these obligations would be accounted for separately. If the license is not considered to have standalone value, then the license and other undelivered performance obligations would be accounted for as a single unit of accounting. In this case, the license payments and payments for performance obligations are recognized as revenue over the estimated period of when the performance obligations are performed or deferred indefinitely until the undelivered performance obligation is determined.
Whenever we determine that an arrangement should be accounted for as a single unit of accounting, we determine the period over which the performance obligations will be performed, and revenue will be recognized. Revenue is recognized using a proportional performance or straight-line method. The proportional performance method is used when the level of effort required to complete performance obligations under an arrangement can be reasonably estimated. The amount of revenue recognized under the proportional performance method is determined by multiplying the total payments under the contract, excluding royalties and payments contingent upon achievement of milestones, by the ratio of the level of effort performed to date to the estimated total level of effort required to complete performance obligations under the arrangement. If we cannot reasonably estimate the level of effort to complete performance obligations under an arrangement, we recognize revenue under the arrangement on a straight-line basis over the period we are expected to complete our performance obligations. Significant management judgment is required in determining the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which we are expected to complete our performance obligations under an arrangement.
Our collaboration agreements typically entitle us to additional payments upon the achievement of development, regulatory and sales performance-based milestones. If the achievement of a milestone is considered probable at the inception of the collaboration, the related milestone payment is included with other collaboration consideration, such as upfront fees and research funding, in our revenue calculation. Typically, these milestones are not considered probable at the inception of the collaboration. As such, milestones will typically be recognized in one of two ways depending on the timing of when the milestone is achieved. If the milestone is achieved during the performance period, then we will only recognize revenue to the extent of the proportional performance achieved at that date, or the proportion of the straight-line basis achieved at that date, and the remainder will be recorded as deferred revenue to be amortized over the remaining performance period. If the milestone is achieved after the performance period has completed and all performance obligations have been delivered, then we will recognize the milestone payment as revenue in its entirety in the period the milestone was achieved.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is set forth in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
Results of Operations
At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $611.1 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. Since inception, we have recognized a nominal amount of revenue from payments for license or collaboration fees, $3.6 million of which was recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021. While we may in the future generate additional revenue from a variety of sources, including license fees, milestone payments, and research and development payments in connection with strategic partnerships, our product candidates may never be successfully developed or commercialized and we may therefore never realize revenue from any product sales. Accordingly, we expect to continue to incur substantial losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands, except percentages):
* Percentage is not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 represents license revenue under the license agreement (the “South Korea Agreement”) with KPM and its affiliate, Telcon, (together with KPM, the “Licensee”), described in more detail in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. License revenue increased $3.3 million in 2021 from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Conducting research and development is central to our business model. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as incurred. We track external research and development costs incurred by project for each of our clinical programs. Our external research and development costs consist primarily of:
∙ expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and our pre-clinical activities;
∙
the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial, pre-commercial and other materials, the cost to transfer the manufacturing process for bulk drug substance and fill/finish production, development of and periodic performance of a variety of tests and assays for stability, release, comparability and product characterization, costs associated with quality management, the preparation of documents and information necessary to file with regulatory authorities, cancellation and termination charges and charges for failed batches; and
∙ other costs associated with development activities, including additional studies.
Other research and development costs consist primarily of internal research and development costs such as salaries and related fringe benefit costs for our employees, stock-based compensation charges, and travel costs not allocated to one of our clinical programs. Internal research and development costs generally benefit multiple projects and are not separately tracked per project.
The following table shows a summary of our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased by $140.4 million from $72.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $213.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily due to an increase of $143.9 million in lenzilumab manufacturing costs, including consulting fees, and a $1.7 million increase in internal costs, primarily compensation-related, partially offset by a $5.2 million reduction in clinical trial expenses for lenzilumab.
We expect our development costs will decrease in 2022 as compared to 2021. We have sought to mitigate our financial commitments while continuing to position lenzilumab for a future authorization or approval in the U.S., EU and UK. Our mitigation efforts included the amendment or in some cases cancelation of certain of our agreements with CMOs for future manufacturing work, some of which were contingent on EUA, in an effort to reduce our future spending. We incurred cancellation fees for several of these modifications. We also have disputed several invoices for cancellation fees and for production batches for lenzilumab that had been submitted by CMOs that failed to produce BDS within our stated release specifications, but our mitigation efforts may not be successful to recoup any such loss of lenzilumab BDS or DP. See Item 3. To this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on these disputes. In the event of authorization by MHRA, EMA, or FDA, we anticipate that the demand for commercial product could exceed the in-process and planned production of lenzilumab through 2022. We intend to seek additional manufacturing capacity if authorization is obtained. We expect to use a portion of the revenues generated from commercial sale of lenzilumab following receipt of a regulatory authorization to support our efforts to expand production capacity in 2023 and beyond.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs (including stock-based compensation), professional fees for legal and patent expenses, consulting, audit and tax services, public, governmental and investor relations costs, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development.
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.5 million from $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily due to increases in consulting and other professional services fees of $6.4 million, personnel-related expenses of $2.9 million, including $2.3 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, primarily attributable to new hires since the first quarter of 2020, an increase of $0.8 million in business insurance, and other net increases in general and administrative expenses of $0.8 million, all in support of our increased operating activities to support the trial for COVID-19 and prepare for potential commercialization of lenzilumab, partially offset by a decrease in public and investor relations expenses of $3.4 million. We expect our overall general and administrative costs to decrease in the near-term until and if authorization is received in the UK, EU, or U.S.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $1.0 million from $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to the Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules Capital as agent for its affiliates serving as lenders thereunder (the “Term Loan”). On March 29, 2021, we borrowed $25.0 million under the Term Loan. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Term Loan. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to our previously outstanding debt. In June 2020, we paid off substantially all of our debt with proceeds from the private placement of our common stock.
Other Expense, net
Other expense increased by $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to litigation costs.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $166.2 million to offset future federal income taxes which expire in the years 2022 through 2037, and approximately $522.5 million that may offset future state income taxes which expire in the years 2028 through 2041. We also have federal net operating loss carryforwards generated in the years 2018 through 2021 of $346.9 million that have no expiration date as a result of the tax law changes signed into law on December 22, 2017. Current federal and state tax laws include substantial restrictions on the utilization of net operating losses and tax credits in the event of an ownership change. Even if the carryforwards are available, they may be subject to annual limitations, lack of future taxable income, or future ownership changes that could result in the expiration of the carryforwards before they are utilized. At December 31, 2021, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets of approximately $150.6 million, as at that time our management believed it was uncertain that they would be fully realized. If we determine in the future that we will be able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets, an adjustment to our valuation allowance would increase net income in the period in which we make such a determination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the public offerings of our common stock, private placements of our common and preferred stock, debt financings, interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents, and marketable securities, and borrowings against lines of credit, and more recently, with the proceeds under the South Korea Agreement. Specifically, under the South Korea Agreement, we received a $6.0 million upfront payment (or $4.5 million, net of withholding taxes and other fees and royalties) in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first milestone payment of $6.0 million (or $4.5 million, net of withholding taxes and other fees and royalties) which was met in the first quarter of 2021 and received in the second quarter of 2021. In the first quarter of 2021, we borrowed $25.0 million under the Term Loan. In the second quarter of 2021, we sold an aggregate of 5,427,017 shares of our common stock in connection with an underwritten public offering, raising net proceeds of approximately $94.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering costs. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 6,408,087 shares of our common stock in connection with our Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), raising net proceeds of approximately $65.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering costs. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $70.0 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2021 and through the date of this filing, as disclosed in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we issued and sold 1,301,548 shares of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement and raised net proceeds of approximately $3.7 million, after deducting fees and expenses.
Primary Sources of and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below ($000’s):
Net cash used in operating activities was $184.0 million and $69.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in operating activities of $184.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to our net loss of $236.6 million, adjusted for non-cash items, such as $5.4 million in stock-based compensation, a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $46.6 million and other non-cash items of $0.6 million. Cash used in operating activities in 2020 primarily related to our net loss of $89.5 million, adjusted for non-cash items, such as $2.1 million in stock-based compensation, changes in operating assets and liabilities of $16.5 million and other non-cash items of $1.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 and $20 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of the purchase of website domain names for future use.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $186.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of approximately $94.2 million related to the sale of 5,427,017 shares of our common stock in connection with an underwritten public offering, $65.7 million received from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Sales Agreement, $24.4 million in net proceeds received from the Term Loan, and $2.0 million received from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $137.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of $67.0 million received from the issuance of common stock in the 2020 Private Placement (as defined below) in June 2020, $72.7 million received from the issuance of common stock in the 2020 Underwritten Offering (as defined below) in September 2020, $0.5 million received from the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes, $0.6 million received from the exercise of stock options, $0.3 million received from the issuance of the 2020 Bridge Notes and $0.1 million received from the issuance of common stock under the equity line of credit with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), offset by $0.5 million for the payoff of the 2020 Convertible Notes, $2.4 million for the payoff of the 2019 and 2020 Bridge Notes and $0.8 million for the payoff of the Notes payable to vendors.
Recent Financings
Controlled Equity Offering
On December 31, 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Cantor, under which we could issue and sell shares of our common stock through Cantor, as sales agent. During the period from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we issued and sold 6,408,087 shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement, raising net proceeds of $65.7 million. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to the Sales Agreement.
2021 Underwritten Public Offering
On March 30, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Jefferies LLC, Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and Cantor, as representatives of the several underwriters, in connection with the public offering of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock. In addition, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase an additional 750,000 shares of our common stock. The initial offering closed on April 5, 2021. On May 3, 2021, we closed on the sale of an additional 427,017 shares of our common stock related to the exercise of the underwriters’ 30-day option. The aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of the 5,427,017 shares in the offering, inclusive of the additional shares purchased by the underwriters, were approximately $100.4 million. The net proceeds from this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering costs, were approximately $94.2 million.
Term Loan with Hercules
On March 10, 2021, we entered into the Term Loan with Hercules which provided us with the ability to draw an initial amount of $25.0 million, which we drew on March 29, 2021. We may become entitled to draw another $20.0 million under the Term Loan through June 15, 2022, at the discretion of Hercules if we request additional funding in support of our strategic initiatives, although there can be no assurances that Hercules would agree to provide such additional funding. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Term Loan.
2020 Underwritten Public Offering
On September 17, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and Jefferies LLC, as representatives of the several underwriters, in connection with the public offering of 8,000,000 million shares of Humanigen’s common stock (the “2020 Underwritten Offering”). In addition, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase an additional 1,200,000 shares of common stock, which option was exercised in full by the underwriters on September 18, 2020.
As a result of the pricing of the public offering, our common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
The aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of the full 9,200,000 shares in the offering were approximately $78.2 million. We used the proceeds from the offering to support our manufacturing, production and commercial preparation activities relating to lenzilumab as a potential therapy for COVID-19 patients and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
2020 Private Placement
On June 1, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain accredited investors to complete a private placement of our common stock (the “Private Placement”). The closing of the Private Placement occurred on June 2, 2020 (the “Closing Date”). At the closing, we issued and sold 16,505,743 shares of our common stock (the “Shares”) at a purchase price of $4.35 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $71.8 million. We used a portion of the proceeds to retire the following indebtedness:
∙ the outstanding principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest on Humanigen’s convertible promissory notes issued in March 2020, which approximated $0.5 million, were repaid in full, and the notes were extinguished;
∙ the outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest, amounting to approximately $2.4 million, on short-term, secured bridge loans made to Humanigen in 2019 and 2020 were repaid in full and the related liens were released; and
∙ the remaining outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest, amounting to approximately $0.8 million, on certain notes payable to vendors in accordance with the bankruptcy plan.
We used the remaining proceeds from the Private Placement to fund our Phase 3 study of lenzilumab in COVID-19, to secure manufacturing capacity, to progress Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMC”) work, to prepare for commercialization in the event of approval of lenzilumab for use in COVID-19 patients, our collaboration agreement with Kite Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and other development programs, as well as for working capital and other general corporate purposes. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for material information regarding two complaints filed against us in connection with the Private Placement.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We continue to advance our efforts in support of the development of lenzilumab as a therapy for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $70.0 million. On September 8, 2021, FDA declined to approve our EUA for lenzilumab. As more fully described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under “Item 1. Business-Manufacturing and Raw Materials”, we have entered into agreements with several CMOs to provide manufacturing, fill/finish and packaging services for lenzilumab. While we remain committed to our ongoing efforts seeking authorization or approval for commercial use of lenzilumab to treat hospitalized COVID-19 patients in the US, EU, UK and other territories, we have amended, and in some cases canceled, certain of these agreements, some of which were contingent on EUA, in an effort to reduce our future spending on lenzilumab production until and if authorization is received in the UK, EU, or U.S. (See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). These changes may limit future production of lenzilumab but because most of our manufacturing agreements required payment of upfront fees upon execution and payments against performance of the services to be provided, often over a lengthy performance period, the changes are expected to decrease our manufacturing costs beginning in 2022.
Considering our current cash resources and our current and expected levels of operating expenses, which includes our combined accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021 of $64.6 million, and our capital commitments of $63.4 million during 2022 related to our manufacturing agreements, as further described below (see “-Capital Commitments and Capital Resources”),we expect to need additional capital to fund our planned operations and capital requirements for the next twelve months. We may seek to raise such additional capital through public or private equity offerings, including under the Sales Agreement with Cantor, grant financing and support from governmental agencies, convertible debt, additional borrowings under our Term Loan with Hercules at the discretion of Hercules, borrowings under other debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, supply, distribution, or licensing arrangements. Subsequent to December 31, 2021 and through the date of this filing, as disclosed in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we issued and sold 1,301,548 shares of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement and raised net proceeds of approximately $3.7 million, after deducting fees and expenses. While we believe these plans to raise additional funds will alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, these plans are not entirely within our control and cannot be assessed as being probable of occurring. Additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay or reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of our research or development programs, our commercialization efforts or our manufacturing commitments and capacity. In addition, if we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, supply, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
We expect that the results of the ACTIV-5/BET-B trial will be important to potential investors in evaluating an investment in our company. Accordingly, our ability to raise capital on favorable terms in the future is linked closely to the success of that trial, which we cannot assure. Unfavorable results likely would have a material and adverse impact on our stock price and ability to obtain future financing.
If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to raise additional capital, based on our current and expected levels of operating expenses our current capital will not be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Capital Commitments and Capital Resources
On September 8, 2021, FDA declined to approve our application for EUA for the use of lenzilumab for the treatment of COVID-19.
To support our development efforts for lenzilumab and potential commercialization upon approval under an EUA, CMA or MAA, we have entered into agreements with several organizations for contract manufacturing services, as more fully described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under “Item 1. Business-Manufacturing and Raw Materials.”
While we remain committed to completing regulatory processes underway seeking marketing authorization for lenzilumab to treat hospitalized COVID-19 patients in the U.S., EU, UK and other territories, subsequent to FDA’s decision to decline to approve our application for EUA for the use of lenzilumab we amended, and in some cases terminated, certain of our manufacturing agreements, some of which were contingent on EUA, in an effort to reduce our future spending on lenzilumab production until and if authorization is received in the UK, EU, or U.S. These changes will significantly limit future production of lenzilumab but because most of our manufacturing agreements required payment of upfront fees upon execution and payments against performance of the services to be provided, often over a lengthy performance period, the changes are expected to decrease our manufacturing costs beginning in 2022. We intend to seek additional manufacturing capacity if authorization is obtained. As of December 31, 2021, we estimate that our commitments remaining to be incurred under these agreements will amount to approximately $63.4 million during 2022, $4.6 million during 2023, and $7.4 million thereafter. Certain of these commitments and amounts accrued at year-end are in dispute and we intend to defer these payments, negotiate lower amounts or seek legal recourse for the amounts in question. If marketing authorization or approval for lenzilumab were granted, we would expect to be able to satisfy certain of the cash requirements associated with our future manufacturing commitments from revenues from the commercial sale of lenzilumab, supplemented as necessary with proceeds from the sale of our equity securities; the incurrence of debt; upfront and milestone payments from licensees; and government funding or financial support, if offered.
See “Contracts” below for additional information.
Other significant contractual cash requirements as of December 31, 2021 include payments for principal and interest on the Term Loan. Our current and long-term obligations related to the Term Loan are outlined in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Financings
See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our other financings.
Contracts
Eversana Agreement
On January 10, 2021, we announced that we had entered into a master services agreement (the “Eversana Agreement”) with Eversana Life Science Services, LLC (“Eversana”) pursuant to which Eversana will provide us with services in connection with the potential launch of lenzilumab.
On September 21, 2021, we notified Eversana that due to the EUA status in the U.S., we were terminating the initial statement of work related to commercialization support of lenzilumab for the treatment of COVID-19 in the United States. Eversana is disputing the termination notice and has requested payment of approximately $4.0 million it has asserted we owe for services rendered from April 1, 2021 to September 30, 2021. We have disputed this assertion and are working to resolve this dispute.
Manufacturing Agreements
We have entered into agreements with several CMOs to manufacture bulk drug substance (“BDS”) and fill/finish/drug product (“DP”) for our lenzilumab clinical trial activities in COVID-19 as well as to manufacture BDS and DP for a potential launch of lenzilumab in anticipation of an EUA or CMA in 2021. We have also entered into agreements for packaging of the drug. These agreements represent large commitments, including upfront amounts prior to commencement of manufacturing and progress payments through the course of the manufacturing process and include payments for technology transfer. Certain of these CMOs have been unsuccessful in their efforts to manufacture some batches of lenzilumab to our specifications for various reasons. We are working with one of these CMOs to determine if batches of BDS manufactured by them will be usable in the future or, if not, whether other financial recompense will be offered to us.
Please see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Efforts to Develop Lenzilumab for COVID-19- Manufacturing efforts relating to our lenzilumab program in COVID-19 have been extremely costly and inefficient in producing treatments for use in our clinical development program or potential sale.”
License Agreements
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under in-license agreements, including sublicense fees, royalties, and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones.
We record upfront and milestone payments made to third parties under licensing arrangements as an expense. Upfront payments are recorded when incurred and milestone payments are recorded when the specific milestone has been achieved.
License with the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research
On June 19, 2019, we entered into the Mayo Agreement with the Mayo Foundation. Under the Mayo Agreement, we have in-licensed certain technologies that we believe may be used to create CAR-T cells lacking GM-CSF expression through various gene-editing tools including CRISPR-Cas9. Pursuant to the Mayo Agreement, we were required to pay $0.2 million to the Mayo Foundation within six months of the effective date of the Mayo Agreement, or upon completion of a qualified financing, whichever is earlier. We paid the initial payment following completion of the Private Placement. The Mayo Agreement also requires the payment of milestones and royalties upon the achievement of certain regulatory and commercialization milestones.
License with the University of Zurich
On July 19, 2019, we entered into the Zurich Agreement with University of Zurich (“UZH”). Under the Zurich Agreement, we have in-licensed certain technologies that we believe may be used to prevent GvHD through GM-CSF neutralization. The Zurich Agreement required an initial one-time payment of $0.1 million, which we paid to UZH on July 29, 2019. The Zurich Agreement also requires the payment of annual license maintenance fees, as well as milestones and royalties upon the achievement of certain regulatory and commercialization milestones.
Outlicensing Agreements
The South Korea Agreement
On November 3, 2020, we entered into a License Agreement (the “South Korea Agreement”) with KPM and Telcon (together, the “Licensee”). Pursuant to the South Korea Agreement, among other things, we granted the Licensee a license under certain patents and other intellectual property to develop and commercialize our lead product candidate, lenzilumab (the “Product”), for treatment of COVID-19 pneumonia, in South Korea and the Philippines (the “Territory”), subject to certain reservations and limitations. The Licensee will be responsible for gaining regulatory approval for, and subsequent commercialization of, lenzilumab in those territories.
As consideration for the license, the Licensee has agreed to pay us (i) an up-front license fee of $6.0 million(or $4.5 million net of withholding taxes and other fees and royalties), payable promptly following the execution of the License Agreement, which was received in the fourth quarter of 2020, (ii) up to an aggregate of $14.0 million in two payments based on our achievement of two specified milestones in the U.S., of which the first milestone was met in the first quarter of 2021 and $6.0 million (or $4.5 million net of withholding taxes and other fees and royalties) was received in the second quarter of 2021,and (iii) subsequent to the receipt by the Licensee of the requisite regulatory approvals, double-digit royalties on the net sales of lenzilumab in South Korea and the Philippines. The Licensee has agreed to certain development and commercial performance obligations. It is expected that we will supply lenzilumab to the Licensee for a minimum of 7.5 years at a cost-plus basis from an existing or future manufacturer. The Licensee has agreed to certain minimum purchases of lenzilumab on an annual basis.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties and provide for general indemnifications. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future but have not yet been made. To date, we have not paid any claims or been required to defend any action related to our indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.