ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Note About Forward-Looking Statements
This report, including this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”), contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws. All such statements are qualified by the cautionary note included under “Forward-Looking Statements” above, which is provided pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Actual results may vary materially from what is expressed in or indicated by the forward-looking statements, for the reasons described in this MD&A, in the Risk Factors in Item 1A above or elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The following MD&A section is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Harte Hanks. This section is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included herein.
Harte Hanks, Inc. is a leading global customer experience company operating in three business segments: Marketing Services, Customer Care, and Fulfillment & Logistics Services. Our mission is to partner with clients to provide them with CX strategy, data-driven analytics and actionable insights combined with seamless program execution to better understand, attract, and engage their customers. Our services include strategic planning, data strategy, performance analytics, creative development and execution; technology enablement; marketing automation; B2B and B2C e-commerce; cross-channel customer care; and product, print, and mail fulfillment.
We are affected by the general, national, and international economic and business conditions in the markets where we and our customers operate. Marketing budgets are largely discretionary in nature, and as a consequence are easier for our clients to reduce in the short-term than all other expenses, which some of our customers did in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our revenues are also affected by the economic fundamentals of each industry that we serve, various market factors, including the demand for services by our clients, and the financial condition of and budgets available to our clients, among other factors. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other geopolitical uncertainties, including but not limited to the ongoing war between Russia and Ukraine, there is continued uncertainty and significant disruption in the global economy and financial markets. We remain committed to making the investments necessary to execute our multichannel strategy while also continuing to adjust our cost structure to reduce costs.
We continue to face a challenging competitive environment. The sale of our direct mail assets and equipment to Summit in April 2020, together with the restructuring activities we undertook over the last two years, have and will continue to result in a decrease of recurring expenses. These are all part of our efforts to prioritize our investments and focus on our core business of partnering with our clients to seamlessly manage experiences with their customers. We believe these efforts are starting to pay-off as we experienced our first year-over-year revenue increase in over five years. Absent any significant shocks to regional and global economic environment, we anticipate continued momentum. Together our revenue increase and cost rationalization have enhanced our liquidity and financial flexibility, and we believe this trend will continue, although no assurance can be given that this will be the case. For additional information, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section.
Results of Operations
Operating results from operations were as follows:
Year ended December 31, 2021 vs. Year ended December 31, 2020
Consolidated Results
Revenues
Revenues of $194.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $17.7 million, or 10.0%, when compared to $176.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue in our Customer Care segment increased $16.0 million, or 27.3%, to $74.7 million driven by strong project-based revenue from new clients and increases in demand by existing clients. Revenue in our Fulfillment & Logistics Services increased $2.4 million, or 3.9%, to $63.5 million and revenue in our Marketing Services declined $0.7 million, or 1.2%, to $56.4 million. For a discussion of the causes and reasons for the year-over-year changes in revenue see “Segment Results” below.
Among other factors, our revenue performance will depend on general economic conditions in the markets we serve and how successful we are at maintaining and growing business with existing clients and acquiring new clients. We believe that, in the long-term, an increasing portion of overall marketing and advertising expenditures will be shifted from other advertising media to the type of targeted media advertising we provide resulting in a benefit to our business. Targeted media advertising results can be more effectively tracked, enabling measurement of the return on marketing investment.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses of $187.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 declined $0.5 million, or 0.3%, when compared to $187.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Labor costs increased by $6.2 million, or 6.0%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher labor expense in our Customer Care segment driven by the increased headcount due to the increased volume of work. Production and distribution expenses increased $1.0 million, or 2.0%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenue partially offset by cost reduction initiatives. Advertising, Selling and General and Administrative expenses declined $3.7 million or 17.0%, primarily due to lower facility related costs resulting from the consolidation of our locations as well as lower legal expense. Depreciation expense declined $1.0 million, or 29.2%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the disposal of production equipment in our Jacksonville facility which we exited in 2020.
The largest components of our operating expenses are labor, transportation expenses and outsourced costs. Each of these costs is, at least in part, variable and tends to fluctuate in line with revenues and the demand for our services. Transportation rates have increased over the last few years due to demand and supply fluctuations within the transportation industry. Future changes in transportation expenses will continue to impact our total production costs and total operating expenses and may have an impact on future demand for our supply chain management services.
Postage costs of mailings are borne by our clients and are not directly reflected in our revenues or expenses.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded restructuring charges of $6.4 million and $9.4 million, respectively. See Note N, Restructuring Activities, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on restructuring activities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $0.3 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. due to the write off of interest expense related to our PPP Term Note which was forgiven in 2021, as well as the lower interest expense associated with lower debt balances outstanding under our revolving credit facility when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Total other expense, net was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to other expense of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $6.1 million decrease in other expense was primarily attributable to a $3.7 million decrease in foreign currency revaluation expense and a $2.2 million reduction of pension expense as a result of the higher return on investment from better asset performance as well as the lower administrative fees due to the restructuring of our pension plans in 2019.
Income Taxes
Our 2021 income tax expense was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to tax benefit of $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in benefit of $17.9 million was due to the enactment of the CARES Act, which permitted the carryback of Net Operating Losses from the years 2018 through 2020 to tax years when the federal statutory rate was 35%, resulting in the additional tax benefit.
Segment Results
The following is a discussion and analysis of the results of our reporting segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. There are three principal financial measures reported to our CEO (the chief operating decision maker) for use in assessing segment performance and allocating resources. Those measures are revenues, operating income (loss) and operating income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). For additional information, see Note O, Segment Reporting, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Marketing Services:
Marketing Services segment revenue declined $0.7 million, or 1.2%, driven largely by the $3.0 million of mail and data services revenue that was transferred into Marketing Services segment from Fulfillment & Logistics Services segment starting from July 2020 following the sale of the bulk of our direct mail operations and a $3.7 million decline in other Marketing Services revenue for 2021 as a result of the reduction of client budgets due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The contribution margin improved by 8.7% as a result of our cost reduction efforts.
Customer Care:
Customer Care segment revenue increased $16.0 million primarily due to additional project work and an increase in volumes with existing clients. Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.7 million, an increase of $5.9 million when compared to the prior year. This increase was driven by higher revenue from extension of COVID-19 related project work and increased volume from other clients. The contribution margin improved by 5.8% for the year end December 31, 2021 due to the increase in revenue as well as our restructuring efforts.
Fulfillment & Logistics Services:
Fulfillment & Logistics Services segment revenue increased $2.4 million when compared to the prior year. The elimination of the Company's direct mail operations in the sale to Summit resulted in a $4.7 million revenue decline as outsourced direct mail is now included in our Marketing Services segment. This decline was offset by a $7.1 million revenue increase driven by increased demand from existing customers. Operating income was $6.0 million for 2021 when compared to an operating loss of $2.7 million in the previous year primarily driven by the higher revenue and our cost reduction efforts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our cash and cash equivalent balances were $11.9 million and $29.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our cash and cash equivalent and restricted cash balances were $15.1 million and $33.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had the ability to borrow an additional $18.9 million under our New Credit Facility.
During 2020, we received an aggregate of $9.6 million in tax refunds related to our net operating loss (“NOL”) and capital loss carryback for the 2013-2018 tax years. We also expect to receive additional tax refunds of $7.8 million in 2022, as a result of the change to the tax NOL carryback provisions included in the CARES Act.
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash on hand, cash provided by operating activities, and borrowings available under our New Credit Facility. Our cash is primarily used for general corporate purposes, working capital requirements, debt service and capital expenditures.
At this time, we believe that we will be able to continue to meet our liquidity requirements and fund our fixed obligations (such as debt services, finance and operating leases and unfunded pension plan benefit payments) and other cash needs for our operations for at least the twelve months from the date of this Annual Report through a combination of cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and borrowings under the New Credit Facility. Although the Company believes that it will be able to meet its cash needs for the short and medium term, if unforeseen circumstances arise the company may need to seek alternative sources of liquidity. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material impact on the Company’s liquidity or on the Company’s ability to meet its obligations under the New Credit Facility, including its ability to comply with all covenants. We will continue to closely monitor the impact the COVID-19 pandemic has on the Company’s liquidity and assess whether any additional cost saving measures, including capital expenditure deferral or human capital decisions, are needed.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to cash used by operating activities of $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $6.0 million year-over-year decrease in cash used by operating activities was primarily driven by the $16.7 million higher net income which was partially offset by $10 million non-cash gain from extinguishment of the PPP Term Note in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to cash used in investing activities of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.1 million decrease was mainly due to the $1.9 million of proceeds from the sale of direct mail assets and equipment in the Jacksonville facility to Summit in 2020 and $0.3 million increase in capital expenditure in the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Capital expenditure for 2021 was mainly related to technology investment as well as pallet racking for our new Kansas City (KS) facility.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $13.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to $7.3 million net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $20.7 million decrease was primarily due to the $10 million of cash proceeds from the PPP Term Note we received in the second quarter of 2020, when compared to $5 million cash proceeds from New Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2021,and the $17.1 million paydown of the Texas Capital Credit Facility, when compared to a $1.6 million paydown of the Texas Capital Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Foreign Holdings of Cash
Consolidated foreign holdings of cash as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2.6 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The Company does not believe it will need to re-patriate foreign cash holdings to meet domestic obligations.
Long Term Debt
On December 21, 2021, the Company entered into a new three-year, $25,000,000 asset-based revolving credit facility (the "New Credit Facility") with Texas Capital Bank. The Company’s obligations under the New Credit Facility are guaranteed on a joint and several basis by the Company’s material subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”). The New Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and the Guarantors pursuant to a Pledge and Security Agreement, dated as of December 21, 2021, between the Company, TCB and the other grantors party thereto (the "Security Agreement").
The New Credit Facility provides for loans up to the lesser of (a) $25,000,000, and (b) the amount available under a "borrowing base" calculated primarily by reference to the Company's cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivables. The New Credit Facility allows the Company to use up to $3,000,000 of its borrowing capacity to issue letters of credit.
The loans under the New Credit Facility accrue interest at a varying rate equal to the Bloomberg Short-Term Bank Yield Index Rate plus a margin of 2.25% per annum. The outstanding amounts advanced under the New Credit Facility are due and payable in full on December 21, 2024.
The Company may voluntarily prepay all or any portion of the loans advanced under the New Credit Facility at any time, without premium or penalty. The New Credit Facility is subject to mandatory prepayments (i) from the net proceeds of asset dispositions not otherwise permitted under the New Credit Facility; (ii) if the unpaid principal balance under the New Credit Facility plus the aggregate face amount of all outstanding letters of credit exceeds the borrowing base; (iii) in an amount equal to 50% of the net proceeds of issuances of capital stock (subject to customary exceptions); or (iv) in an amount equal to the net proceeds from any issuance of debt not otherwise permitted under the New Credit Facility.
The New Credit Facility contains certain covenants restricting the Company's and its subsidiaries' ability to create, incur, assume or become liable for indebtedness; make certain investments; pay dividends or repurchase the Company's stock; create, incur or assume liens; consummate mergers or acquisitions; liquidate, dissolve, suspend or cease operations; or modify accounting or tax reporting methods (other than as required by U.S. GAAP).
In connection with entering into the New Credit Facility, the Company and Texas Capital Bank terminated the old Texas Capital Credit Facility. Prior to termination of the old Texas Capital Credit Facility, the Company used cash on hand to pay down $8.1 million outstanding and the remaining $5 million of loans outstanding were deemed to be outstanding under the New Credit Facility. Texas Capital Bank did not require the New Credit Facility to be guaranteed by HHS Guaranty, LLC, an entity formed to provide credit support for the Company by certain members of the Shelton family (descendants of one of the Company's founders) or any other third-party credit support.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had letters of credit in the amount of $1.1 million and $1.8 million outstanding, respectively. No amounts were drawn against these letters of credit as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. These letters of credit exist to support insurance programs relating to workers’ compensation, automobile, and general liability. We had no other off-balance sheet financing arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $5.0 million of borrowings outstanding under the New Credit Facility. As of December31, 2020, we had $17.1 million of borrowings outstanding under the Texas Capital Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had the ability to borrow an additional $18.9 million under the New Credit Facility.
On April 20, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of $10.0 million under the Small Business Administration ("SBA") PPP Term Note.
On June 10, 2021, we received notice that the entire amount of our PPP Term Note was forgiven by the SBA because we used the proceeds from the loan as contemplated under the CARES Act. We recorded the $10.0 million of debt extinguishment as "Gain from extinguishment of debt (Paycheck Protection Program Term Note)" in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Dividends
We did not pay any dividends in either 2021 or 2020. We currently intend to retain any future earnings and do not expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Any future dividend declaration can be made only upon, and subject to, approval of our Board, based on its business judgment.
Share Repurchase
During 2021 and 2020, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under our current stock repurchase program that was publicly announced in August 2014. Under our current program we are authorized to spend up to $20.0 million to repurchase shares of our outstanding common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had authorization of $11.4 million remaining under this program. From 1997 through December 31, 2015, we repurchased 6.8 million shares for an aggregate of $1.2 billion under this program and previously announced programs. We have not made any repurchases under the program since 2015. Any repurchases under the program would require the consent of the holders of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
Outlook
We consider such factors as total cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, current assets, current liabilities, total debt, revenues, operating income (loss), cash flows from operations, investing activities, and financing activities when assessing our liquidity. Our management of cash is designed to optimize returns on cash balances and to ensure that it is readily available to meet our operating, investing, and financing requirements as they arise. We believe that there are no conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the twelve months following the issuance of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The areas that we believe involve the most significant management estimates and assumptions are detailed below. On an ongoing basis, management reviews its estimates and assumptions based on currently available information.
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that, in our judgment, are most important to the portrayal of our Company’s financial condition and results of operations and which require complex or subjective judgments or estimates. The areas that we believe involve the most significant management estimates and assumptions are detailed below.
Our Significant Accounting policies are described in Note A, Overview and Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement.
Revenue Recognition
Application of various accounting principles in accordance with U.S. GAAP related to measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make significant judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements with non-standard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine appropriate accounting. For revenue generated from arrangements that involve third parties, there is significant judgment in evaluating whether we are the principal, and report revenue on a gross basis, or the agent, and report revenue on a net basis.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous other jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. For additional information on the valuation allowance see Note I, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We adjust these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any reserves that we believe are appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note B, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of certain accounting standards that we have recently adopted and certain accounting standards that we have not yet been required to adopt and may be applicable to our future financial condition and results of operations.