Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(dollars in millions throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations)
(unless otherwise stated, references to years relate to fiscal years)
The following discussion compares our results for the year ended September 30, 2022, to the year ended September 30, 2021. The discussion comparing our results for the year ended September 30, 2021, to the year ended September 30, 2020, is included within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2021, filed with the SEC on November 17, 2021. We begin the discussion at a consolidated level and then provide separate detail about Advanced Process Solutions, Molding Technology Solutions, and Batesville reportable operating segments, as well as Corporate. These financial results are prepared in accordance with United States (“U.S.”) generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
We also provide certain non-GAAP operating performance measures. These non-GAAP measures are referred to as “adjusted” measures and primarily exclude the following items:
•business acquisitions, disposition, and integration costs;
•restructuring and restructuring-related charges;
•impairment charges;
•gains and losses on divestitures;
•the related income tax impact for all of these items; and
•certain tax items related to the acquisition of Milacron and divestitures of TerraSource, ABEL, Red Valve, and Cimcool, the revaluation of deferred tax balances in connection with enacted statutory tax rate reductions in certain foreign jurisdictions, foreign income inclusion tax provisions, including the impact the Milacron loss carryforward attributes have on tax provisions related to the imposition of tax on Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) earned by certain foreign subsidiaries, the Foreign Derived Intangible Income Deduction (FDII), and the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT).
Non-GAAP information is provided as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We use this non-GAAP information internally to make operating decisions and believe it is helpful to investors because it allows more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results. The information can also be used to perform trend analysis and to better identify operating trends that may otherwise be masked or distorted by items such as the above excluded items. We believe this information provides a higher degree of transparency.
An important non-GAAP measure that we use is adjusted earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation, and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”). A part of Hillenbrand’s strategy is to selectively acquire companies that we believe can benefit from the Hillenbrand Operating Model (“HOM”) to spur faster and more profitable growth. Given that strategy, it is a natural consequence to incur related expenses, such as amortization from acquired intangible assets and additional interest expense from debt-funded acquisitions. Accordingly, we use adjusted EBITDA, among other measures, to monitor our business performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized term under GAAP and therefore does not purport to be an alternative to consolidated net income. Further, the Company’s measure of adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
We expect that future net revenue associated with the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments will be influenced by order backlog because of the lead time involved in fulfilling engineered-to-order equipment and solutions for customers. Although backlog can be an indicator of future net revenue, it does not include projects and aftermarket parts orders that are booked and shipped within the same quarter. The timing of order placement, size, extent of customization, and customer delivery dates can create fluctuations in backlog and net revenue. Net revenue attributable to backlog may also be affected by foreign exchange fluctuations for orders denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars.
We calculate the foreign currency impact on net revenue, gross profit, operating expenses, consolidated net income and consolidated adjusted EBITDA, in order to better measure the comparability of results between periods. We calculate the foreign currency impact by translating current year results at prior year foreign exchange rates. This information is provided because exchange rates can distort the underlying change in these metrics, either positively or negatively. The cost structures
for Corporate and Batesville are generally not significantly impacted by the fluctuation in foreign exchange rates, and we do not disclose the foreign currency impact in the Operations Review below where the impact is not significant.
Another important operational measure used is backlog. Backlog is not a term recognized under GAAP; however, it is a common measurement used in industries with extended lead times for order fulfillment (long-term contracts), like those in which the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments compete. Backlog represents the amount of net revenue that we expect to realize on contracts awarded to the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments. For purposes of calculating backlog, 100% of estimated net revenue attributable to consolidated subsidiaries is included. Backlog includes expected net revenue from large systems and equipment, as well as aftermarket parts, components, and service. The length of time that projects remain in backlog can span from days for aftermarket parts or service to approximately 18 to 24 months for larger system sales within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment. The majority of the backlog within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment is expected to be fulfilled within the next twelve months. Backlog includes expected net revenue from the remaining portion of firm orders not yet completed, as well as net revenue from change orders to the extent that they are reasonably expected to be realized. We include in backlog the full contract award, including awards subject to further customer approvals, which we expect to result in net revenue in future periods. In accordance with industry practice, our contracts may include provisions for cancellation, termination, or suspension at the discretion of the customer.
See page 48 for reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to consolidated net income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure. We use non-GAAP measures in certain other instances and include information reconciling such non-GAAP measures to the respective most directly comparable GAAP measures. Given that backlog is an operational measure and that the Company’s methodology for calculating backlog does not meet the definition of a non-GAAP measure, as that term is defined by the SEC, a quantitative reconciliation is not required or provided.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our financial results are affected by the selection and application of accounting policies and methods. Significant accounting policies which require management’s judgment are discussed below. A detailed description of our accounting policies is included in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Net revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services and is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied under the terms of contracts with customers.
A performance obligation is deemed to be satisfied by the Company when control of the product or service is transferred to the customer. The transaction price of a contract, or the amount the Company expects to receive upon satisfaction of the performance obligation, is determined by reference to the contract’s terms and includes adjustments, if applicable, for any variable consideration, such as sales discounts, customer rebates, and sales incentives, all of which require us to make estimates for the portion of these allowances that have yet to be credited or paid to our customers. We estimate these allowances using the expected value method, which is based upon historical rates and projections of customer purchases toward contractual rebate or incentive thresholds. If a contract contains more than one distinct performance obligation, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling price of each performance obligation; however, these situations do not occur frequently and are not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as our contracts generally include one performance obligation for the transfer of goods or services.
The timing of revenue recognition for the contract’s performance obligation is either over time or at a point in time. We recognize revenue over time for contracts that have an enforceable right to collect payment for performance completed to date upon customer cancellation and provide one or more of the following: (i) service over a period of time, (ii) highly customized equipment, or (iii) parts which are highly engineered and have no alternative use. Net revenue generated from standard equipment and highly customized equipment or parts contracts without an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, as well as non-specialized parts sales and sales of death care products, is recognized at a point in time.
We use the input method of “cost-to-cost” to recognize net revenue over time. Accounting for these contracts involves management judgment in estimating total contract revenue and cost. Contract revenue is largely determined by negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding contract options, change orders, and incentive and award provisions associated with technical performance clauses. Contract costs are incurred over longer periods of time and, accordingly, the estimation of these costs requires judgment. We measure progress based on costs incurred to date relative to total estimated cost at completion. Incurred cost represents work performed, which corresponds with, and we believe thereby
best depicts, the transfer of control to the customer. Contract costs include labor, material, and certain overhead expenses. Cost estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events, including labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the cost of materials, and the performance of suppliers and subcontractors. Significant factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements. Revenue and cost estimates are regularly monitored and revised based on changes in circumstances. Anticipated losses on long-term manufacturing contracts are recognized immediately when such losses become evident. We maintain financial controls over the customer qualification, contract pricing, and estimation processes designed to reduce the risk of contract losses.
Standalone service revenue is recognized either over time proportionately over the period of the underlying contract or as invoiced, depending on the terms of the arrangement. Standalone service revenue is not material to the Company.
Retirement and Postretirement Benefit Plans
We sponsor retirement and postretirement benefit plans covering some of our employees. Expense recognized for the plans is based upon actuarial valuations. Inherent in those valuations are key assumptions including discount rates, expected returns on assets, and projected future salary rates. The actuarial assumptions we use may differ significantly from actual results due to changing economic conditions, participant life span, and withdrawal rates. These differences may result in a material impact to the amount of net periodic pension cost to be recorded in our Consolidated Financial Statements in the future. The discount rates used in the valuation of our retirement and postretirement benefit plans are evaluated annually based on current market conditions. We use a full yield curve approach in the estimation of the service and interest cost components of our defined benefit retirement plans. Under this approach, we applied discounting using individual spot rates from a yield curve composed of the rates of return on several hundred high-quality, fixed income corporate bonds available at the measurement date. These spot rates align to each of the projected benefit obligations and service cost cash flows. The service cost component relates to the active participants in the plans, so the relevant cash flows on which to apply the yield curve are considerably longer in duration on average than the total projected benefit obligation cash flows, which also include benefit payments to retirees. Interest cost is computed by multiplying each spot rate by the corresponding discounted projected benefit obligation cash flows. The full yield curve approach reduces any actuarial gains and losses based upon interest rate expectations (e.g., built-in gains in interest cost in an upward sloping projected yield curve scenario), or gains and losses merely resulting from the timing and magnitude of cash outflows associated with our benefit obligations.
Our overall expected long-term rate of return on pension assets is based on historical and expected future returns, which are inflation-adjusted and weighted for the expected return for each component of the investment portfolio. Our rate of assumed compensation increase for pension benefits is also based on our specific historical trends of past wage adjustments in recent years and expectations for the future.
Changes in retirement and postretirement benefit expense and the recognized obligations may occur in the future as a result of a number of factors, including changes to key assumptions such as the expected long-term rate of return on pension assets and the weighted-average discount rate. Our expected long-term rate of return on domestic and international pension plan assets was 4.7% and 3.7% at September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The weighted-average discount rate was 4.6% and 2.1% for the domestic and international defined benefit pension plans and 5.2% and 2.4% for the postretirement healthcare plans at September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. A 50 basis-point change in the expected long-term rate of return on domestic and international pension plan assets would change annual pension expense by $1.6. A 50 basis-point change in the weighted-average discount rate would change the annual domestic and international pension expense by $0.3 and the annual postretirement healthcare plan expense by less than $0.1. Impacts from assumption changes could be positive or negative depending on the direction of the change in rates. Based upon rates and assumptions at September 30, 2022, we expect the aggregate expense associated with our retirement and postretirement benefit plans to decrease from $1.7 in 2022 to $1.2 in 2023. The expected decrease in expense is primarily due to decreasing amortization of actuarial loss.
See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K, for key assumptions and other information regarding our retirement and postretirement benefit plans.
Asset Impairment Determinations
Impairment of goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually and upon the occurrence of certain triggering events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value may be below carrying value.
Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment if discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by operating segment management. For the purpose of the goodwill impairment test, the Company can elect to perform a quantitative or qualitative analysis. If the qualitative test is elected, qualitative factors are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair values of its reporting units are less than the respective carrying values of those reporting units. Such factors we consider in a qualitative analysis include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, Company-specific events, events affecting the reporting unit, and the overall financial performance of the reporting unit. If after performing the qualitative analysis, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then the Company must perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test.
If we elect to perform or are required to perform a quantitative analysis, we compare the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s net assets, including goodwill, to the fair value of the reporting unit. If the fair value exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is required, and no impairment loss is recognized. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between carrying amount and fair value, not to exceed the original amount of goodwill.
In determining the estimated fair value of the reporting units when performing a quantitative analysis, we consider both the market approach and the income approach. For purposes of the goodwill impairment test, weighting is equally attributed to both the market and income approaches in arriving at the fair value of the reporting units.
Under the market approach, we utilize the guideline company method, which involves calculating valuation multiples based on operating data from comparable publicly traded companies. Multiples derived from these companies provide an indication of how much a knowledgeable investor in the marketplace would be willing to pay for a company. These multiples are then applied to the operating data for our reporting units to arrive at an indication of value.
Under the income approach, the fair value of the reporting unit is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows utilizing a market-based weighted-average cost of capital determined separately for each reporting unit.
To determine the reasonableness of the calculated fair values of our reporting units, the Company reviews the assumptions described below to ensure that neither the market approach nor the income approach yields significantly different valuations. We selected these valuation approaches because we believe the combination of these approaches, along with our best judgment regarding underlying assumptions and estimates, provides us with the best estimate of fair value of our reporting units. We believe these valuation approaches are appropriate for the industry and widely accepted by investors.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires us to make significant judgments, estimates, and assumptions. The Company believes these estimates and assumptions are reasonable. However, future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in the impairment testing for goodwill, including discount and tax rates or future cash flow projections, could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values. As a result of these factors and the limited cushion (or headroom, as commonly referred) due to the acquisition of Milacron in fiscal 2020, goodwill for the reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment are more susceptible to impairment risk.
The key assumptions for the market and income approaches we use to determine fair value of our reporting units are updated at least annually. Those assumptions and estimates include macroeconomic conditions, competitive activities, cost containment, achievement of synergy initiatives, market data and market multiples (6.0-10.0 times adjusted EBITDA), discount rates (11.5-13.0%), and terminal growth rates (2.0%), as well as future levels of revenue growth, operating margins, depreciation, amortization, and working capital requirements, which are based upon the Company’s strategic plan. Hillenbrand’s strategic plan is updated as part of its annual planning process and is reviewed and approved by management and the Board of Directors. The strategic plan may be revised as necessary during a fiscal year, based on changes in market conditions or other changes in the reporting units. The discount rate assumption is based on the overall after-tax rate of return required by a market participant whose weighted-average cost of capital includes both equity and debt, including a risk premium. The discount rates may be impacted by adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other factors. While the Company can implement and has implemented certain strategies to address these events, changes in operating plans or adverse changes in the future could reduce the underlying cash flows used to estimate reporting unit fair values and could result in a further decline in fair value that would trigger a future material impairment charge of the reporting units’ goodwill balance.
Although there are always changes in assumptions to reflect changing business and market conditions, our overall valuation methodology and the types of assumptions we use have remained consistent. While we use the best available information to
prepare the cash flow and discount rate assumptions, actual future cash flows or market conditions could differ significantly resulting in future impairment charges related to recorded goodwill balances.
The Company is required to provide additional disclosures about fair value measurements as part of the Consolidated Financial Statements for each major category of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis (including impairment assessments). Goodwill is valued using Level 3 inputs, which are unobservable by nature, and included internal estimates of future cash flows (income approach). Significant increases (decreases) in any of those unobservable inputs in isolation would result in a significantly higher (lower) fair value measurement.
Annual impairment assessment
The Company performed its annual July 1 goodwill impairment assessment during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 for all reporting units. For all reporting units, the fair value of goodwill was determined to exceed the carrying value, resulting in no impairment to goodwill as part of this test. As a result of the Milacron acquisition in fiscal 2020, there is less cushion or headroom for the reporting units with the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment. The estimated fair value, as calculated at July 1, 2022, for the three reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment ranged from approximately 13% to 54% greater than their carrying value (9% to 45% at the previous impairment assessment date).
Impairment recorded in 2020
Fourth quarter of 2020
As a result of classifying certain reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment as held for sale at September 30, 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $16.9 during the fourth quarter of 2020. See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K for further information.
Second quarter of 2020
In connection with the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements for the second quarter of 2020, an interim impairment assessment was performed for select reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments as a result of certain triggering events and changes in circumstances discussed in detail below. Additionally, based on the macroeconomic factors below, as well as the decline in the Company’s common stock price during the second quarter of 2020, the Company performed a qualitative review for all remaining reporting units and determined that those reporting units did not require an interim impairment test as it was more likely than not that the current fair value of those reporting units exceeded their carrying value, based on their current and projected financial performance as well as the headroom from previous goodwill impairment tests.
For certain reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment, an interim impairment review was triggered during the second quarter of 2020 by the Company’s decision to redirect its strategic investments as it focused on deleveraging following two major events: (1) the continued evaluation of the Company’s operations following the acquisition of Milacron completed on November 21, 2019, and (2) adverse macroeconomic conditions primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. In connection with these events, the Company made the decision to limit its future strategic investment in its two reporting units that primarily sold and manufactured products in the flow control sector. The decision to limit future investment, as well as the Company’s updated forecasts, which considered the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced those reporting units’ anticipated annual revenue growth rates and corresponding profitability and cash flows. The annual revenue growth rates utilized in the Company’s fair value estimate are consistent with the reporting units’ operating plans. As a result of the change to expected future cash flows, along with comparable fair value information, the Company concluded that the carrying value for these reporting units exceeded their fair value, resulting in goodwill impairment charges of $72.3 during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment goodwill balance for these reporting units was $95.2. Additionally, under the relief-from-royalty fair value method, the Company concluded that the carrying value of a trade name associated with one of these reporting units exceeded its fair value. As a result, an impairment charge of $0.7 was recorded for this trade name during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment balance for this trade name was $4.4.
For the reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment, an interim impairment review was triggered during the second quarter of 2020, due to adverse macroeconomic conditions primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequent to the Company completing the acquisition of Milacron on November 21, 2019, the Company revised its forecasts for all reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment due to the deterioration in the overall global economy largely as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the decline in forecasted net
revenue, under the relief-from-royalty fair value method, the Company concluded that the carrying value of certain trade names and technology associated with these reporting units exceeded their fair value. As a result, impairment charges of $9.5 were recorded for these intangible assets during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment balance for these intangible assets was $125.0.
The impairment charges to goodwill and the intangible assets were nondeductible for tax purposes. The following table summarizes the impairment charges by reportable segment recorded by the Company during the year ended September 30, 2020:
Impairment of long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. For assets (disposal group) held for sale, the disposal group as a whole is measured at the lower of its carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell after adjusting the individual assets of the disposal group, if necessary. If the carrying value of assets, after the consideration of other asset valuation guidance, exceeds fair value less cost to sell, the Company establishes a valuation allowance which would offset the original carrying value of disposal group. This valuation allowance would be adjusted based on subsequent changes in our estimate of fair value less cost to sell. If the fair value less cost to sell increases, the carrying amount of the long-lived assets would be adjusted upward; however, the increased carrying amount cannot exceed the carrying amount of the disposal group before the decision to dispose of the assets was made. Estimates are required to determine the fair value, the disposal costs and the time period to dispose of the assets. The estimate of fair value incorporates the transaction approach, which utilizes pricing indications derived from recent acquisition transactions involving comparable companies. Such estimates are critical in determining whether any impairment charge should be recorded and the amount of such charge if an impairment loss is deemed to be necessary.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recognized a non-cash charge for TerraSource and the flow control businesses of $62.3, which included a goodwill impairment of $16.9 and a valuation adjustment of $45.4, to recognize the assets of these businesses at fair value less estimated costs to sell. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recognized a non-cash valuation adjustment of $11.2 to recognize TerraSource at fair value less estimated cost to sell based on the definitive agreement the Company entered into to sell TerraSource. The non-cash charges of $11.2 and $62.3, for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were recorded within the impairment charges caption on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For further information, see discussion below within the Executive Overview section and Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
For assets held and used, impairment may occur if projected undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the assets. In such cases, additional analysis is conducted to determine the amount of loss to be recognized, and the impairment loss is determined as the amount the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds the estimated fair value, measured by future discounted cash flows. The analysis requires estimates of the amount and timing of projected cash flows and, where applicable, judgment associated with, among other factors, the appropriate discount rate. Such estimates are critical in determining whether any impairment charge should be recorded and the amount of such charge if an impairment loss is deemed to be necessary. Our judgment regarding the existence of circumstances that indicate the potential impairment of an asset’s carrying value is based on several factors, including, but not limited to, changes in business environment, a decline in operating cash flows or a decision to close a manufacturing facility. The variability of these factors depends on a number of conditions, including uncertainty about future events and general economic conditions.
Business Combinations
Estimating fair value for acquired assets and liabilities as part of a business combination typically requires us to exercise judgment, particularly for those assets and liabilities that may be unique or not easily determined by reference to market data. Often estimates for these types of acquired assets and liabilities will be developed using valuation models that require both historical and forecasted inputs, as well as market participant expectations. Thus, the valuation is directly affected by the inputs we judge as best under the given circumstances. When material, we expect to seek assistance of competent valuation
professionals when the underlying valuation is more complex or unique. We anticipate that in most cases, we will exercise significant judgment in estimating the fair value of intangible assets, contingent liabilities, and contingent consideration. This list is not exhaustive, but is designed to give you a better understanding of where we think a larger degree of judgment will be required due to the nature of the item and the way it is typically valued.
The Company makes an initial allocation of the purchase price at the date of acquisition based upon its understanding of the fair value of the acquired assets, including identifiable intangible assets, and assumed liabilities. We obtain this information during due diligence and through other sources. In the months after closing, as we obtain additional information about these assets and liabilities, including through tangible asset appraisals, and learn more about the newly acquired business, we are able to refine the estimates of fair value and more accurately allocate the purchase price. The determination of intangible assets is subjective and generally requires complex valuation methodologies including the relief from royalty method and multi-period excess earnings method, for which we generally use a third-party valuation specialist. The intangible assets are impacted by a number of judgmental assumptions including future revenue growth rates and margins on such revenue, customer attrition rates, technology obsolescence factors and the discount rates.
See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K, for further information on recent business combinations.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Hillenbrand is a global industrial company operating in over 40 countries with multiple leading brands that serve a wide variety of industries around the world. Guided by its Purpose, Shape What Matters For Tomorrow™, Hillenbrand pursues excellence, collaboration, and innovation to shape solutions that best serve our people, our customers, and our communities. Customers choose Hillenbrand due to its reputation for designing, manufacturing, and servicing highly engineered, mission-critical equipment and solutions that meet their unique product specifications.
Hillenbrand’s portfolio is composed of three reportable operating segments: Advanced Process Solutions, Molding Technology Solutions, and Batesville®. Advanced Process Solutions is a leading global provider of compounding, extrusion, and material handling, screening and separating equipment and systems, and services for a wide variety of manufacturing and other industrial processes. Molding Technology Solutions is a global leader in highly engineered and customized equipment and systems and service in plastic technology and processing. Batesville is a recognized leader in the death care industry in North America.
We strive to provide superior return for our shareholders, exceptional value for our customers, great professional opportunities for our employees, and to be responsible to our communities through deployment of the HOM. The HOM is a consistent and repeatable framework designed to produce sustainable and predictable results. The HOM describes our mission, vision, values and mindset as leaders; applies our management practices in Strategy Management, Segmentation, Lean, Talent Development, and Acquisitions; and prescribes three steps (Understand, Focus, and Grow) designed to make our businesses both bigger and better. Our goal is to continue developing Hillenbrand as a world-class global industrial company through the deployment of the HOM.
Our strategy is to leverage our historically strong financial foundation and the implementation of the HOM to deliver sustainable profit growth, revenue expansion and substantial free cash flow, and then reinvest available cash in new growth initiatives focused on building platforms with leadership positions in our core markets and near adjacencies, both organically and inorganically, in order to create shareholder value.
During the year ended September 30, 2022, the following operational decisions and economic developments had an impact on our current and may impact our future cash flows, consolidated results of operations, and financial position.
Ukraine War
As a result of the Ukraine War, various nations, including the U.S., have instituted economic sanctions and other responsive measures, which have resulted in an increased level of global economic and political uncertainty. Any such geopolitical instability and uncertainty could have a negative impact on our ability to sell to, ship products to, collect payments from, and support customers in certain regions.
We have suspended all new business in Russia and Belarus but may be contractually obligated to complete certain existing contracts, insofar as economic sanctions do not prevent us from doing so. The impacts of sanctions and other measures being imposed have not had a material impact to the consolidated results of operations. Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine do not constitute
a material portion of our business; however, a significant escalation or expansion of the Ukraine War’s current scope and associated global economic disruption could have a negative effect on our cash flows and consolidated results of operations.
Additionally, supply chain disruptions and logistical challenges due to the Ukraine War and any indirect effects thereof are expected to further complicate existing supply chain constraints, which could adversely affect profitability. To date, we have experienced some inability to source certain raw materials and components, but we have largely been able to mitigate the impact on our consolidated results of operations.
Given the evolving nature of the Ukraine War, and the related sanctions, potential governmental actions, and economic impact, the scope and magnitude of any such potential effects remain uncertain. While we may experience negative impacts on our business, financial condition, and consolidated results of operations, we are unable to estimate the ultimate extent or nature of these impacts at this time.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and is continuing to impact Hillenbrand very differently by business, geography, and function. The scope and nature of these impacts continue to evolve, sometimes rapidly, including through the resurgence of COVID-19 due to variant strains of the virus and related government actions, and we cannot reasonably estimate the duration, spread, or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and related variants, nor the economic and governmental responses thereto.
It is difficult to quantify the complete impact the pandemic had for 2022, but the actions being undertaken to reduce the severity and spread of COVID-19 are currently creating disruptions, and could continue to create significant disruptions, with respect to consumer demand, our ability to continue to manufacture products, and the reliability and sufficiency of our supply chain. The surge of any variant strain in China, and China’s COVID-19 lockdowns that include mass testing, mandatory quarantines, and international travel bans, have at times closed and could potentially in the future close commerce in the region and, if extended, could impact other areas where the Company has operations, suppliers, and sales. We cannot predict the extent or duration of any such measures or the associated impacts. While our inventory positions protect our ability to fulfill customer orders in the short term, a prolonged lockdown may unfavorably impact our ability to timely manufacture and distribute our products or negatively impact our supply chain and could also have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated net revenue, consolidated results of operations, and cash flows during fiscal 2023 and beyond.
As a result of the current circumstances, we may continue to experience adverse impacts during fiscal 2023 within our Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments, although we cannot reasonably estimate these impacts. Should these conditions continue for Advanced Process Solutions or Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments, or should the severity of COVID-19 increase, the Company would similarly expect adverse impacts on its net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows, depending upon the severity and length of time such conditions persist. While the COVID-19 pandemic generally has had a favorable impact on the Batesville reportable operating segment’s net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows, we are starting to see lower deaths associated with the declining effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently not able to predict the extent and duration of the impact for fiscal 2023 or the further potential negative impact that the increase in deaths in North America due to the COVID-19 pandemic will have on future deaths when the pandemic has subsided. The timing and effectiveness of further vaccine development and rollout, in addition to consequences of variants of the virus, could also have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows during the remainder of fiscal 2023 and beyond.
We continue to take actions intended to help minimize the risk to our Company, employees, customers, and the communities in which we operate, as well as to lessen the financial impact on the business while protecting our ability to continue to generate profitable growth over the long-term. We continue to believe the Company has sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment as a result of these actions.
Employees
We have implemented a number of employee safety measures across our plants and other locations in an attempt to contain the spread of COVID-19, which we update as appropriate for the evolving COVID-19 situation depending on the geography and function.
In addition, we believe various factors have contributed to the current labor shortage, particularly in the U.S. We have continued to experience effects of this labor shortage at certain production facilities, and we are mitigating this impact through the use of overtime and third-party outsourcing as warranted. It is possible that a prolonged shortage of qualified, available
workers could result in a further increase in labor costs and could negatively affect our ability to efficiently operate our production facilities and our results of operations.
Supply Chain and Inflation
While global supply chains have recently suffered from various headwinds, those supporting our products have generally remained intact, providing access to sufficient inventory of the key materials needed for manufacturing. However, we have experienced significant delays of certain raw materials and components, but we have largely been able to mitigate the impact on our consolidated results of operations. We continue to identify and qualify alternative sources to mitigate risk associated to single or sole source supply continuity, and we have purchased and may continue to purchase certain materials in safety stock where we have supply chain continuity concerns. It remains possible that we may experience some sort of interruption to our supply chains, and such an interruption could materially affect our ability to timely manufacture and distribute our products and could also have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows during fiscal 2023 and beyond.
We also experienced material and supply chain inflation, including but not limited to higher transportation costs, in fiscal 2022 as further discussed in our Operations Review. Pricing actions and supply chain productivity initiatives have and are expected to continue to mitigate some of these inflationary pressures, but we may not be successful in fully offsetting these incremental costs, which could have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, and cash flows during fiscal 2023 and beyond.
For additional information regarding labor, supply chain, and other risks, including those relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Strategic Alternatives for Batesville
On July 20, 2022, the Company announced its intention to explore strategic alternatives for the Batesville reportable operating segment. There can be no assurance that the Strategic Process will result in a Batesville Transaction or that any Batesville Transaction, if pursued, will be consummated on terms our investors view as favorable or at all. Based on the ongoing nature of the Company’s process to explore strategic alternatives and there being no decisions made at September 30, 2022, or by the date of this Form 10-K, the pendency of this process had no impact on and did not result in any changes to the consolidated financial statement presentation of Batesville during the year ended September 30, 2022. The Company does not intend to provide any additional information on the review of strategic alternatives for Batesville unless or until the process is completed or terminated.
Subsequent acquisition of LINXIS Group SAS
On October 6, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of LINXIS Group SAS (“Linxis”) from IBERIS INTERNATIONAL S.À R.L, an affiliate of IK Partners, and additional sellers (“Sellers”). As a result of the acquisition, the Company acquired from the Sellers all of the issued and outstanding securities of Linxis, and Linxis became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company for total aggregate consideration of $590.8 (€596.2) in cash, reflecting an enterprise value of approximately $566.8 (€572.0) plus cash acquired at closing, subject to post-closing adjustments.
Linxis has six leading brands - Bakon, Diosna, Shaffer, Shick Esteve, Unifiller, and VMI - that serve customers in over 100 countries. With a global manufacturing, sales and service footprint, Linxis specializes in design, manufacturing, and service of dosing, kneading, mixing, granulating, drying and coating technologies that are complementary to the equipment and solutions offered under Hillenbrand's Coperion brand. Linxis will be included in our Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment.
Proposed acquisition of Peerless Food Equipment
On November 3, 2022, the Company signed a definitive agreement to acquire from Illinois Tool Works Inc. its Peerless Food Equipment division (“Peerless”), a premier supplier of industrial food processing equipment, for a purchase price of $59.0, subject to customary post-closing adjustments. Headquartered in Sidney, Ohio, Peerless is highly complementary to certain Linxis brands. This transaction is expected to close during the fiscal first quarter of 2023. Peerless will be included in our Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment.
Divestiture of flow control businesses
On December 31, 2020, the Company completed the divestiture of Red Valve to DeZURIK, Inc. in a transaction valued at $63.0. The sale included cash proceeds received at closing of $59.4, including working capital adjustments, and a $5.0 note receivable, included within other long-term assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September 30, 2022 and 2021.
As a result of the Red Valve divestiture, the Company recorded a pre-tax gain of $31.6 in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The related tax effect resulted in tax expense of $9.3 and was included within income tax expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The Company incurred $2.9 of transaction costs associated with the sale during the year ended September 30, 2021, which were recorded within operating expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Red Valve’s results of operations were included within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment until the completion of the sale on December 31, 2020.
On March 10, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of ABEL to IDEX Corporation in a transaction valued at $103.5. The divestiture included cash proceeds received at closing of $106.3, including working capital adjustments.
As a result of the ABEL divestiture, the Company recorded a pre-tax gain of $35.5, after post-closing adjustments, in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The related tax effect resulted in tax expense of $3.8 included within income tax expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The Company incurred $3.9 of transaction costs associated with the divestiture during the year ended September 30, 2021, which were recorded within operating expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. ABEL’s results of operations were included within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment until the completion of the sale on March 10, 2021.
Divestiture of TerraSource
On October 22, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of TerraSource pursuant to a Contribution Agreement (“Agreement”) between the Company and certain affiliated companies of industrial holding company Right Lane Industries (“RLI”). Under the terms of the Agreement, Hillenbrand contributed TerraSource and its subsidiaries to a newly formed entity, TerraSource Holdings, LLC (“Holdings”), with RLI obtaining majority ownership and full operational control of TerraSource. In exchange for contributing the TerraSource business, the Company received consideration in the form of a five-year note with initial principal amount of $25.6, subject to certain adjustments, and also retained a 49% equity interest in Holdings through one of the Company’s indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries. The fair value of the total consideration received by the Company was $27.7.
As a result of the TerraSource divestiture, the Company recorded a pre-tax loss of $3.1, after post-closing adjustments, in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2022. The Company incurred $0.4 of transaction costs associated with the divestiture during the year ended September 30, 2022, which were recorded within operating expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. TerraSource’s results of operations were included within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment until the completion of the divestiture on October 22, 2021. Subsequent to the divestiture, the Company’s equity interest in Holdings is accounted for under the equity method of accounting as prescribed by GAAP.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - CONSOLIDATED
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Net revenue increased $76.1 (3%), which included unfavorable foreign currency impact (4%).
•Advanced Process Solutions’ net revenue increased $24.1 (2%) primarily due to an increase in large plastics systems sales, favorable pricing, and higher aftermarket parts and service net revenue, partially offset by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020, ABEL on March 10, 2021, and TerraSource on October 22, 2021. Foreign currency impact decreased net revenue by 6%.
•Molding Technology Solutions’ net revenue increased $49.8 (5%), primarily driven by an increase in injection molding equipment sales and favorable pricing. Foreign currency impact decreased net revenue by 3%.
•Batesville’s net revenue increased $2.2 (0.4%) primarily due to an increase in average selling price driven by a commodity surcharge in 2022, mostly offset by a decrease in volume. Lower volume was driven by a decrease in burial casket sales primarily due to estimated lower deaths associated with the declining effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and an estimated increased rate at which families opted for cremation.
Gross profit decreased $2.7 (0.3%). Gross profit margin decreased 90 basis points to 32.5%. On an adjusted basis, which excludes restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.2 in 2022 and $10.3 in 2021), business acquisition, integration, and development costs ($0.4 in 2022 and $3.8 in 2021), and other one-time costs ($1.0 in 2022 and $0.5 in 2021), gross profit decreased $14.4 (2%), and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 140 basis points to 32.6%.
•Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit increased $10.2 (2%), primarily due to favorable pricing, an increase in volume, and productivity improvements and synergies, partially offset by cost inflation, and the divestitures of Red Valve, ABEL, and TerraSource. Foreign currency impact decreased gross profit by 6%. Gross profit margin improved 10 basis points to 34.5% in 2022, primarily due to favorable pricing and productivity improvements, partially offset by cost inflation.
Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.1 in 2022 and $7.6 in 2021), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($0.1 in 2022 and $1.9 in 2021), and other one-time costs ($0.8 in 2022 and $0.5 in 2021). Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $3.2 (1%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 40 basis points to 34.8%.
•Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit increased $21.3 (7%), primarily due to favorable pricing, an increase in volume, and productivity improvements and synergies, partially offset by cost inflation. Foreign currency impact decreased gross profit by 3%. Gross profit margin improved 60 basis points to 31.1% in 2022, primarily due to favorable pricing and productivity improvements including synergies, partially offset by cost inflation.
Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.1 in 2022 and $2.6 in 2021), and business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($0.3 in 2022 and $1.9 in 2021). Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $16.9 (5%) and adjusted gross profit margin improved 20 basis points to 31.2%.
•Batesville’s gross profit decreased $34.2 (15%) and gross profit margin decreased 560 basis points to 30.5%. The decrease in gross profit and gross profit margin was primarily due to inflation in commodities, fuel, and wages and benefits, lower volume, and incremental costs driven by supply chain disruptions, partially offset by an increase in average selling price and productivity initiatives.
Operating expenses decreased $4.3 (1%), primarily due to the divestitures of Red Valve, ABEL and TerraSource, synergy savings, and a decrease in variable compensation, partially offset by an increase in strategic investments, cost inflation, and an increase in one-time costs including reserves against certain receivables. Foreign currency impact decreased operating expenses by 3%. Our operating expense-to-revenue ratio improved 60 basis points to 17.8%. Operating expenses included the following items:
On an adjusted basis, which excludes business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs, restructuring and restructuring-related charges, and other one-time costs including reserves against certain receivables, operating expenses decreased $4.3 (1%), which included favorable foreign currency impact (3%). Adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 50 basis points to 16.6%.
Amortization expense decreased $1.7 (3%), primarily due to the impact of foreign currency (3%).
Loss (gain) on divestitures was a loss of $3.1 in the current year due to the loss realized on the divestiture of TerraSource and a gain of $67.1 in the prior year due to the gains realized on the divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL. For further information on divestitures, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Impairment charges decreased $11.2 due to a one-time valuation adjustment related to TerraSource assets held for sale during 2021. For further information on the one-time valuation adjustment, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
Other income, net increased $8.1, primarily due to increases in interest income and gains on the sale of property, plant, and equipment.
The effective tax rate was 31.5% in fiscal 2022 compared to 27.9% in fiscal 2021. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by an increase in tax expense associated with distributions from foreign subsidiaries, an increase in non-deductible executive compensation, and the impact of divestitures in the prior period, partially offset by a reduction of the provisions for uncertain tax positions in the prior period and the revaluation of deferred tax balances as a result of foreign currency fluctuations.
Our adjusted effective income tax rate was 29.1% in 2022 compared to 28.7% in 2021. The adjusted effective income tax rate primarily excludes the tax effect of the following items:
•The divestitures of TerraSource, ABEL and Red Valve ($0.6 expense in 2022 and $7.4 expense in 2021);
•The impact of Milacron tax loss carryforwards on net domestic taxes on foreign earnings ($3.9 expense in 2022 and $0.6 expense in 2021);
•The revaluation of deferred tax balances as a result of foreign currency fluctuations ($1.8 benefit in 2022 and $1.6 expense in 2021); and
•Adjustments previously discussed within this section ($22.3 benefit in 2022 and $28.3 benefit in 2021).
Excluding these items, the increase in the current year adjusted effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in tax expense associated with distributions from foreign subsidiaries and an increase in non-deductible executive compensation, partially offset by a reduction of the provisions for uncertain tax positions in the prior period.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - ADVANCED PROCESS SOLUTIONS
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Net revenue increased $24.1 (2%) primarily due to an increase in large plastics systems sales, favorable pricing, and higher aftermarket parts and service net revenue, partially offset by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020, ABEL on March 10, 2021, and TerraSource on October 22, 2021. Foreign currency impact decreased net revenue by 6%.
We expect future net revenue for Advanced Process Solutions to continue to be influenced by order backlog because of the lead time involved in fulfilling engineered-to-order equipment and solutions for customers. Though backlog can be an indicator of future net revenue, it does not include projects and aftermarket parts orders that are booked and shipped within the same quarter. The timing of order placement, size of orders, extent of order customization, and customer delivery dates can create fluctuations in backlog and net revenue. Net revenue attributable to backlog is also affected by foreign exchange rate fluctuations for orders denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars. Order backlog increased $48.5 (4%) from $1,349.4 at September 30, 2021, to $1,397.9 at September 30, 2022. The increase in order backlog was primarily driven by an increase in large plastics systems, the acquisition of Herbold, and aftermarket parts and service, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impact (15%), and the divestiture of TerraSource. On a sequential basis, order backlog increased $169.3 (14%) to $1,397.9 at September 30, 2022, up from $1,228.6 at June 30, 2022, primarily due to an increase in large plastics systems and the acquisition of Herbold, partially offset by the impact of foreign currency (6%).
Gross profit increased $10.2 (2%), primarily due to favorable pricing, an increase in volume, and productivity improvements and synergies, partially offset by cost inflation, and the divestitures of Red Valve, ABEL, and TerraSource. Foreign currency impact decreased gross profit by 6%. Gross profit margin improved 10 basis points to 34.5% in 2022, primarily due to favorable pricing and productivity improvements, partially offset by cost inflation.
Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.1 in 2022 and $7.6 in 2021), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($0.1 in 2022 and $1.9 in 2021), and other one-time costs ($0.8 in 2022 and $0.5 in 2021). Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $3.2 (1%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 40 basis points to 34.8%.
Operating expenses decreased $13.2 (6%), primarily due to the divestitures of Red Valve, ABEL, and TerraSource, synergy savings from restructuring actions, a decrease in restructuring and restructuring-related charges, and a decrease in business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs, partially offset by an increase in strategic investments and cost inflation. Foreign currency impact decreased operating expenses by 6%. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 130 basis points to 16.4%.
Operating expenses included other one-time costs including reserves against certain receivables ($2.6 in 2022), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($1.5 in 2022 and $3.1 in 2021), and restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.1 in 2022 and $2.5 in 2021). Excluding these items, adjusted operating expenses decreased $11.4 (5%), which included favorable foreign currency impact (6%). Adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 130 basis points to 16.0%.
Amortization expense decreased $1.8 (9%), primarily due to the impact of foreign currency (6%).
Impairment charges decreased $11.2 due to a one-time valuation adjustment related to TerraSource assets held for sale during 2021. For further information on the one-time valuation adjustment, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - MOLDING TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Net revenue increased $49.8 (5%), primarily driven by an increase in injection molding equipment sales and favorable pricing. Foreign currency impact decreased net revenue by 3%.
Order backlog decreased $1.5 (0.4%) from $365.6 at September 30, 2021, to $364.1 at September 30, 2022. Foreign currency impact decreased order backlog by 3%. On a sequential basis, order backlog decreased $56.1 (13%) to $364.1 at September 30, 2022, down from $420.2 at June 30, 2022. The decrease in order backlog was primarily driven by a decrease in orders within our injection molding, extrusion, and hot runner equipment product lines.
Gross profit increased $21.3 (7%) primarily due to favorable pricing, an increase in volume, and productivity improvements and synergies, partially offset by cost inflation. Foreign currency impact decreased gross profit by 3%. Gross profit margin improved 60 basis points to 31.1% in 2022, primarily due to favorable pricing and productivity improvements including synergies, partially offset by cost inflation.
Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.1 in 2022 and $2.6 in 2021), and business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($0.3 in 2022 and $1.9 in 2021). Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $16.9 (5%) and adjusted gross profit margin improved 20 basis points to 31.2%.
Operating expenses increased $7.1 (5%), primarily due to cost inflation and an increase in strategic investments, partially offset by synergies and savings from restructuring actions. Foreign currency impact decreased operating expense by 2%. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue remained flat at 14.3%.
Operating expenses included business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($1.3 in 2022 and $1.1 in 2021) (including severance costs related to the Milacron integration) and restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.5 in 2022 and $0.7 in 2021). Excluding these charges, adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue remained flat at 14.1%.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - BATESVILLE
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Net revenue increased $2.2 (0.4%), primarily due to an increase in average selling price driven by a commodity surcharge in 2022, mostly offset by a decrease in volume. Lower volume was driven by a decrease in burial casket sales primarily due to estimated lower deaths associated with the declining effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and an estimated increased rate at which families opted for cremation.
Gross profit decreased $34.2 (15%), and gross profit margin decreased 560 basis points to 30.5%. The decrease in gross profit and gross profit margin was primarily due to inflation in commodities, fuel, and wages and benefits, lower volume, and incremental costs driven by supply chain disruptions, partially offset by an increase in average selling price and productivity initiatives.
Operating expenses decreased $4.2 (6%) to $70.8 in 2022, primarily due to cost containment actions, a decrease in variable compensation, and a decrease in restructuring and restructuring-related charges, partially offset by inflation. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 70 basis points to 11.3%.
Operating expenses included restructuring and restructuring related charges ($0.1 in 2022 and $0.8 in 2021). Excluding the charges adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 50 basis points to 11.3%
REVIEW OF CORPORATE EXPENSES
Corporate operating expenses include the cost of providing management and administrative services to each reportable operating segment. These services include treasury management, human resources, legal, business development, information technology, tax compliance, procurement, sustainability, and other public company support functions such as internal audit, investor relations, and financial reporting. Corporate operating expenses also include costs related to business acquisition, disposition, and integration, which we incur as a result of our strategy to grow through selective acquisitions. Core operating expenses primarily represent corporate operating expenses excluding costs related to business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs.
Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs include legal, tax, accounting, and other advisory fees and due diligence costs associated with investigating opportunities (including acquisitions and dispositions) and integrating completed acquisitions (including severance).
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Operating expenses increased $6.0 (7%) in 2022, primarily due to increase in strategic investments, cost inflation, and an increase in business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs, partially offset by a decrease in variable compensation. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue were 3.2%, an increase of 10 basis points from the prior year.
Core operating expenses increased $3.3 (5%) in 2022, primarily due to an increase in strategic investments and cost inflation, partially offset by a decrease in variable compensation. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue remained flat at 2.2%.
NON-GAAP OPERATING PERFORMANCE MEASURES
The following is a reconciliation from consolidated net income, the most directly comparable GAAP operating performance measure, to our non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA.
(1)Hillenbrand recorded a $11.2 valuation adjustment related to assets held for sale within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment during 2021. For further information on the impairment charge, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
(2)Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs during 2022 primarily included professional fees related to the Gabler, Herbold, and Linxis acquisitions and professional fees and employee-related costs attributable to the integration of Milacron and the divestiture of TerraSource. Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs during 2021 primarily included professional fees and employee-related costs attributable to the integration of Milacron and divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL.
(3)Restructuring and restructuring-related charges primarily included severance costs, unrelated to the acquisition and integration of Milacron, during 2022 and 2021.
(4)The current year amount represents the loss on divestiture of TerraSource. The prior year amount represents the gain on divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL.
Consolidated net income for 2022 compared to 2021 decreased $40.0 (16%). The decrease was primarily driven by cost inflation, the gain on the divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL in 2021, a decrease in volume at the Batesville reportable operating segment, and an increase in strategic investments, partially offset by favorable pricing and productivity improvements, and an increase in demand for equipment within the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments. Foreign currency impact decreased consolidated net income $13.9.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for 2022 compared to 2021 decreased $10.8 (2%). The decrease was primarily driven by cost inflation, a decrease in volume at the Batesville reportable operating segment, and an increase in strategic investments, partially offset by favorable pricing and productivity improvements, and an increase in demand for equipment within the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments. Foreign currency impact decreased consolidated adjusted EBITDA by $21.8.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
In this section, we discuss our ability to access cash to meet business needs. We discuss how we see cash flow being affected for the next twelve months. We describe actual results in generating and using cash by comparing 2022 to 2021. Finally, we identify other significant matters, such as contractual obligations and contingent liabilities and commitments that could affect liquidity on an ongoing basis.
Ability to Access Cash
Our debt financing has historically included revolving credit facilities, term loans, and long-term notes as part of our overall financing strategy. We regularly review and adjust the mix of fixed-rate and variable-rate debt within our capital structure in order to achieve a target range based on our financing strategy.
We have taken proactive measures to maintain financial flexibility within the landscape of the ongoing Ukraine War and other uncertainties. We believe the Company ended the fiscal year with and continues to have sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment.
As of September 30, 2022, we had $1,174.3 of maximum borrowing capacity under the Credit Agreement (defined below), of which $901.3 was immediately available based on our most restrictive covenant. The available borrowing capacity reflects a reduction of $19.0 for outstanding letters of credit issued under the Credit Agreement. The Company may request an increase of up to $600.0 in the total borrowing capacity under the Credit Agreement, subject to approval of the lenders.
In the normal course of business, operating companies within the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments provide to certain customers bank guarantees and other credit arrangements in support of performance, warranty, advance payment, and other contractual obligations. This form of trade finance is customary in the industry and, as a result, we maintain adequate capacity to provide the guarantees. As of September 30, 2022, we had guarantee arrangements totaling $373.6, under which $247.4 was utilized for this purpose. These arrangements include the L/G Facility Agreement (defined below) under which unsecured letters of credit, bank guarantees, or other surety bonds may be issued. The Company may request an increase to the total capacity under the L/G Facility Agreement by an additional €100, subject to approval of the lenders.
We have significant operations outside the U.S. We continue to assert that the basis differences in the majority of our foreign subsidiaries continue to be permanently reinvested outside of the U.S. We have recorded tax liabilities associated with distribution taxes on expected distributions of available cash and current earnings. The Company has made, and intends to continue to make, substantial investments in our businesses in foreign jurisdictions to support the ongoing development and growth of our international operations. As of September 30, 2022, we had a transition tax liability of $16.9 pursuant to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”). The cash at our international subsidiaries, including U.S. subsidiaries participating in non-U.S. cash pooling arrangements, totaled $218.0 at September 30, 2022. We continue to actively evaluate our global capital deployment and cash needs.
12-month Outlook
COVID-19 impact
As discussed in the COVID-19 impact section above, the Company has taken actions aimed to safeguard its capital position during the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the Company has sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment. The challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on our businesses continue to evolve rapidly and could evolve further as the COVID-19 pandemic continues and vaccine rollouts continue around the world. Consequently, we will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to COVID-19 and any of the variant strains of the virus, and we plan to take necessary steps to manage through such developments.
Ukraine War
The Ukraine War that began in February 2022 continues as of the date of this Annual Report. We have suspended all new business in Russia and Belarus but may be contractually obligated to complete existing contracts, insofar as economic sanctions do not prevent us from doing so. Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine do not constitute a material portion of our customer and supplier portfolio, however, a significant escalation or expansion of economic disruption of the Ukraine War’s current scope could have a negative effect on our consolidated results of operations and cash flows. However, we do not believe the impact will be material to our consolidated results of operations and cash flows. For more information about the Ukraine War and its effect on the Company’s business and results of operations, see Part I Item 1A. Risk Factors within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Leverage update
The Company’s net leverage (defined as debt, net of cash, to adjusted EBITDA) at September 30, 2022 was 1.8x. Given the strength of the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and with leverage within our targeted range, the Company has resumed strategic acquisitions and opportunistic share repurchases in support of its capital structure objectives.
Subsequent event financing activities
As discussed in Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, on October 6, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Linxis for total aggregate consideration of $590.8 (€596.2) in cash, reflecting an enterprise value of approximately $566.8 (€572.0) plus cash acquired at closing, subject to post-closing adjustments. We utilized borrowings, subsequent to September 30, 2022, under our Facility (defined below) to fund this acquisition.
Other activities
The Company is required to pay a transition tax on unremitted earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, resulting in an estimated liability of $16.9 recorded as of September 30, 2022. The transition tax liability is expected to be paid over the next three years.
On December 2, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $300.0, which replaced the previous $200.0 share repurchase program authorized on December 7, 2018. The repurchase program has no expiration date but may be terminated by the Board of Directors at any time. As of September 30, 2022, we repurchased approximately 4,143,000 shares under the December 2, 2021 share repurchase program for approximately $175.0 in the aggregate. At September 30, 2022, we had approximately $125.0 remaining for share repurchases under the existing authorization by the Board of Directors. During the year ended September 30, 2022, we repurchased approximately 4,767,000 shares for approximately $203.9 in the aggregate. Such shares were classified as treasury stock.
Our anticipated contribution to our defined benefit pension plans in 2023 is $9.5. We will continue to monitor plan funding levels, performance of the assets within the plans, and overall economic activity, and we may make additional discretionary funding decisions based on the net impact of the above factors.
We currently expect to pay approximately $15.0 in cash dividends each quarter based on our outstanding common stock at September 30, 2022. We increased our quarterly dividend in 2022 to $0.2175 per common share from $0.2150 per common share paid in 2021.
We believe existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, borrowings under existing arrangements, and the issuance of debt will be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities. Based on these factors, we believe our current liquidity position is sufficient and will continue to meet all of our financial commitments in the current business environment.
Key liquidity events
Amendments to current financing agreements
On June 8, 2022, the Company entered into a Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), which governs our multi-currency revolving credit facility (the “Facility”). The Credit Agreement increases the maximum principal amount available for borrowing under the Facility to $1,000. The Credit Agreement further provides for a delayed-draw term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $200. The Credit Agreement extends the maturity date of the Facility to June 8, 2027. The Credit Agreement fully transitions interest rate benchmarks from LIBOR-based interest rates to SOFR-based interest rates for U.S. dollar borrowings.
On June 21, 2022, Hillenbrand and certain of its subsidiaries entered into a Syndicated L/G Facility Agreement (the “L/G Facility Agreement”), which replaced the Company’s Syndicated L/G Facility Agreement dated March 8, 2018, as amended (the “Prior L/G Facility Agreement”), and permits Hillenbrand and certain of its subsidiaries to request up to an aggregate of €225 in unsecured letters of credit, bank guarantees, or other surety bonds, an increase from €175 under the Prior L/G Facility Agreement. The L/G Facility Agreement also conformed certain terms with those contained in the Credit Agreement and the L/G Facility Agreement matures in June 2027.
On June 9, 2022, the Company and certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries entered into amendments to the Private Shelf Agreement (as amended, the “Shelf Agreement”), which conformed certain terms of the Shelf Agreement with those contained in the Credit Agreement.
See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details on these amendments.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Operating activities provided $191.1 of cash during 2022, and provided $528.4 of cash during 2021, a $337.3 (64%) decrease. The decrease in operating cash flow was primarily due to unfavorable timing of working capital requirements related to large plastics projects and an increase in inventory due to higher customer demand and supply chain disruptions.
Working capital requirements for the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments fluctuate and may continue to fluctuate in the future due primarily to the type of product and geography of customer projects in process at any point in time. Working capital needs are lower when advance payments from customers are more heavily weighted toward the beginning of the project. Conversely, working capital needs are higher when a larger portion of the cash is to be received in later stages of manufacturing.
Investing Activities
The $269.4 decrease in net cash flows from investing activities during 2022 was primarily due to proceeds received of $165.8 from the divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL in fiscal 2021, the acquisitions of Gabler ($12.9) and Herbold ($77.7) in 2022, and an increase in capital expenditures. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K for further information on these acquisitions and divestitures.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was largely impacted by net borrowing activity and share repurchases. Our general practice is to use available cash to pay down debt unless it is needed for an acquisition. Daily borrowing and repayment activity under the Credit Agreement may fluctuate significantly between periods as we fulfill the capital needs of our business units.
Cash used in financing activities during 2022 was $244.2, including $203.9 of common stock repurchases. Cash used in financing activities during 2021 was $523.3, including $338.8 of debt repayments, net of proceeds, which included $350.0 of proceeds from senior unsecured notes issued in 2021. The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to higher debt repayment in 2021, partially offset by an increase in repurchases of common stock.
We returned $62.0 to shareholders in 2022 in the form of quarterly dividends compared to $64.0 in 2021. We increased our quarterly dividend in 2022 to $0.2175 per common share from $0.2150 paid during 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of its normal course of business, Hillenbrand is a party to various financial guarantees and other commitments. These arrangements involve elements of performance and credit risk that are not included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The possibility that Hillenbrand would have to make actual cash expenditures in connection with these obligations is largely dependent on the performance of the guaranteed party, or the occurrence of future events that Hillenbrand is unable to predict. We have no off-balance sheet financing agreements or guarantees at September 30, 2022, that we believe are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
The following table summarizes our future obligations not quantified and disclosed elsewhere in this Form 10-K as of September 30, 2022. This will help give you an understanding of the significance of cash outlays that are fixed beyond the normal accounts payable and other obligations we have already incurred, have recorded, and disclosed in the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
(1)Cash obligations for interest requirements relate to our fixed-rate debt obligations at the contractual rates as of September 30, 2022.
(2)Agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction.
(3)Primarily includes estimated payments for transition tax liability, the estimated liquidation of liabilities related to both our self-insurance reserves and severance payments.
(4)We have excluded from the table our $33.9 liability related to uncertain tax positions as the current portion is not significant and we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the long-term portion.
(5)See Notes 5, 6, and 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K for lease, financing, and pension obligations, respectively.
Summarized Financial Information for Guarantors and the Issuer of Guaranteed Securities
Summarized financial information of Hillenbrand (the “Parent”) and our subsidiaries that are guarantors of our senior unsecured notes (the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”) is shown below on a combined basis as the “Obligor Group.” The Company’s senior unsecured notes are guaranteed by certain of our wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries and rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and financial information of the Obligor Group. All intercompany balances and transactions between the Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries have been eliminated and all information excludes subsidiaries that are not issuers or guarantors of our senior unsecured notes, including earnings from and investments in these entities.
(1) Current assets include intercompany receivables from non-guarantors of $1,868.7 and $596.8 as of September 30, 2022 and September 30, 2021, respectively.
(2) Net revenue includes intercompany sales with non-guarantors of $32.2 as of September 30, 2022 and $35.8 as of September 30, 2021.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
For a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting standards applicable to us, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.