ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Our Business
Huntington Ingalls Industries, Inc. is America’s largest military shipbuilding company and a provider of professional services to partners in government and industry. For more than a century, our Ingalls segment in Mississippi and Newport News segment in Virginia have built more ships in more ship classes than any other U.S. naval shipbuilder. Our Technical Solutions segment provides a range of services to government and commercial customers. Headquartered in Newport News, Virginia, HII employs approximately 44,000 people domestically and internationally.
We conduct most of our business with the U.S. Government, primarily the DoD. As prime contractor, principal subcontractor, team member, or partner, we participate in many high-priority U.S. defense programs. Ingalls includes our non-nuclear ship design, construction, repair, and maintenance businesses. Newport News includes all of our nuclear ship design, construction, overhaul, refueling, and repair and maintenance businesses. Our Technical Solutions segment provides a wide range of professional services, including DFS, nuclear and environmental services, and unmanned systems.
The following discussion should be read along with the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Environment
COVID-19 Pandemic - The COVID-19 global pandemic has had wide-ranging effects on the global health environment and disrupted the global and U.S. economies and financial markets, including impacts to our employees, customers, suppliers, and communities (collectively, “COVID-19 Events”). COVID-19 Events have also
impacted our operations, and the extent of future impacts are uncertain. The most significant areas of impact have been the disruption of our employees’ ability to work effectively, disruption in our supply chain, disruption of the U.S. Government's and our other customers' abilities to perform their obligations, and impact on pension assets and other investment performance.
In September 2021, President Biden issued an executive order requiring certain employers with U.S. Government contracts to ensure that their U.S.-based employees, contractors, and subcontractors that work on or in support of U.S. Government contracts are fully vaccinated in accordance with the guidelines of the Safer Federal Workforce Task Force. In November 2021, OSHA issued an Emergency Temporary Standard (“ETS”) requiring that all employers with 100 or more employees mandate vaccines for covered employees or, in the alternative, weekly testing and masks. The U.S. federal contractor mandate was preliminarily enjoined by several U.S. federal district courts, the U.S. Supreme Court preliminarily stayed the OSHA ETS in January 2022, and OSHA subsequently withdrew the ETS.
While we are not currently subject to any vaccine mandate, it continues to be our policy to encourage each of our employees to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19. To the extent we become subject to a vaccine mandate in the future, our implementation of the mandate could result in employee attrition, including attrition of critical skilled labor, and difficulty meeting future labor requirements.
See Risk Factors in Item 1A for a discussion of COVID-19-related risks.
We have aggressively managed our response to the uncertainties regarding COVID-19 Events, and we have incurred costs to respond to COVID-19 Events, including paid leave, quarantining employees, vaccinations, and recurring facility cleaning. Our shipyards and other facilities have remained open and productive, but we continue to experience decreases in workforce attendance and challenges meeting our hiring requirements, which has impacted our operations due to delay and disruption from a shortage of critical skills and out-of-sequence work.
Under Section 3610 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), contractors may submit claims for employee paid time off caused by restrictions from COVID-19 Events in circumstances where the employee could not work remotely. Such instances may include paid time off for employees to allow for plant decontamination, idle time due to social distancing restrictions, paid time off to take care of dependents impacted by government-ordered school or day care closures, paid time for employee vaccinations or responding to side effects from vaccination, and employee quarantines due to travel restrictions or coming into contact, being diagnosed, or taking care of someone diagnosed with COVID-19. We have taken steps to preserve our rights to pursue such claims for HII and our subcontractors, and we submitted an initial Section 3610 Reimbursement Request to the DoD for Ingalls and Newport News Shipbuilding. Section 3610 under the CARES Act was not extended past September 30, 2021. We anticipate submitting supplemental requests for Section 3610 reimbursement for HII and our subcontractors into 2022. Reimbursements of our requests are contingent upon contracting officers making funding available, and most DoD contracting officers are awaiting supplemental appropriations from Congress before approving such reimbursement requests. We have no assurance that Congress will appropriate sufficient funds to cover the reimbursement of costs contemplated by the CARES Act.
While costs related to COVID-19 Events are allowable under U.S. Government contracts, our contract estimates reflect margin impact uncertainty, because such costs may not result in equitable adjustments, particularly on firm fixed-price and fixed-price incentive contracts, or may not be adequately covered by insurance. Our reinsurers have failed to acknowledge coverage for various losses related to COVID-19, and we filed a complaint in state court in Vermont seeking a judgment declaring that our business interruption and other losses associated with COVID-19 are covered by our property insurance program. We also initiated arbitration proceedings against other reinsurers seeking similar relief. The Vermont court dismissed our complaint in response to a motion of the reinsurers for judgment on the pleadings, and we have appealed the decision. Although we continue to believe that our position is well-founded, no assurance can be provided regarding the ultimate resolution of this matter. See Note 14: Investigations, Claims, and Litigation in Item 8.
We have also focused on actively supporting our customers, suppliers, and communities. We have been proactive in engaging with our U.S. Government customers regarding future contract adjustments. While there has been no change in contract terms or substantial degradation in timely payments from customers, we have experienced delays in decisions on certain contract awards. We are unable to predict how our customers will allocate resources in the future as they react to the evolving demands of the COVID-19 response. We also accelerated payments to small business suppliers in an effort to minimize supply chain disruption.
We temporarily halted stock repurchases in the first quarter of 2020, but we resumed share repurchases during the first quarter of 2021. We also deferred certain payroll taxes in 2020 pursuant to the CARES Act, which increased our cash from operations in 2020, but will reduce cash from operations in 2021 and 2022.
U.S. Government Contracts - Long-term uncertainty exists with respect to overall levels of defense spending across the future years' defense plan, and it is likely that U.S. Government discretionary spending levels will continue to be subject to significant pressure.
The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 was enacted in December 2021 and broadly supports our shipbuilding programs, including increased funding authority for Arleigh Burke-class destroyers (DDG-51), LHA and LPD Flight II amphibious ships, and submarine supplier development assistance. However, more than one quarter into the fiscal year, Congressional appropriations for the federal government have yet to be finalized. Consequently, the U.S. Government is currently operating under a Continuing Resolution ("CR") that funds government operations through February 18, 2022. It remains uncertain at this point whether fiscal year 2022 government operations will require additional short-term funding or annual appropriations measures will be finalized prior to the expiration of the CR. Appropriations measures must be passed by Congress and enacted by the President, and we cannot predict the outcome of the fiscal year 2022 budget process.
Long-term funding for certain programs in which we participate may be reduced, delayed, or canceled. In addition, spending cuts and/or reprioritization of defense investment could adversely affect the viability of our suppliers, subcontractors, and employee base. Our contracts or subcontracts under programs in which we participate may be terminated or adjusted by the U.S. Government or the prime contractor as a result of lack of government funding or reductions or delays in government funding. Significant reductions in the number of ships procured by the U.S. Navy or significant delays in funding our ship programs would have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
The federal budget environment remains a significant long-term risk. Considerable uncertainty exists regarding how future budget and program decisions will develop and what challenges budget changes will present for the defense industry. We believe continued budget pressures will have serious implications for defense discretionary spending, the defense industrial base, including HII, and the customers, employees, suppliers, subcontractors, investors, and communities that rely on companies in the defense industrial base. Although it is difficult to determine specific impacts, we expect that over the longer term, the budget environment may result in fewer contract awards and lower revenues, profits, and cash flows from our U.S. Government contracts. It is likely budget and program decisions made in this environment will have long-term impacts on HII and the entire defense industry.
Defense Industry Overview
The United States faces a complex, uncertain, and rapidly changing national security environment. Upon assuming office in 2021, the Biden Administration released a broad interim National Security Strategy that lays out the contours of U.S. foreign policy over the next four years. Under this strategy, the Indo-Pacific region remains at the heart of U.S. defense planning. While the United States continues to face security challenges from Russia, North Korea, and non-state extremism, other ‘non-traditional’ threats such as pandemic disease and climate change, are now part of the national security dialogue.
The U.S. also faces a more lethal and disruptive battlefield, combined across domains and conducted at increasing speed and reach. The security environment is affected by rapid technological advancements and the changing character of war. The drive to develop new capabilities and enhance lethality is relentless, expanding to address emerging threats from peer-competitors as well as actors with lower barriers of entry, and moving at accelerating speed. To address these rapidly-evolving threats, the U.S. is investing in new capabilities and lethality enhancements, including unmanned and autonomous systems and platforms; artificial intelligence; hypersonics; directed energy; resilient networks; command, control, communications, computers, cyber, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance; and targeting requirements and microelectronics. Technologies are being prioritized that can penetrate and operate inside highly-contested and highly-defended territory, both physical and cyber.
In late December 2020, the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard released a Tri-Service Maritime Strategy titled Advantage at Sea. The document provides strategic guidance on how the sea services will prevail in day-to-day competition, crisis, and conflict over the next decade. The strategy directs the services to pursue an agile and aggressive approach to force modernization and experimentation by combining legacy assets with new capabilities
to understand faster, decide faster, and act faster. The strategy also emphasizes the need to develop new operational concepts for fielded capabilities, employ resilient and integrated networks across the force, leverage the strengths of regional partners, and expand the use of optionally manned and unmanned platforms.
In January 2021, the Chief of Naval Operations released a Navigation Plan to the Fleet that nests under the Tri-Service Maritime Strategy and outlines how the U.S. Navy will grow its naval power to control the seas and project power across all domains. It lays out what must be done this decade to deliver the naval power America needs to compete and win, characterized as a ready fleet, a more lethal and better-connected fleet, and a larger more hybrid fleet. To this end, the Marine Corps is also reshaping its force under the Commandant’s Force Design 2030 guidance to become optimized for modern operations by 2030. The Marine Corps has already taken action to eliminate legacy capabilities, such as battle tanks, and a future force may feature an expanded assortment of smaller platforms, landing craft, and connectors that are manned, minimally manned, and unmanned, and exploit autonomy and artificial intelligence.
We anticipate the U.S. Navy’s force projection strategy will continue to emphasize sea control and sea denial, enabling power projection against adversaries with long-range weapons and full-spectrum joint domain capabilities. The Navy will likely continue to employ the evolving concept of Distributed Maritime Operations ("DMO"), which features multiple sensors and shooters that are widely dispersed across a broad range of manned and unmanned platforms and linked through resilient networks. Naval forces are participating in a larger DoD-wide objective to modernize command and control architecture, the concept to connect sensors from all of the military services into a single network known as Joint All-Domain Command and Control ("JADC2"). Future conflicts may require leaders to analyze the operating environment and make decisions rapidly. With JADC2, DoD envisions creating an “internet of things” network that would connect numerous sensors with weapons systems, using artificial intelligence algorithms to help improve decision-making. Project Overmatch is the Navy’s effort to develop the networks, infrastructure, data architecture, and analytics to participate in this larger, networked military operating environment. The end-state for the “Future Navy” envisions a fleet designed to ensure the wholeness of combat capability and lethal forces maximizing the benefits of DMO, expeditionary advanced base operations, and littoral operations in a contested environment. Manned and unmanned technology will be used to expand reach, lethality, and warfighter awareness.
The Navy’s force structure goal of 355 ships, identified in the December 2016 Force Structure Assessment and codified in the fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act, has remained the fleet objective for five years. The Navy and the DoD have been working to develop a successor for the 355-ship force-level goal. In December 2020, the outgoing Administration released its vision for the Navy’s future force structure in a fiscal year 2022 30-year Navy shipbuilding plan. The plan envisioned achievement of the Navy’s force-level goal through a distributed fleet architecture, including 382 to 446 manned ships and 143 to 242 large unmanned vehicles by 2045. The new Administration did not submit a new force structure goal or shipbuilding plan in 2021, but is expected to do so with the delivery of the fiscal year 2023 budget in spring 2022.
The Defense Department and Navy not only face difficult tradeoffs between modernization priorities, but also tradeoffs about where to take risk across time. The shipbuilding defense industry is capital heavy and skilled labor intensive. The Navy, a large single customer with many needs and requirements, dominates the industry's customer base and is served by an increasingly fragile supplier base that has trended toward exclusive providers. Inconsistent shipbuilding plans and annual funding uncertainty severely degrade the ability of shipyards to conduct long-term planning and respond to near-term changes in requirements. This ultimately results in longer construction times and increased costs. For example, the high operational tempo of the Navy in recent years has resulted in a backlog of repair work across the fleet. Coupled with the impacts of COVID-19 and increases in new ship construction, many suppliers are experiencing a shortfall in their capacity to perform work and manufacture products. This increased demand is applying stress to already-aging production equipment. The combination of limited suppliers and an increase in workload could increase cost and potentially create schedule slips, impacting American warfighting capability.
Ultimately, a balance will need to be achieved between the competing priorities of upgrading legacy systems for the near-term, developing and procuring the next generation of systems for the mid-term, and investing in emerging technologies that could drive game-changing capabilities in the long-term. Additionally, the U.S. Navy must compete with other budget priorities, including other defense activities, non-defense discretionary spending, supplemental spending for COVID-19 relief, and entitlement programs for a share of federal budget funding. While the impact to our business resulting from these developments remains uncertain, they could have a material impact on current programs, as well as new business opportunities with the DoD. See Risk Factors in Item 1A.
Program Descriptions
For convenience, a brief description of certain programs discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K is included in the Glossary of Programs.
CONTRACTS
We generate most of our revenues from long-term U.S. Government contracts for design, production, and support activities. Government contracts typically include the following cost elements: direct material, labor and subcontracting costs, and certain indirect costs, including allowable general and administrative expenses. Unless otherwise specified in a contract, costs billed to contracts with the U.S. Government are treated as allowable and allocable costs under the FAR and CAS regulations. Examples of costs incurred by us that are not allowable under the FAR and CAS regulations include certain legal costs, lobbying costs, charitable donations, interest expense, organizational costs, including certain merger and acquisition costs, and advertising costs.
We monitor our policies and procedures with respect to our contracts on a regular basis to ensure consistent application under similar terms and conditions, as well as compliance with all applicable government regulations. In addition, the DCAA routinely audits the costs we incur that are allocated to U.S. Government contracts.
Our contracts typically fall into one of four categories: firm fixed-price, fixed-price incentive, cost-type, and time and materials. See Note 7: Revenue in Item 8.
•Firm Fixed-Price Contracts - A firm fixed-price contract is a contract in which the specified scope of work is agreed to for a price that is predetermined by bid or negotiation and not generally subject to adjustment regardless of costs incurred by the contractor.
•Fixed-Price Incentive Contracts - Fixed-price incentive contracts provide for reimbursement of the contractor's allowable costs, but are subject to a cost-share limit that affects profitability. Fixed-price incentive contracts effectively become firm fixed-price contracts once the cost-share limit is reached.
•Cost-Type Contracts - Cost-type contracts provide for reimbursement of the contractor's allowable costs plus a fee that represents profit. Cost-type contracts generally require that the contractor use its reasonable efforts to accomplish the scope of the work within some specified time and some stated dollar limitation.
•Time and Materials - Time and materials contracts specify a fixed hourly billing rate for each direct labor hour expended and reimbursement for allowable material costs and expenses.
Contract Fees - Negotiated contract fee structures include: fixed fee amounts, cost sharing arrangements to reward or penalize contractors for under- or over-cost target performance, respectively, positive award fees, and negative penalty arrangements. Profit margins may vary materially depending on the negotiated contract fee arrangements, percentage-of-completion of the contract, the achievement of performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under incentive and award fee contracts, is finally determined.
Award Fees - Certain contracts contain award fees based on performance criteria such as cost, schedule, quality, and technical performance. Award fees are determined and earned based on an evaluation by the customer of our performance against such negotiated criteria. We consider award fees to be variable consideration and generally include these fees in the transaction price using a most likely amount approach. Award fees are limited to the extent of funding allotted by the customer and available for performance and those amounts for which a significant reversal of revenue is not probable.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES, ESTIMATES, AND JUDGMENTS
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Management considers an accounting policy to be critical if it is important to our financial condition and results of operations and requires significant judgment and estimates by management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by our management. We have reviewed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our
board of directors. Due to the significant judgment involved in selecting certain of the assumptions used in these policies, it is possible that different parties could choose different assumptions and reach different conclusions. While we base estimates and assumptions on our knowledge of current events and actions we may undertake in the future, actual results may ultimately differ from these estimates and assumptions. We consider our policies relating to the following matters to involve our most critical accounting policies and estimates:
•Revenue recognition;
•Purchase accounting, goodwill, and intangible assets;
•Litigation, commitments, and contingencies;
•Retirement related benefit plans; and
•Workers' compensation.
We have incorporated realized and estimated future effects of COVID-19 Events, based upon current conditions and our judgment of the future impacts of COVID-19 Events, with respect to contract costs and revenue recognition, effective income tax rates, and the fair values of our long-lived assets, financial instruments, intangible assets, and goodwill recorded at our reporting units. See Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8.
Revenue Recognition
Most of our revenues are derived from long-term contracts for the production of goods and services provided to the U.S. Government, which are generally accounted for by recognizing revenues over time using a cost-to-cost measure of progress. In estimating contract costs, we utilize a profit-booking rate based upon performance expectations that takes into consideration a number of assumptions and estimates regarding risks related to technical requirements, feasibility, schedule, and contract costs. Management performs periodic reviews of the contracts to evaluate the underlying risks, which may increase the profit-booking rate as we are able to mitigate and retire such risks. For the impacts of changes in estimates on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income, see Note 8: Segment Information in Item 8.
Purchase Accounting, Goodwill, and Intangible Assets
Purchase Accounting and Goodwill - We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the underlying tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair values, with the excess recorded as goodwill. We recognize purchased intangible assets in connection with our business acquisitions at fair value on the acquisition date. The most significant purchased intangible assets recognized from our acquisitions are generally related to customer contracts, including backlog and recompeted contracts. We determine the fair values of those customer related intangible assets based on estimates and judgments, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, and discount rates.
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis at each of our reporting units by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is determined to be less than the carrying value, we record a charge to operations.
We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of discounted cash flow analysis and market-based valuation methodologies. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including judgments about projected revenues, operating expenses, working capital investment, capital expenditures, and cash flows over a multi-year period. The discount rate applied to our forecasts of future cash flows is based on our estimated weighted average cost of capital. In assessing the reasonableness of our determined fair values, we evaluate our results against our market capitalization. Impairment assessment inherently involves management judgments as to assumptions about expected future cash flows and the impact of market conditions on those assumptions. Changes in our estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment for each reporting unit.
Other Intangible Assets - We perform tests for impairment of amortizable intangible assets whenever events or
circumstances suggest that amortizable intangible assets may be impaired.
Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of the fair values of our business and the relative size of our recorded goodwill and other purchased intangible assets, differences in assumptions may have a material effect on the results of our impairment analysis.
For further information on purchase accounting, goodwill, and intangible assets, see Risk Factors in Item 1A and Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Note 4: Acquisitions and Divestitures, and Note 11: Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in Item 8.
Litigation, Commitments, and Contingencies
Overview - We are subject to a range of legal proceedings before various courts and administrative agencies and are periodically subject to government audits, inquiries, and investigations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Estimating liabilities and costs associated with these matters requires judgment and assessment based upon professional knowledge and the experience of management and our internal and external legal counsel. In accordance with our practices relating to accounting for contingencies, we record charges to earnings when we determine, after taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of each matter, including any settlement offers, that it is probable a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The ultimate resolution of any such exposure may vary from earlier estimates as further facts and circumstances become known.
Environmental Accruals - We are subject to the environmental laws and regulations of the jurisdictions in which we conduct operations. We record a liability for the costs of expected environmental remediation obligations when we determine that it is probable we will incur such costs and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated. When a range of costs is possible and no amount within that range is a better estimate than another, we record the minimum amount of the range.
Factors that could result in changes to the assessment of probability, range of estimated costs, and environmental liability accruals include: modification of planned remedial actions, increase or decrease in the estimated time required to remediate, discovery of more extensive contamination than anticipated, results of efforts to involve other legally responsible parties, financial insolvency of other responsible parties, changes in laws and regulations or contractual obligations affecting remediation requirements, and improvements in remediation technology. Although we cannot predict whether new information gained as remediation projects progress will materially affect the accrued liability, we do not believe that future remediation expenditures will have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Income Tax Matters - The evaluation of tax positions taken in a filed tax return, or planned to be taken in a future tax return or claim, requires judgment. We establish reserves for uncertain tax positions that do not meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, based on the merits of the position. We recognize the amount of a tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. If a tax position does not meet the minimum statutory threshold to avoid payment of penalties, we recognize an expense for the amount of the penalty in the period the tax position is claimed or expected to be claimed in our tax return. Penalties and accrued interest related to unrecognized tax benefits are recognized as a component of income tax expense. See Note 12: Income Taxes in Item 8. Changes in accruals associated with unrecognized tax benefits are recorded in earnings in the period they are determined.
For further information on litigation, commitments, and contingencies, see Risk Factors in Item 1A and Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Note 4: Acquisitions and Divestitures, Note 12: Income Taxes, Note 14: Investigations, Claims, and Litigation, and Note 16: Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8.
Retirement Related Benefit Plans
We recognize, on a plan-by-plan basis, the funded status of our retirement related benefit plans as an asset or liability on our balance sheet, with corresponding adjustments to after-tax accumulated other comprehensive loss and deferred tax assets or liabilities. The funded status represents the difference between the benefit obligation and the fair value of plan assets. See Note 17: Employee Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits in Item 8.
We calculate our retirement related benefit plan costs under both CAS and U.S. GAAP Financial Accounting Standards ("FAS"). The calculations under CAS and FAS require significant judgment. CAS prescribes the determination, allocation, and recovery of retirement related benefit plan costs on U.S. Government contracts through the pricing of products and services. FAS prescribes the methodology used to determine retirement related benefit plan expense or income, as well as the liability, for financial reporting purposes. The CAS requirements for
these costs and their calculation methodologies differ from FAS. As a result, while both CAS and FAS use assumptions in their calculation methodologies, each method results in different calculated amounts of retirement related benefit plan costs.
We recover our CAS costs through the pricing of products and services on U.S. Government contracts, so that the CAS cost is recognized in segment product sales and service revenues and in the costs of those product sales and service revenues. In order to present our consolidated financial statements in accordance with FAS, we record the difference between our FAS expense and CAS cost (“FAS/CAS Adjustment”) as operating income within segment operating income and non-operating retirement benefit (expense).
The minimum funding requirements for our qualified pension plans are determined under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ("ERISA"), which is primarily based on the year's expected service cost and amortization of other previously unfunded liabilities. Effective January 1, 2011, we were subject to the funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act of 2006 ("PPA"), which amended ERISA. Under the PPA, we are required to fully fund our pension plans over a rolling seven-year period as determined annually based upon the funded status at the beginning of each year. PPA also introduced a variety of benefit restrictions that apply if a plan falls below certain funded percentages, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code. In funding our plans, we consider various factors, including the minimum funding requirements, maintaining the funded status needed to avoid potential benefit restrictions and other adverse consequences, maintaining minimum CAS funding requirements, and the current and anticipated funding levels of each plan.
Effective January 1, 2021, we adopted the Safe Harbor methodology used in determining CAS pension costs. The interest rates used to calculate pension liabilities under CAS are consistent with those used in the determination of minimum funding requirements under ERISA.
Pension funding requirements under ERISA are subject to pension relief for plan sponsors in the form of higher interest rate assumptions introduced by the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act and subsequently extended by the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Using these minimum funding interest rates for the purposes of determining pension costs under CAS reduces volatility in CAS costs year-over-year and provides more predictable costs for our customers, while better aligning reimbursements of pension costs under our contracts with our required pension plan contributions under ERISA.
Due to the differences in requirements and calculation methodologies between FAS and CAS, our FAS pension expense is not necessarily indicative of the funding requirements under PPA or the amounts we recover from the U.S. Government under CAS.
Assumptions - We account for our retirement related benefit plans on the accrual basis under FAS. The measurements of obligations, costs, assets, and liabilities require significant judgment. We annually review our assumptions, which are set at each year end and generally not changed during the following year unless a major plan event occurs, such as an amendment, curtailment, or settlement that would trigger a remeasurement. The key assumptions in these measurements are the interest rate used to discount future benefit payments and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets.
Discount Rate - The assumed discount rate under FAS is used to determine the retirement related benefit plan obligations and expense, and represents the hypothetical rate at which plan benefit obligations could be effectively settled at the measurement date. Consequently, the discount rate can be volatile from year to year. The discount rate assumption is determined for each plan by constructing a hypothetical portfolio of high-quality bonds with cash flows that match the estimated outflows for future benefit payments to determine a single equivalent discount rate. Benefit payments are not only contingent on the terms of a plan but also on the underlying participant demographics, including current age and assumed mortality. We use only bonds that are denominated in U.S. Dollars, are rated Aa or better by nationally recognized statistical rating agencies, have a minimum outstanding issue of $100 million as of the measurement date, and are not callable, convertible, or index-linked.
Expected Long-Term Rate of Return - The expected long-term rate of return on assets is used to calculate net periodic expense, based on such factors as historical returns, targeted asset allocations, investment policy, duration, expected future long-term performance of individual asset classes, interest rates, inflation, portfolio volatility, investment management and administrative fees, and risk management strategies. Historical plan asset performance alone has inherent limitations in predicting future returns. While studies are helpful in understanding past and current trends and performance, the rate of return assumption is based more on long-term prospective
views to avoid short-term market influences. Unless plan assets and benefit obligations are subject to re-measurement during the year, the expected return on pension assets is based on the fair value of plan assets at the beginning of the year.
Mortality - Mortality assumptions are used to determine the retirement related benefit obligations and expense, and represent the likelihood and duration of benefit payments to plan participants based on historical experience and projected longevity. We periodically update our mortality assumptions as circumstances warrant.
Differences arising from actual experience or changes in assumptions might materially affect retirement related benefit plan obligations and the funded status. Actuarial gains and losses arising from differences between assumptions and actual experience or changes in assumptions are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive loss. This unrecognized amount is amortized as a component of net expense to the extent it exceeds 10% of the greater of the plan's benefit obligation or plan assets. The amortization period for actuarial gains and losses is the estimated average remaining service life of the plan participants. In 2021, the actual return on assets was approximately 12.7%, which was more than the expected return assumption of 7.25%. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the weighted average discount rates for our pension and other postretirement benefit plans increased by 20 and 19 basis points, respectively. These differences in asset returns and discount rates resulted in actuarial gains of $412 million and $289 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
An increase or decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return assumptions would have had the following approximate impacts on pension expense and obligations:
Assuming a 7.25% expected return on assets assumption, a $50 million pension plan contribution is generally expected to favorably impact the current year expected return on assets by approximately $2 million, depending on the timing of the contribution.
Sensitivities to assumptions are not necessarily linear and are specific to the time periods noted.
CAS Cost - In addition to providing the methodology for calculating retirement related benefit plan costs, CAS also prescribes the method for assigning those costs to specific periods. While the ultimate liability for such costs under FAS and CAS is similar, the pattern of cost recognition is different. The key drivers of CAS pension cost include the funded status and the method used to calculate CAS reimbursement for each of our plans. A plan’s CAS pension cost can only be allocated until the plan is fully funded as defined under the CAS requirements.
Other FAS and CAS Pension Considerations - A key driver of the difference between FAS expense and CAS cost (and consequently the FAS/CAS Adjustment) is the pattern of earnings and expense recognition for actuarial gains and losses that arise when our asset and liability experiences differ from our assumptions under each set of requirements. Under FAS, our net actuarial gains and losses exceeding the 10% corridor are amortized over the estimated average remaining service life of the plan participants. Under CAS Harmonization, the amortization period is 10 years for actuarial gains and losses. Both FAS and CAS use a "market-related value" of plan assets approach to calculate the amount of deferred asset gains or losses to be amortized. Under CAS, actual asset gains and losses are systematically smoothed over five years, subject to certain limitations. For FAS, we do not use this smoothing method, and instead use fair value in determining our FAS expense. Accordingly, FAS expense generally reflects recent asset gains and losses sooner than CAS.
Additionally, CAS cost is only recognized for plans that are not fully funded as defined under CAS. If a plan becomes or ceases to be fully funded due to our asset or liability experience, our CAS cost will change accordingly.
Retirement Plan Assets - Retirement plan assets are stated at fair value. Investments in equity securities (common and preferred) are valued at the last reported sales price when an active market exists. Investments in fixed-income
securities are generally valued based on market transactions for comparable securities and various relationships between securities that are generally recognized by institutional traders. Investments in hedge funds, real estate investment funds, private partnerships, collective trust funds, and commingled funds are generally valued at their Net Asset Values ("NAV") or equivalent, which are based on the current fair values of the fund's underlying assets.
Management reviews independently appraised values, audited financial statements, and additional pricing information to evaluate the NAV or its equivalent.
For the limited group of investments for which market quotations are not readily available or for which the above valuation procedures are deemed not to reflect fair value, additional information is obtained from the investment manager and evaluated internally to determine whether any adjustments are required to reflect fair value. See Note 17: Employee Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits in Item 8.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss - Changes in assumptions and changes to plan assets and benefit obligations due to differences between actuarial assumptions and actual results are reported as actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss, along with unrecognized prior service costs arising from plan amendments. As disclosed in Note 17: Employee Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits in Item 8, net pre-tax unrecognized actuarial losses as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,194 million and $2,007 million, respectively. The decrease in actuarial losses in 2021 was primarily driven by asset returns exceeding expected returns by $412 million, lower benefit obligations of $289 million resulting from higher discount rates, and $107 million of amortization of previously unrecognized actuarial losses.
Net pre-tax unrecognized prior service costs (credits) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $60 million and $85 million, respectively. These net deferred costs (credits) primarily originated from plan amendments, including those resulting from collective bargaining agreements. The change in unrecognized prior service costs (credits) in 2021 resulted from plan amendments and the amortization of previously accumulated prior service costs (credits).
Workers' Compensation
Our operations are subject to federal and state workers' compensation laws. We maintain self-insured workers' compensation plans and participate in federally administered second injury workers' compensation funds. We estimate the liability for such claims and funding requirements on a discounted basis utilizing actuarial methods based on various assumptions, which include our historical loss experience and projected loss development factors. We periodically, and at least annually, update our assumptions based on an actuarial analysis. For further information on workers’ compensation, see Environmental, Health & Safety in Item 1 and Note 16: Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8.
Accounting Standards Updates
See Note 3: Accounting Standards Updates in Item 8 for further information.
CONSOLIDATED OPERATING RESULTS
The following table presents selected financial highlights:
Operating Performance Assessment and Reporting
We manage and assess the performance of our business based on our performance on individual contracts and programs using the financial measures referred to below, with consideration given to the Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments referred to in this section. Our portfolio of long-term contracts is largely flexibly-priced. Therefore, sales tend to fluctuate in concert with costs across our large portfolio of active contracts, with operating income being a critical measure of operating performance. Under FAR rules that govern our business with the U.S. Government, most types of costs are allowable, and we do not focus on individual cost groupings, such as cost of sales or general and administrative expenses, as much as we do on total contract costs, which are a key factor in determining contract operating income. As a result, in evaluating our operating performance, we look primarily at changes in sales and service revenues, as well as operating income, including the effects of significant changes in operating income as a result of changes in contract estimates and the use of the cumulative catch-up method of accounting in accordance with GAAP. This approach is consistent with the long-term life cycle of our contracts, as management assesses the bidding of each contract by focusing on net sales and operating profit and monitors performance in a similar manner through contract completion. Consequently, our discussion of business segment performance focuses on net sales and operating profit, consistent with our approach for managing our business.
Cost of sales for both product sales and service revenues consists of materials, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs for overhead. We manage the type and amount of costs at the contract level, which is the basis for estimating our total costs at completion of our contracts. Unusual fluctuations in operating performance driven by changes in a specific cost element across multiple contracts are described in our analysis.
Sales and Service Revenues
Sales and service revenues were comprised as follows:
2021 - Product sales in 2021 increased $150 million, or 2%, from 2020. Product sales at our Ingalls segment decreased $105 million in 2021, primarily as a result of lower volumes in the Legend class NSC program and amphibious assault ships, partially offset by higher volumes in surface combatants. Newport News product sales
increased $231 million in 2021, primarily as a result of higher volumes in submarines and aircraft carriers. Technical Solutions product sales increased $24 million in 2021, primarily as a result of higher volumes in DFS, partially offset by lower volumes in unmanned systems.
Service revenues in 2021 increased $13 million, or 1%, from 2020. Service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $56 million in 2021, primarily as a result of lower volumes in surface combatant and amphibious assault ship services. Service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $138 million in 2021, primarily as a result of lower volumes in naval nuclear support services. Service revenues at our Technical Solutions segment increased $207 million in 2021, primarily as a result of higher volumes in DFS services due to the acquisition of Alion, partially offset by the divestiture of our oil and gas business and contribution of our San Diego Shipyard to a joint venture.
2020 - Product sales in 2020 increased $585 million, or 9%, from 2019. Product sales at our Ingalls segment increased $143 million in 2020, primarily as a result of higher volumes in amphibious assault ships and surface combatants, partially offset by lower volume in the Legend class NSC program. Newport News product sales increased $366 million in 2020, primarily as a result of higher volumes in aircraft carriers and submarines, partially offset by lower volume on commercial nuclear products. Technical Solutions product sales increased $76 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the acquisition of Hydroid, Inc. ("Hydroid") in March 2020.
Service revenues in 2020 decreased $123 million, or 5%, from 2019. Service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $21 million in 2020, as a result of lower volumes in amphibious assault ship services. Service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $30 million in 2020, primarily as a result of lower volumes in aircraft carrier services, partially offset by higher volumes in naval nuclear support and submarine services. Service revenues at our Technical Solutions segment decreased $72 million in 2020, primarily as a result of lower volumes at our San Diego Shipyard and on DFS, oil and gas, and nuclear and environmental services, partially offset by the acquisition of Hydroid in March 2020.
Cost of Sales and Service Revenues
Cost of product sales, cost of service revenues, income from operating investments, net, and general and administrative expenses were as follows:
Cost of Product Sales
2021 - Cost of product sales in 2021 increased $337 million, or 6%, compared to 2020. Cost of product sales at our Ingalls segment decreased $82 million in 2021, primarily as a result of volume decreases described above. Cost of product sales at our Newport News segment increased $65 million in 2021, primarily as a result of submarine volume increases described above, partially offset by impacts related to performance on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and delay and disruption from discrete COVID-19 Events in 2020. Cost of product sales at our Technical Solutions segment increased $20 million in 2021, primarily due to the higher volumes described above. Cost of product sales related to the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment increased $334 million from 2020 to 2021.
Cost of product sales as a percentage of product sales increased from 82.1% in 2020 to 85.1% in 2021, primarily due to an unfavorable change in the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment, lower risk retirement on Delbert D. Black (DDG 119), and year-to-year variances in contract mix, partially offset by impacts related to performance on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and delay and disruption from discrete COVID-19 Events in 2020, higher risk retirement on Bougainville (LHA 8), and a contract incentive on Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125).
2020 - Cost of product sales in 2020 increased $463 million, or 9%, compared to 2019. Cost of product sales at our Ingalls segment increased $22 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the volume changes described above, partially offset by higher risk retirement on Delbert D. Black (DDG 119) in connection with its delivery and a capital expenditure contract incentive. Cost of product sales at our Newport News segment increased $480 million in 2020, primarily as a result of program cost growth and the volume increases described above. Cost of product sales at our Technical Solutions segment increased $65 million in 2020, primarily due to the higher volumes described above. Cost of product sales related to the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment decreased $104 million from 2019 to 2020.
Cost of product sales as a percentage of product sales decreased from 82.3% in 2019 to 82.1% in 2020, primarily due to a favorable change in the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and higher risk retirement on Delbert D. Black (DDG 119), USS Tripoli (LHA 7), and Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), as well as year-to-year variances in contract mix, partially offset by unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments in the second quarter of 2020 of $111 million on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program, including $95 million for cost and schedule performance and updates to our assumptions for future program efficiencies and performance as a result of cost and schedule trends, as well as $16 million from delay and disruption directly attributable to COVID-19 Events. The decrease in cost of product sales as a percentage of product sales was also offset by unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments in the second quarter of 2020 aggregating $61 million across all programs, resulting from cost estimates for delay and disruption from discrete COVID-19 Events, including $16 million in relation to the Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program discussed above.
Cost of Service Revenues
2021 - Cost of service revenues in 2021 increased $128 million, or 6%, compared to 2020. Cost of service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $46 million in 2021, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above. Cost of service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $74 million in 2021, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above. Cost of service revenues at our Technical Solutions segment increased $177 million in 2021, primarily as a result of higher volumes described above. Cost of service revenues related to the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment increased $71 million from 2020 to 2021.
Cost of service revenues as a percentage of service revenues increased from 82.4% in 2020 to 87.1% in 2021, primarily driven by an unfavorable change in the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment, lower risk retirement on submarine support services, and year-to-year variances in contract mix.
2020 - Cost of service revenues in 2020 decreased $140 million, or 6%, compared to 2019. Cost of service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $10 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the volume changes described above, partially offset by recovery of losses on a long-term design contract in 2019. Cost of service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $12 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the volume changes described above, partially offset by lower risk retirement on naval nuclear support services. Cost of service revenues at our Technical Solutions segment decreased $98 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the volume changes described above, partially offset by a loss on a fleet support services contract in 2019. Cost of service revenues related to the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment decreased $20 million from 2019 to 2020.
Cost of service revenues as a percentage of service revenues decreased from 83.9% in 2019 to 82.4% in 2020, primarily driven by a favorable change in the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment, a loss on a fleet support services contract in 2019, and year-to-year variances in contract mix, partially offset by lower risk retirement on naval nuclear support services.
Income from Operating Investments, Net
The activities of our operating investments are closely aligned with the operations of the segments holding the investments. We therefore record income related to earnings from equity method investments in our operating income.
2021 - Income from operating investments, net increased $9 million, or 28%, to $41 million in 2021 from $32 million in 2020. The increase resulted from higher equity income from our ship repair and specialty fabrication joint venture and nuclear and environmental joint ventures.
2020 - Income from operating investments, net increased $10 million, or 45%, to $32 million in 2020 from $22 million in 2019. The increase resulted from higher equity income from our SRNS and MSTS investments.
Other Income and Gains, Net
2021 - Other income and gains, net in 2021 were flat compared to 2020.
2020 - Other income and gains, net in 2020 were flat compared to 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
In accordance with industry practice and the regulations that govern the cost accounting requirements for government contracts, most general and administrative expenses are considered allowable and allocable costs on government contracts. These costs are allocated to contracts in progress on a systematic basis, and contract performance factors include this cost component as an element of cost.
2021 - General and administrative expenses in 2021 decreased $6 million, or 1%, compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by favorable changes in current state income tax expense, partially offset by unfavorable changes in non-current state income tax expense and higher overhead costs driven by the acquisition of Alion.
2020 - General and administrative expenses in 2020 increased $116 million, or 15%, compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the acquisition of Hydroid and higher overhead costs and current state income tax expense, partially offset by favorable changes in non-current state income tax expense.
Goodwill Impairment
As discussed above in Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Judgments, we perform impairment tests for
goodwill as of November 30 each year, or when evidence of potential impairment exists. We record a charge to operations when we determine that an impairment has occurred.
Operating Income
We consider operating income to be an important measure for evaluating our operating performance, and, consistent with industry practice, we define operating income as revenues less the related costs of producing the revenues and general and administrative expenses.
We internally manage our operations by reference to "segment operating income," which is defined as operating income before the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and non-current state income taxes, neither of which affects segment performance. Segment operating income is not a recognized measure under GAAP. When analyzing our operating performance, investors should use segment operating income in addition to, and not as an alternative for, operating income or any other performance measure presented in accordance with GAAP. It is a measure we use to evaluate our core operating performance. We believe segment operating income reflects an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. We believe the measure is used by investors and is a useful indicator to measure our performance. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of segment operating income may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table reconciles operating income to segment operating income:
Segment Operating Income
2021 - Segment operating income in 2021 was $683 million, compared to $555 million in 2020. The increase was driven by impacts related to performance on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and delay and disruption from discrete COVID-19 Events in 2020.
2020 - Segment operating income in 2020 was $555 million, compared to $631 million in 2019. The decrease was driven by unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments in the second quarter of 2020 totaling $167 million from updated cost and schedule assumptions across all programs.
Included in the $167 million of unfavorable adjustments was $111 million related to Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program for unfavorable cost and schedule performance and updates to our assumptions for future program efficiencies and performance as a result of cost and schedule trends. Our risk retirement assumptions on Block IV boats anticipated boat-to-boat cost and schedule improvements working down the learning curve, but performance trends, exacerbated by COVID-19 Events, made those improvements less likely to occur. Also included in the $167 million of unfavorable adjustments was $61 million for the margin impact of delay and disruption cost estimates across all programs from discrete COVID-19 Events, including $16 million relating to Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program, which was included in the $111 million unfavorable adjustments noted above. These unfavorable margin adjustments were partially offset by higher risk retirement on USS Delbert D. Black (DDG 119) in connection with its delivery and a capital expenditure contract incentive, higher risk retirement and improved performance on USS Tripoli (LHA 7) and Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), and a loss on a fleet support services contract in 2019.
Activity within each segment is discussed under Segment Operating Results below.
FAS/CAS Adjustment and Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment
The FAS/CAS Adjustment reflects the difference between expenses for pension and other postretirement benefits determined in accordance with GAAP and the expenses for these items included in segment operating income in accordance with CAS. The Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment excludes the following components of net periodic benefit costs: interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service cost (credit) and actuarial loss (gain), and settlement and curtailment effects.
Effective January 1, 2021, we adopted the Safe Harbor methodology for determining CAS pension costs. Under the new methodology, the interest rates used to calculate pension liabilities under CAS are consistent with those used in the determination of minimum funding requirements under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ("ERISA").
The components of the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment were as follows:
2021 - The Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment in 2021 was a net expense of $157 million, compared to a net benefit of $248 million in 2020. The unfavorable change was primarily driven by the more immediate recognition of higher interest rates under CAS.
2020 - The Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment in 2020 was a net benefit of $248 million, compared to a net benefit of $124 million in 2019. The favorable change was primarily driven by the more immediate recognition of lower interest rates under CAS.
We expect the FAS/CAS Adjustment in 2022 to be a net benefit of approximately $152 million (($105) million FAS and $47 million CAS), primarily driven by the more immediate recognition of the 2021 asset returns under FAS.
We expect the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment in 2022 to be a net expense of approximately $142 million ($189 million FAS and $47 million CAS). The expected FAS/CAS Adjustment is subject to change during 2022, when we remeasure our actuarial estimate of the unfunded benefit obligation for CAS with updated census data and other items later in the year.
Non-current State Income Taxes
Non-current state income taxes include deferred state income taxes, which reflect the change in deferred state tax assets and liabilities, and the tax expense or benefit associated with changes in state unrecognized tax benefits in the relevant period. These amounts are recorded within operating income. Current period state income tax expense is charged to contract costs and included in cost of sales and service revenues in segment operating income.
2021 - Non-current state income tax expense in 2021 was $13 million, compared to $4 million in 2020. The unfavorable change in non-current state income taxes was driven by an increase in deferred state income tax expense, primarily attributable to a decrease in expenses not currently deductible for income tax purposes.
2020 - Non-current state income tax expense in 2020 was $4 million, compared to $19 million in 2019. The decrease in non-current state income tax expense was driven by a decrease in deferred state income tax expense. The decrease in deferred state income tax expense was primarily attributable to an increase in expenses that are not currently deductible for income tax purposes and pension related adjustments.
Interest Expense
2021 - Interest expense in 2021 was $89 million, compared to $114 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of costs associated with the early redemption in 2020 of $600 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.000% senior notes due in 2025, partially offset by increased borrowing to fund the acquisition of Alion with the issuance of $400 million aggregate principal amount of 0.670% senior notes due 2023, $600 million aggregate principal amount of 2.043% senior notes due 2028, and a $650 million three-year Term Loan.
2020 - Interest expense in 2020 was $114 million, compared to $70 million in 2019. The increase was primarily a result of costs associated with the early redemption of $600 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.000% senior notes due 2025 and the issuance in 2020 of $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.844% senior notes due 2025 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.200% senior notes due 2030, partially offset by reduced borrowing on our credit facilities.
Non-Operating Retirement Benefit
The non-operating retirement benefit includes the following components of net periodic benefit costs: interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service cost (credit) and actuarial loss (gain), and settlement and curtailment effects.
2021 - A favorable change in the non-operating retirement benefit of $62 million from 2020 to 2021 was primarily driven by higher 2020 returns on plan assets.
2020 - A favorable change in the non-operating retirement benefit of $107 million from 2019 to 2020 was primarily driven by higher 2019 returns on plan assets.
Other, Net
2021 - Other, net income in 2021 was $17 million, compared to $6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an impairment of a loan receivable in 2020.
2020 - Other, net income in 2020 was consistent with 2019.
Federal and Foreign Income Taxes
2021 - Our effective tax rate on earnings from continuing operations was 12.5% in 2021, compared to 14.1% in 2020. The decrease in our effective tax rate for 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in research and development tax credits for prior periods and a tax loss associated with the sale of our oil and gas business, partially offset by an increase in unrecognized tax benefits.
2020 - Our effective tax rate on earnings from continuing operations was 14.1% in 2020, compared to 19.6% in 2019. The decrease in our effective tax rate for 2020 was primarily attributable to favorable adjustments related to research and development tax credits for prior tax years.
SEGMENT OPERATING RESULTS
Basis of Presentation
We are aligned into three reportable segments: Ingalls, Newport News, and Technical Solutions.
The following table presents segment operating results:
KEY SEGMENT FINANCIAL MEASURES
Sales and Service Revenues
Period-to-period revenues reflect performance under new and ongoing contracts. Changes in sales and service revenues are typically expressed in terms of volume. Unless otherwise described, volume generally refers to increases (or decreases) in reported revenues due to varying production activity levels, delivery rates, or service levels on individual contracts. Volume changes will typically carry a corresponding income change based on the margin rate for a particular contract.
Segment Operating Income
Segment operating income reflects the aggregate performance results of contracts within a segment. Excluded from this measure are certain costs not directly associated with contract performance, such as the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and non-current state income taxes. Changes in segment operating income are typically expressed in terms of volume, as discussed above, or performance. Performance refers to changes in contract margin rates. These changes typically relate to profit recognition associated with revisions to estimated costs at completion ("EAC") that reflect improved or deteriorated operating performance on that contract. Operating income changes are accounted for on a cumulative to date basis at the time an EAC change is recorded. Segment operating income may also be affected by, among other things, contract performance, the effects of workforce stoppages, the effects of natural disasters such as hurricanes, resolution of disputed items with the customer, recovery of insurance proceeds, and other discrete events. At the completion of a long-term contract, any originally estimated costs not incurred or reserves not fully utilized, such as warranty reserves, could also impact contract earnings. Where such items have occurred and the effects are material, a separate description is provided.
Cumulative Adjustments
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, favorable and unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments included risk retirement on Bougainville (LHA 8), a contract incentive on Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125) and risk retirement on Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28). During the same period, no unfavorable cumulative catch-up margin adjustments were individually significant.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments included risk retirement on Delbert D. Black (DDG 119) in connection with its delivery and a capital expenditure contract incentive, naval nuclear support services, the San Antonio class (LPD 17) program, and other individually insignificant adjustments.
During the same period, unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments were primarily driven by $111 million in the second quarter of 2020 on the Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program, including $95 million for cost and schedule performance and updates to our assumptions for future program efficiencies and performance as a result of cost and schedule trends. Our risk retirement assumptions on Block IV boats anticipated boat-to-boat cost and schedule improvements working down the learning curve, but performance trends, exacerbated by the COVID-19 Events, made those improvements less likely to occur. Unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments on the Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program also included $16 million from delay and disruption directly attributable to COVID-19 Events due to lower employee attendance, decreased availability of critical skills, and out-of-sequence work. Unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments across all programs resulting from delay and disruption cost estimates for discrete COVID-19 Events were $61 million, including $16 million in relation to the Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program discussed above.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments were related to contract changes on submarine support services, risk retirement on the Legend class NSC program, surface combatants, and the RCOH of USS George Washington (CVN 73), as well as other individually insignificant adjustments. During the same period, unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments included recognition of a forward loss on a fleet support services contract and schedule delays on USS Tripoli (LHA 7), as well as other individually insignificant adjustments.
When estimates of total costs to be incurred exceed estimates of total revenue to be earned on a performance obligation related to a complex, construction-type contract, we recognize the entire loss on the performance obligation in the period the loss is determined.
Ingalls
Sales and Service Revenues
2021 - Ingalls revenues, including intersegment sales, decreased $150 million, or 6%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by lower revenues in the Legend class NSC program and amphibious assault ships, partially offset by higher revenues in surface combatants. Revenues on the Legend class NSC program decreased due to lower volumes on USCGC Stone (NSC 9) following its delivery. Amphibious assault ship revenues decreased due to lower volumes on Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28), Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), Harrisburg (LPD 30), and USS Tripoli (LHA 7), partially offset by higher volumes on Pittsburgh (LPD 31) and LHA 9 (unnamed). Surface combatant revenues increased due to higher volumes on Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125), George M. Neal (DDG 131), Jeremiah Denton (DDG 129), and Sam Nunn (DDG 133), partially offset by lower volumes on USS Delbert D. Black (DDG 119) following its delivery and USS Fitzgerald (DDG 62) following its redelivery.
2020 - Ingalls revenues, including intersegment sales, increased $123 million, or 5%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by higher revenues in surface combatants and amphibious assault ships, partially offset by lower revenues in the Legend class NSC program. Surface combatant revenues increased due to higher volumes on Ted Stevens (DDG 128), Jeremiah Denton (DDG 129), USS Delbert D. Black (DDG 119), Sam Nunn (DDG 133), George M. Neal (DDG 131), and Thad Cochran (DDG 135), partially offset by lower volumes on USS Fitzgerald (DDG 62) restoration and modernization, USS Paul Ignatius (DDG 117), Frank E. Petersen Jr. (DDG 121), and Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125). Amphibious assault ship revenues increased as a result of higher volumes on Harrisburg (LPD 30), Pittsburgh (LPD 31), LHA 9 (unnamed), Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28), and Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), partially offset by lower volumes on USS Tripoli (LHA 7), LPD life cycle services, and Bougainville (LHA 8). Revenues on the Legend class NSC program decreased due to lower volumes on USCGC Midgett (NSC 8) and Friedman (NSC 11), partially offset by higher volume on Calhoun (NSC 10).
Segment Operating Income
2021 - Ingalls segment operating income in 2021 was flat compared to 2020.
2020 - Ingalls segment operating income in 2020 was $281 million, compared to segment operating income of $235 million in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by higher risk retirement on USS Delbert D. Black (DDG 119) in connection with its delivery and a capital expenditure contract incentive, as well as higher risk retirement and improved performance on USS Tripoli (LHA 7) and Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), partially offset by unfavorable adjustments across programs, including delay and disruption from COVID-19 Events.
Newport News
Sales and Service Revenues
2021 - Newport News revenues, including intersegment sales, increased $92 million, or 2%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by higher revenues in submarines and aircraft carriers, partially offset by lower revenues in naval nuclear support services. Submarine revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes on Block V boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and the Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine program, partially offset by lower volumes on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program. Aircraft
carrier revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes on the RCOH of USS John C. Stennis (CVN 74), the construction of Enterprise (CVN 80), and the construction of Doris Miller (CVN 81), partially offset by lower volumes on the construction of John F. Kennedy (CVN 79) and the RCOH of USS George Washington (CVN 73). Naval nuclear support service revenues decreased primarily as a result of lower volumes in submarine fleet support services and facility maintenance services, partially offset by higher volumes in carrier fleet support services.
2020 - Newport News revenues, including intersegment sales, increased $340 million, or 6%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by higher revenues in aircraft carriers, submarines, and naval nuclear support services. Aircraft carrier revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes on the construction of Enterprise (CVN 80), the RCOH of USS John C. Stennis (CVN 74), and Doris Miller (CVN 81), partially offset by lower volumes on the RCOH of USS George Washington (CVN 73), John F. Kennedy (CVN 79), and USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN 78). Submarine revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes on the Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine program and the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program. The higher volumes on the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program were due to higher volumes on Block V boats, partially offset by lower volumes on Block III and Block IV boats. Naval nuclear support service revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes in carrier fleet support services.
Segment Operating Income
2021 - Newport News segment operating income in 2021 was $352 million, compared to segment operating income of $233 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to impacts related to performance on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and delay and disruption from discrete COVID-19 Events in 2020.
2020 - Newport News segment operating income in 2020 was $233 million, compared to segment operating income of $410 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments in the second quarter on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program for the reasons described above in "Segment Operating Results - Cumulative Adjustments” and 2019 contract changes on submarine support services.
Technical Solutions
Sales and Service Revenues
2021 - Technical Solutions revenues, including intersegment sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $208 million, or 16%, compared to 2020, primarily due to higher volumes in DFS from the acquisition of Alion, partially offset by the divestiture of our oil and gas business and contribution of our San Diego Shipyard to a joint venture.
2020 - Technical Solutions revenues, including intersegment sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $31 million, or 3%, compared to 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of Hydroid in 2020, partially offset by lower volume at our San Diego Shipyard following the conclusion of several repair contracts.
Segment Operating Income
2021 - Technical Solutions segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $50 million, compared to operating segment operating income of $41 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the acquisition of Alion and equity income from nuclear and environmental joint ventures, partially offset by lower performance in unmanned systems and the amortization of Alion purchased intangible assets.
2020 - Technical Solutions segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $41 million, compared to a segment operating loss of $14 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a goodwill
impairment at our oil and gas reporting unit and a loss on a fleet support services contract in 2019, as well as higher equity income from our nuclear and environmental joint ventures and improved performance on DFS services.
BACKLOG
Total backlog as of December 31, 2021, was approximately $48.5 billion. Total backlog includes both funded backlog (firm orders for which funding is contractually obligated by the customer) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding is not currently contractually obligated by the customer). Backlog excludes unexercised contract options and unfunded Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity orders. For contracts having no stated contract values, backlog includes only the amounts committed by the customer.
The following table presents funded and unfunded backlog by segment as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We expect approximately 19% of the $48.5 billion total backlog as of December 31, 2021, to be converted into sales in 2022. U.S. Government orders comprised substantially all of the backlog as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Awards
2021 - The value of new contract awards during the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $8.1 billion, comprised primarily of awards for the RCOH of USS John C. Stennis (CVN 74), construction of a 10th boat of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program, and construction of John F. Lehman (DDG 137).
2020 - The value of new contract awards during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $8.9 billion, comprised primarily of construction contracts for Pittsburgh (LPD 31), module sections for each of the first two Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarines, Sam Nunn (DDG 133), and Thad Cochran (DDG 135).
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We seek to efficiently convert operating results into cash for deployment in operating our businesses, implementing our business strategy, and maximizing stockholder value. We use various financial measures to assist in capital deployment decision making, including net cash provided by operating activities and free cash flow. We believe these measures are useful to investors in assessing our financial performance.
The following table summarizes key components of cash flow provided by operating activities:
We have historically maintained a capital structure comprising a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary our leverage both to optimize our equity return and to pursue acquisitions. We expect to meet our current debt obligations as they come due through internally generated funds from current levels of operations and/or through refinancing in the debt markets prior to the maturity dates of our debt.
Cash Flows
We discuss below our significant operating, investing, and financing activities affecting cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, as classified in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Operating Activities
2021 - Cash provided by operating activities was $760 million in 2021, compared to $1,093 million in 2020. The unfavorable change of $333 million in operating cash flow was primarily due to changes in trade working capital, partially offset by lower income tax payments and lower contributions to retiree benefit plans. The change in trade working capital was primarily driven by the timing of payments of accounts payable and receipts of accounts receivable.
We expect cash generated from operations in 2022, in combination with our current cash and cash equivalents, as well as existing borrowing facilities, to be sufficient to service debt and retiree benefit plans, meet contractual obligations, and fund capital expenditures for at least the next 12 calendar months beginning January 1, 2022 and beyond such 12-month period based on our current business plans.
2020 - Cash provided by operating activities was $1,093 million in 2020, compared to $896 million in 2019. The favorable change of $197 million in operating cash flow was primarily due to changes in trade working capital, partially offset by higher contributions to retiree benefit plans, higher income tax payments, and higher interest payments. The change in trade working capital was primarily driven by deferred payroll tax payments under the CARES Act, as well as the timing of receipts of accounts receivable and payments of accounts payable.
Investing Activities
2021 - Cash used in investing activities was $1,954 million in 2021, an increase of $1,195 million from 2020. The change in investing cash flow was primarily driven by the acquisitions of Alion and a non-controlling interest in a specialty fabrication and ship repair joint venture in 2021, partially offset by the acquisition of Hydroid in 2020 and lower capital expenditures and the disposition of our oil and gas business in 2021.
For 2022, we expect our capital expenditures for maintenance and sustainment to be approximately 1.0% of annual revenues and our discretionary capital expenditures to be approximately 1.5% to 2.0% of annual revenues.
2020 - Cash used in investing activities was $759 million in 2020, an increase of $132 million from 2019. The change in investing cash flow was driven by business acquisitions, including Hydroid, partially offset by lower capital expenditures in 2020 and the acquisition of Fulcrum in 2019.
Financing Activities
2021 - Cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was $1,309 million, compared to $103 million provided by financing activities in 2020. The change in financing cash was primarily due to an increase of $1,225 million in net proceeds from long-term debt, a decrease of $15 million in premiums related to the 2020 early extinguishment of debt, and a decrease of $6 million in employee taxes on share-based payment arrangements, partially offset by an increase of $17 million in common stock repurchases, an increase of $14 million in cash dividend payments, and an increase of $9 million in debt issuance costs.
2020 - Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $103 million, compared to $434 million used in financing activities in 2019. The change in financing cash was primarily due to $1 billion of proceeds from the issuance of senior notes, a decrease of $178 million from common stock repurchases, and a decrease of $10 million in employee tax withholdings on share-based payment arrangements, partially offset by a $600 million increase in repayment of long-term debt, a $23 million increase in cash dividend payments, an increase of $15 million in premiums related to early extinguishment of debt, and an increase of $13 million in debt issuance costs.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow represents cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures net of related grant proceeds. Free cash flow is not a measure recognized under GAAP. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net earnings as a measure of our performance or net cash provided by operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity measure for our investors because it provides them insight into our current and period-to-period performance and our ability to generate cash from continuing operations. We also use free cash flow as a key operating metric in assessing the performance of our business and as a key performance measure in evaluating management performance and determining incentive compensation. Free cash flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow:
2021 - Free cash flow decreased $308 million from 2020, primarily due to changes in trade working capital, partially offset by lower income tax payments, lower contributions to retiree benefit plans, and lower capital expenditures.
2020 - Free cash flow increased $297 million from 2019, primarily due to a change in trade working capital and lower capital expenditures, partially offset by higher contributions to retiree benefit plans and higher income tax payments.
Retirement Related Benefit Plan Contributions
ERISA, including amendments under pension relief, defines the minimum amount that must be contributed to our qualified defined benefit pension plans. In determining whether to make discretionary contributions to these plans above the minimum required amounts, we consider various factors, including maintaining the funded status needed to avoid potential benefit restrictions and other adverse consequences, maintaining minimum CAS funding requirements, and the current and anticipated future funding levels of each plan. The contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plans are affected by a number of factors, including published IRS interest rates, the actual return on plan assets, actuarial assumptions, and demographic experience. These factors and our resulting contributions also impact the funded status of the plans. We made the following minimum and discretionary contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
We made discretionary contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plans totaling $60 million, $205 million, and $21 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our qualified pension plans were funded 102% and 91%, respectively, on a FAS basis. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, these plans were sufficiently funded on an ERISA basis so as not to be subject to benefit payment restrictions. The funded percentages under ERISA and FAS vary due to inherent differences in the assumptions and methodologies used to calculate the respective obligations. We expect our 2022 cash contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plans to be less than $1 million, all of which we anticipate will be discretionary and which are exclusive of CAS cost recoveries under our contracts. Due to the differences in calculation methodologies, our FAS expense is not necessarily representative of our funding requirements or CAS cost recoveries.
Other postretirement benefit plan contributions were $37 million, $33 million, and $31 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We expect 2022 contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans to be approximately $34 million, which are exclusive of CAS cost recoveries under our contracts. Contributions for other postretirement benefit plans are not required to be funded in advance and are paid on an as-incurred basis.
Other Sources and Uses of Capital
Stockholder Distributions - In November 2021, our board of directors authorized an increase in our quarterly cash dividend to $1.18 per share. The board previously increased the quarterly cash dividend to $1.14 per share in November 2020 and $1.03 per share in November 2019. We paid cash dividends totaling $186 million ($4.60 per share), $172 million ($4.23 per share), and $149 million ($3.61 per share) in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
In November 2019, our board of directors authorized an increase to our stock repurchase program from $2.2 billion to $3.2 billion and an extension of the term of the program to October 31, 2024. Repurchases are made from time to time at management's discretion in accordance with applicable federal securities laws. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 544,440 shares at an aggregate cost of $101 million. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 390,904 and 1,005,762 shares, respectively, at aggregate costs of $84 million and $214 million, respectively. The cost of repurchased shares is recorded as treasury stock in the consolidated statements of financial position.
Additional Capital - In 2021, we issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of callable unregistered 0.670% senior notes due 2023 and $600 million aggregate principal amount of unregistered 2.043% senior notes due 2028, both with registration rights. The net proceeds were used to fund a portion of the purchase price for the acquisition of Alion. Interest on these senior notes is payable semiannually.
In 2021, we amended and restated our existing $1.25 billion credit facility, increasing the capacity thereunder to $1.5 billion and extending the maturity date to five years from signing (the "Revolving Credit Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility includes a letter of credit subfacility of $300 million. The Revolving Credit Facility has a variable interest rate on outstanding borrowings based on the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"), plus a spread based upon our credit rating, which may vary between 1.125% and 2.000%. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate spread on drawn amounts was 1.375% based on our current credit rating. The Revolving Credit Facility also has a commitment fee rate on the unutilized balance based on our credit ratings. The commitment fee rate as of December 31, 2021 was 0.200% and may vary between 0.125% and 0.300%.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $15 million in issued but undrawn letters of credit and $1,485 million unutilized under the Revolving Credit Facility.
In 2021, we entered into a $650 million 3-year delayed draw term loan (the “Term Loan”) to finance a portion of the purchase price for Alion. The Term Loan must be repaid prior to or at maturity, which is 36 months from the date of the initial draw. The Term Loan has a variable interest rate on outstanding borrowings based on LIBOR, plus a spread based upon our credit rating, which may vary between 1.125% and 2.000%. As of December 31, 2021, the annual interest rate spread was 1.375% based on our current credit rating, and the outstanding balance was $625 million.
In 2020, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.844% senior notes due 2025 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.200% senior notes due 2030. The net proceeds were intended to be used for general corporate purposes, including debt repayments and working capital. Interest on these senior notes is payable semiannually.
In 2020, we redeemed $600 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.000% senior notes due 2025 in accordance with the terms of the indenture governing the notes.
In 2019, we established an unsecured commercial paper note program, under which we may issue up to $1 billion of unsecured commercial paper notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding debt under the commercial paper program.
We were in compliance with all debt-related covenants as of and during the year ended December 31, 2021. For a description of our outstanding debt amounts and related restrictive covenants, see Note 13: Debt in Item 8.
Contractual obligations - Our future contractual obligations are related to debt, leases, pension liabilities, unrecognized tax benefits, workers compensation, and purchase obligations. See Note 13: Debt, Note 15: Leases, Note 17: Employee Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits, Note 12: Income Taxes, and Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8 for information about those obligations. Our purchase obligations as of December 31, 2021, were approximately $5,384 million, with approximately $2,333 million expected to be paid in 2022 and $3,051 million thereafter. A purchase obligation is defined as an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable and legally binding on us and that specifies all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. As of December 31, 2021, future scheduled periodic interest payments on our outstanding long-term debt, including commitment fees that we are obligated to pay on our Revolving Credit Facility, were approximately $527 million, with approximately $97 million expected to be paid in 2022 and $430 million thereafter.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the ordinary course of business, we use letters of credit issued by commercial banks to support certain leases, insurance policies, and contractual performance obligations, as well as surety bonds issued by insurance companies principally to support our self-insured workers' compensation plans. As of December 31, 2021, $15 million in letters of credit were issued but undrawn and $276 million of surety bonds were outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, we had no other significant off-balance sheet arrangements.
GLOSSARY OF PROGRAMS
Included below are brief descriptions of some of the programs discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Program Name Program Description
America class (LHA 6) amphibious assault ships
Design and build large deck amphibious assault ships that provide forward presence and power projection as an integral part of joint, interagency and multinational maritime expeditionary forces. The America class (LHA 6) ships, together with the Wasp class (LHD 1) ships, are the successors to the decommissioned Tarawa class (LHA 1) ships. The America class (LHA 6) ships optimize aviation operations and support capabilities. In 2020, we delivered USS Tripoli (LHA 7), and we were awarded a long-lead-time material and construction contract for LHA 9 (unnamed). We are currently constructing Bougainville (LHA 8).
Arleigh Burke class (DDG 51) destroyers
Build guided missile destroyers designed for conducting anti-air, anti-submarine, anti-surface, and strike operations. The Aegis-equipped Arleigh Burke class (DDG 51) destroyers are the U.S. Navy's primary surface combatant, and have been constructed in variants, allowing technological advances during construction. We delivered USS Paul Ignatius (DDG 117), USS Delbert D. Black (DDG 119), and Frank E. Petersen Jr. (DDG 121) in 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively. We have contracts to construct the following Arleigh Burke class (DDG 51) destroyers: Lenah H. Sutcliffe Higbee (DDG 123), Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125), Ted Stevens (DDG 128), Jeremiah Denton (DDG 129), George M. Neal (DDG 131), Sam Nunn (DDG 133), Thad Cochran (DDG 135), and John F. Lehman (DDG 137).
Carrier RCOH
Perform refueling and complex overhaul ("RCOH") of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers, which is required at the mid-point of their 50-year life cycle. USS George Washington (CVN 73) arrived at Newport News for the start of its RCOH in August 2017, and USS John C. Stennis (CVN 74) arrived at Newport News for the start of its RCOH in May 2021.
Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarines
Newport News is participating in designing the Columbia class submarine as a replacement for the current aging Ohio class nuclear ballistic missile submarines, which were first introduced into service in 1981. The Ohio class SSBN includes 14 nuclear ballistic missile submarines and four nuclear cruise missile submarines. The Columbia class program plan of record is to construct 12 new ballistic missile submarines. The U.S. Navy has initiated the design process for the new class of submarines, and, in early 2017, the DoD signed the acquisition decision memorandum approving the Columbia class program’s Milestone B, which formally authorizes the program’s entry into the engineering and manufacturing development phase. We perform design work as a subcontractor to Electric Boat, and we have entered into a teaming agreement with Electric Boat to build modules for the entire Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine program that leverages our Virginia class (SSN 774) experience. We have been awarded contracts from Electric Boat for integrated product and process development, providing long-lead-time material and advance construction, and construction of the first two boats of the Columbia class (SSBN 826) program. Construction of the first Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine began in 2020.
Defense and federal solutions DFS is focused on solving tough national security challenges for the DoD, the intelligence community, and federal civilian agencies around the globe. The group provides a wide range of professional services and products, including fleet sustainment, cyber and electronic warfare, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, and live, virtual, and constructive solutions.
USS Gerald R. Ford class (CVN 78) aircraft carriers
Design and construction for the Ford class program, which is the aircraft carrier replacement program for the decommissioned Enterprise (CVN 65) and Nimitz class (CVN 68) aircraft carriers. USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN 78), the first ship of the Ford class, was delivered to the U.S. Navy in the second quarter of 2017. In June 2015, we were awarded a contract for the detail design and construction of John F. Kennedy (CVN 79), following several years of engineering, advance construction, and purchase of long-lead-time components and material. In addition, we have received awards for detail design and construction of Enterprise (CVN 80) and Doris Miller (CVN 81). This category also includes the class' non-recurring engineering. The class is expected to bring improved warfighting capability, quality of life improvements for sailors, and reduced life cycle costs.
Legend class National Security Cutter
Design and build the U.S. Coast Guard's National Security Cutters ("NSCs"), the largest and most technically advanced class of cutter in the U.S. Coast Guard. The NSC is equipped to carry out maritime homeland security, maritime safety, protection of natural resources, maritime mobility, and national defense missions. The plan is for a total of 11 ships, of which the first nine ships have been delivered. Calhoun (NSC 10) and Friedman (NSC 11) are currently under construction.
Naval nuclear support services Provide services to and in support of the U.S. Navy, ranging from services supporting the Navy's carrier and submarine fleets to maintenance services at U.S. Navy training facilities. Naval nuclear support services include design, construction, maintenance, and disposal activities for in-service U.S. Navy nuclear ships worldwide through mobile and in-house capabilities. Services include maintenance services on nuclear reactor prototypes.
Nuclear and environmental services Provide services in nuclear management and operations, including site management, nuclear and industrial facilities operations and maintenance, decontamination and decommissioning, radiological and hazardous waste management services, and technical engineering services. We participate in several joint ventures, including Newport News Nuclear BWXT Los Alamos, LLC (" N3B"), Mission Support and Test Services, LLC ("MSTS"), and Savannah River Nuclear Solutions, LLC ("SRNS"), and we are an integrated subcontractor to Triad National Security. N3B was awarded the Los Alamos Legacy Cleanup Contract at the DoE/National Nuclear Security Administration’s Los Alamos National Laboratory. MSTS was awarded a contract for site management and operations at the Nevada National Security Site. SRNS provides site management and operations at the DoE’s Savannah River Site near Aiken, South Carolina. Triad provides site management and operations at the DoE’s Los Alamos National Laboratory.
San Antonio class (LPD 17) amphibious transport dock ships
Design and build amphibious transport dock ships, which are warships that embark, transport, and land elements of a landing force for a variety of expeditionary warfare missions, and also serve as the secondary aviation platform for Amphibious Readiness Groups. The San Antonio class (LPD 17) is the newest addition to the U.S. Navy's 21st century amphibious assault force, and these ships are a key element of the U.S. Navy's seabase transformation. We are currently constructing Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28), Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), and Harrisburg (LPD 30). In 2020 we were awarded a contract to construct Pittsburgh (LPD 31).
Unmanned systems Our unmanned systems products and services create advanced unmanned maritime solutions for defense, marine research, and commercial applications. Serving customers in more than 30 countries, unmanned systems provides design, autonomy, manufacturing, testing, operations, and sustainment of unmanned systems, including unmanned underwater vehicles and unmanned surface vessels.
Virginia class (SSN 774) fast attack submarines
Construct attack submarines as the principal subcontractor to Electric Boat. The Virginia class (SSN 774) is a post-Cold War design tailored to excel in a wide range of warfighting missions, including anti-submarine and surface ship warfare; special operation forces; strike; intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; carrier and expeditionary strike group support; and mine warfare.