Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 18, 2020 for the purpose of effecting the merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Based on our business activities to date, the Company is a “shell company” as defined under the Exchange Act because we have minimal operations and nominal assets consisting almost entirely of cash held in a trust account.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $9,394,923, which consists of the change in the fair value of warrant liabilities and FPA of $11,155,667, transaction costs of $878,490 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $166,685, offset by formation and operating costs of $1,048,939.
For the period from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,268, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 26, 2021 the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 60,000,000 Units, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 7,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $600,000,000 which is described in Note 3. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 9,333,334 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $14,000,001, which is described in Note 4.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $600,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $33,493,009 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $12,000,000 in cash underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $21,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $493,009 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $847,795. Net income of $9,394,923 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities and FPA of $11,155,667, interest earned in marketable securities held in Trust Account of $166,685 and transaction costs incurred in connection with IPO of $878,490. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $201,144 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $15. Net loss of $1,268 was affected by the changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,253 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $600,166,685 (including approximately $166,685 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills/Notes with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $709,182. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Going Concern
We have until February 26, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 26, 2023.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on February 26, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $21,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters solely in the event that the Company fails to complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities and Forward Purchase Agreement Derivative Asset
The Company accounts for the Warrants and FPA in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40,
under which the Warrants and FPA do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as assets or liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants and FPA as assets or liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants and FPA to fair value at each reporting period. These assets or liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants has been estimated using the Public Warrants’ quoted market price. The Private Placement Warrants are valued using a Modified Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model, and the FPA’s fair value was estimated using the reconstructed unit price, the net present value of per forward purchase unit commitment, and the forward purchase unit.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption, if any, are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No.2020-06,
“Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on February 26, 2021 (inception). Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.