Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this report, including the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in Part I, “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A.“Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements, other than as required by law.
Overview
We earn revenue by deploying professionals to provide services to our clients, including project management, construction management, facilities management and related consulting. These services are primarily delivered on a “cost plus” or “time and materials” ("T&M") basis in which we bill negotiated hourly or monthly rates or a negotiated multiple of the direct cost of these professionals, plus actual out-of-pocket expenses. Our direct expenses are the actual cost of these professionals, including most payroll and benefits, except for paid time-off, which is recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") on our consolidated statements of operations. We also provide services under fixed price contracts.
Our revenue consists of two components: CFR and reimbursable expenses. The professionals we deploy are occasionally subcontractors. We generally bill the actual cost of these subcontractors and recognize this cost as both revenue (reimbursable expenses) and direct expense. CFR refers to our revenue excluding amounts paid or due to subcontractors. We believe CFR is an important measure because it represents the revenue on which we earn gross profit, whereas total revenue includes the costs for subcontractors on which we generally pass through the cost and earn minimal or no gross profit.
We compete for business based on a variety of factors such as technical capability, global resources, price, reputation and past experience, including client requirements for substantial experience in similar projects. We have developed significant long-standing relationships, which bring us repeat business and may be difficult for others to replicate. We believe we have an excellent reputation for attracting and retaining professionals. In addition, we believe there are high barriers to entry for new competitors especially in the project management market.
SG&A expenses consist primarily of personnel costs that are not billable and corporate or regional costs such as sales, business development, proposals, operations, finance, human resources, legal, marketing, management and administration.
The Company operates as a single reporting segment, known as the Project Management Group which provides fee-based project management, construction management, facilities management and other consulting services to our clients, leveraging our construction expertise to identify potential trouble, difficulties and sources of delay on a construction project before they develop into costly problems. Our experienced professionals are capable of managing all phases of the construction process from concept through completion, including cost and budget controls, scheduling, estimating, expediting, inspection, contract administration and management of contractors, subcontractors and suppliers.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic as a result of the further spread of the virus into all regions of the world, including those regions where our primary operations occur. Variants of the virus continue to emerge in various regions and countries worldwide.
We instituted a work-from-home policy for all offices and employees globally in late March 2020, except for field-based employees who normally work on-site at our client’s facilities. These field-based employees comply with our respective clients’ policies. The majority of our field employees were already located in the regions where they deliver their services, so the travel restrictions that have been enacted by various government authorities have not materially impaired our ability to continue to perform services for our clients. As of December 31, 2021, most of our employees have returned to their assigned offices, on a modified basis, as their city, state and country reopens, consistent with the applicable requirements of local law.
Most of the projects to which we provide services have been classified as essential services by the relevant governmental authority and as such have continued despite restrictions on the operation of "non-essential" businesses by certain governmental authorities. The majority of our billable employees have continued to provide billable services to our clients, either on-site or remotely at the same or at a slightly reduced volume as in effect prior to the pandemic.
Nearly all our employees had company laptop computers and the ability to work remotely prior to the institution of our work-at-home policy. The work-at-home policy did not have a significant impact on our employees’ ability to perform their job requirements. Our internal control structure does not generally require physical access to our office locations, and has not to date and is not expected in the future to be adversely impacted the pandemic and the corresponding response by certain governmental authorities. Processes that require physical access to our offices, such as receiving mail (including collections) and processing and mailing manual checks, are being performed by designated individuals at a reduced frequency while certain of our offices continue to operate on a limited basis.
The main impacts on our business, other than those discussed above, were delays in the procurement processes of a number of our current and potential clients and a temporary slowing of certain collections.
Management implemented various actions and policies that resulted in approximately $11,000 in cost reductions to partially offset the expected reduction in CFR for the year ended December 31, 2020. Costs in 2021 have increased modestly in line with an anticipated rebound in activity, as the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subside and the Company's activity increases. The Company will continue to manage costs and its association with CFR relative to the evolving effects of COVID-19.
The full extent and duration of the impact of the pandemic on our operations and financial performance is currently unknown, and depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable, including the institution of new lockdowns by certain government authorities, the duration and spread of the pandemic, its impact on capital and financial markets on a macro-scale and any new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus, its spread to other regions and the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others.
Management currently believes that it has adequate liquidity and business plans to continue to operate the business and mitigate the continuing risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect the consolidated financial statements, areas that management considers critical are discussed below. We believe our assumptions are reasonable and appropriate, however, actual results may be materially different than estimated.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from providing professional services to our clients under various types of contracts. We evaluate contractual arrangements to determine how to recognize revenue. Below is a description of the basic types of contracts from which we may earn revenue:
Time and Materials Contracts
Under the T&M arrangements, contract fees are based upon time and materials incurred. The contracts may be structured as basic T&M, cost plus a margin or time and materials subject to a maximum contract value (the "cap value"). Due to the potential limitation of the cap value, the economic factors of the contracts subject to a cap value differ from the economic factors of basic T&M and cost plus a margin contracts.
The majority of our contracts are for consulting projects where we bill the client monthly at hourly billing rates. The hourly billing rates are determined by contract terms. Under cost plus a margin contracts, we charge our clients for our costs, plus a fixed fee or rate.
Under T&M contracts with a cap value, we charge our clients for time and materials based upon the work performed, however there is a cap or a not to exceed value. There are often instances that a contract is modified to extend the contract value past the cap. As the consideration is variable depending on the outcome of the contract renegotiation, we will estimate the total contract price in accordance with the variable consideration guidelines and will only include consideration we expect to receive from the client. When we expect to reach the cap value, the contract will be renegotiated or we will cease work when the maximum contract value is reached. We continue to work if it is probable that the contract will be extended. We will only include consideration on contract negotiations to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. If we continue to work and are uncertain that a contract change order will be processed, the variable consideration will be constrained to the cap until it is probable that the contract will be renegotiated. We are only entitled to consideration for the work we have performed, and the cap value is not a guaranteed contract value.
Fixed Price Contracts
Under fixed price contracts, our clients pay an agreed amount negotiated in advance for a specified scope of work. We are guaranteed to receive the consideration to the extent that we deliver under the contract. We recognize revenue over a period of time on fixed price contracts using the input method based upon direct costs incurred to date, which are compared to total projected direct costs. Costs are the most relevant measure to determine the transfer of the service to the client. We assess contracts quarterly and will recognize any expected future loss before actually incurring the loss. When we expect to reach the total consideration under the contract, we begin to negotiate a change order.
Change Orders and Claims
Change orders are modifications of an original contract. Either we or our client may initiate change orders. They may include changes in specifications or design, manner of performance, facilities, equipment, materials, sites and period of completion of the work. Management evaluates when a change order is probable based upon its experience in negotiating change orders, the client’s written approval of such changes or separate documentation of change order costs that are identifiable. Change orders may take time to be formally documented and terms of such change orders are agreed with the client before the work is performed. Sometimes circumstances require that work progresses before an agreement is reached with the client. If we are having difficulties in renegotiating the change order, we will stop work if possible, record all costs incurred to date, and determine, on a project by project basis, the appropriate final revenue recognition.
Claims are amounts in excess of the agreed contract price that we seek to collect from our clients or others for client-caused delays, errors in specifications and designs, contract terminations, change orders that are either in dispute or are unapproved as to both scope and price, or other causes of unanticipated additional contract costs. Costs related to change orders and claims are recognized when they are incurred. We evaluate claims on an individual basis and will recognize revenue based on what we believe is probable to collect.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We make ongoing estimates relating to the collectability of our accounts receivable and maintain an allowance for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our clients to make required payments. Estimates used in determining accounts receivable allowances are based on our evaluation of specific client accounts and contracts involved and the financial condition of our clients. The factors we consider in our evaluations include, but are not limited to, client type (U.S. federal and other national governments, state and local governments or private sector), historical contract performance, historical collection and delinquency trends, client credit worthiness, and general economic and political conditions. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $39,670 and $53,450, respectively. The allowance for doubtful accounts balance included approximately $24,031 and $33,242 related to our receivables in Libya at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Contingencies
Estimates are inherent in the assessment of our exposure to insurance claims that fall below policy deductibles and to litigation and other legal claims and contingencies, as well as in determining our liabilities for incurred but not reported insurance claims. Significant judgments by us and reliance on third-party experts are utilized in determining probable and/or reasonably estimable amounts to be recorded or disclosed in our financial statements. The results of any changes in accounting estimates are reflected in the financial statements of the period in which the changes are determined. We do not believe that material changes to these estimates are reasonably likely to occur.
2021 Business Overview
Consolidated Results
(In thousands)
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Total Revenue:
Consulting Fee Revenue:
Total revenue increased approximately $8,914 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same time period in the prior year. CFR was $305,093 and $296,615 of the total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was approximately 80.8% and 80.5% of total revenues, respectively.
The increase in total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to revenue during 2020 being reduced as a result of delayed project starts and project suspensions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The increase in CFR for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by activity continuing to return to pre-COVID levels, including returns to full staffing on certain existing projects and mobilizations on certain newly awarded projects.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit (margin) as a percentage of total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was general consistent. In the Americas, the decrease in margin as a percentage of total revenue was primarily due to an increase in direct benefit expense as a result of the reinstatement of the company 401(k) match in 2021. In Africa, the decrease in margin as a percentage of total revenue was due to the start of a large project with a lower margin. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase in margin as a percentage of total revenue in the Middle East/Asia/Pacific due to the liquidation of a bond and a settlement on a project in Qatar during 2020 that did not recur during 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses:
Our total selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") increased $4,462 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
During 2021, the increase was primarily due to a $5,900 increase in labor expenses and $500 increase in travel expenses due to the lifting of COVID-19 stay at home orders and the ramping up of projects, and the reinstatement of the company 401(k) match. In addition, consultants and temporary office support increased $400 due to vacancies and additional work needed to address internal control deficiencies, a $359 increase in computer related costs, a $200 increase in insurance expense, a $250 increase in legal expenses, and a $350 increase in global auditing fees, Partially offsetting these increases was a $2,100 decrease in bad debt expense as a result of the Company receiving payments against previously reserved receivables. In addition, there was a $1,600 additional depreciation charge in the first quarter of 2020 for the write-off of leasehold improvements related to the Company subletting office space in Philadelphia to a third party, which did not reoccur in 2021.
SG&A expenses represented 30.1% and 29.6% of total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Foreign Currency Exchange Loss
Foreign currency exchange losses were approximately $204 greater for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The currency exchange losses were primarily caused by a 7.7% weakening of the Euro against the U.S. dollar and currencies pegged to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a 7.5% strengthening of the Egyptian pound against the Euro.
Interest and related financing fees, net
Interest and related financing fees, net, included interest expense of $5,431, net of $4 in interest income, and interest expense of $5,357, net of $133 in interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively..
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rates for 2021, and 2020 were 205.2% and (1636.2)% respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to additional uncertain tax position accruals, as well as the inability to recognize any tax benefit for losses in certain jurisdictions, particularly the United States.
The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to additional uncertain tax position accruals, as well as the inability to recognize any tax benefit for losses in certain jurisdictions, particularly Brazil.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities and projected future taxable income in making this assessment. Management evaluates the need for valuation allowances on the deferred tax assets according to the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes. We consider both positive and negative evidence. In making this determination, management assesses all of the evidence available at the time including recent earnings, internally-prepared income projections, and historical financial performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash obligations are our payroll and our project subcontractors. Our primary source of cash is receipts from clients. We generally pay our employees semi-monthly in arrears and invoice our clients monthly in arrears. Our clients generally remit payment approximately three months, on average, after invoice date. This creates a lag between the time we pay our employees and the time we receive payment from our clients. We bill our clients for any subcontractors used and pay those subcontractors after receiving payment from our clients, so no such timing lag exists for the payments we make to subcontractors.
We utilize cash on hand and our revolving credit facilities to fund the working capital requirement caused by the lag discussed above and other operating needs. We believe our expected cash receipts from clients, together with current cash on hand and revolving credit facilities, are sufficient to support the reasonably anticipated cash needs of our operations over the next twelve months.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our primary sources of liquidity consisted of $21,821 and $34,229 in cash and cash equivalents, respectively, of which $19,365 and $28,842 was on deposit in foreign locations, respectively, and $9,143 and $11,711 of available borrowing capacity under our various credit facilities, respectively. We also have relationships with other foreign banks for the issuance of letters of credit, letters of guarantee and performance bonds in a variety of foreign currencies. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately $63,331 and $52,236 of availability under these arrangements. Our sources of liquidity under arrangements with foreign banks are available for repatriation as deemed necessary by us with some restrictions and tax implications.
On March 31, 2022, we entered into an amendment of our main credit facility with Société Générale that extends the maturity dates of the Domestic and International Revolving Credit Facilities to May 5, 2023 and the term loan facility to November 5, 2023. The interest rates on these facilities will increase by 1.0% and the Company will pay an amendment fee of 1.0% or less, contingent on the timing of refinancing the revolving credit facilities. The aggregate amount of the credit commitments under the facilities will automatically and permanently be reduced by an amount equal to $3,000 on each of September 30, 2022 and December 31, 2022.
We believe that we have sufficient liquidity to support the reasonably anticipated cash needs of our operations over the next twelve months from the date of this filing.
Sources of Additional Capital
A significant increase in our current backlog may require us to obtain additional financing. If additional financing is required in the future due to an increase in backlog or changes in strategic or operating plans, we cannot provide any assurance that any other sources of financing will be available, or if available, that the financing will be on terms acceptable to us.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
The decrease in cash from operations during 2021 was primarily due to the increase in our outstanding accounts receivable balances related to increases in revenue during the year partially offset by increases in accounts payable due to the timing of vendor payments.
Cash held in restricted accounts is primarily collateral for the issuance of performance and advance payment bonds, letters of credit and escrow and was $8,625 and $7,184 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily due to a large cash receipt at the end of the current year that was partially payable to our partners on a large project.
We manage our operating cash flows by managing the working capital accounts in total. The primary elements of our working capital are accounts receivable, prepaid and other current assets, accounts payable and deferred revenue.
From year to year, the components of our working capital accounts may reflect significant changes. The changes are primarily due to the timing of cash receipts and payments with our working capital accounts combined with changes in our receivables and payables relative to the changes in our overall business.
Investing Activities
During 2021 and 2020, cash was used in investing activities primarily for the purchase of fixed assets. In 2020, cash was also used to purchase an engineering license in New York.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 were from net borrowings on revolving debt of $7,300 and $700 in principal payments for finance leases, which was insignificant in 2020, partially offset by $1,200 in repayments of term loans. Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was from net borrowings on revolving debt of $5,800 and $1,300 of term loans.
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the effects of exchange rate changes on cash was primarily driven by the weakening of the Libyan Dinar (70.9%) and Euro (7.0%) against the U.S. Dollar.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the effects of exchange rate changes on cash was primarily driven by the strengthening of the Euro by 8.9% against the U.S. Dollar.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" hereof.
Quarterly Fluctuations
Our operating results vary from period to period as a result of the timing of projects and assignments. We do not believe that our business is seasonal.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table provides information with respect to off-balance sheet arrangements with domestic and foreign banks for the issuance of performance bonds, advance payment guarantees and other letters of credit that are scheduled to expire in 2022 and beyond. The total amount of these arrangements in the following table includes amounts issued in various foreign currencies and are based on the foreign currency exchange rates as of December 31, 2021, where applicable.
(1)At December 31, 2021, the Company had provided cash collateral amounting to $8,625 for certain of these items. That collateral is reflected in restricted cash on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding these arrangements.
(2)Represents guarantee of service performance bonds and advance payments through domestic and international banks required under certain client contracts.
(3)Represents tender and bid bonds issued through international banks as part of the bidding process for new work to assure our client that we will enter into the service contract.
(4)Includes off-balance sheet arrangements with open-ended expiration dates or are subject to automatic renewals.
Contractual Obligations
The following table reflects contractual debt obligations under our notes payable and credit facilities, fees paid on our off-balance sheet arrangements and minimum cash rental payments due for our operating and finance lease obligations over the next five years and thereafter as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Reduced by the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our term loan debt.
(2)Estimated using the weighted average effective interest rates as of December 31, 2021 on our notes payable and credit facilities. Includes the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our term loan and revolving credit facilities.
(3)Fees paid on our off-balance sheet arrangements are included in interest and related financing fees, net, in our consolidated statements of operations.
(4)Represents future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable lease terms. Amounts exclude contingent rental payments, where applicable, that may be payable based on lease provisions where annual rent increases are based on certain economic indexes, among other items. We expect to fund these commitments with existing cash and cash flow from operations.
(5)Amounts presented are partially payable in various foreign currencies and are based on the foreign currency rates at December 31, 2021.
The liability for unrecognized tax benefits is not included in the table above due to the subjective nature of the costs and timing of anticipated payments.