ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITIONS AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations together with and our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All amounts in this report are in U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted.
Overview
We are a pre-clinical biotechnology company developing novel therapeutic candidates targeting ferroptosis, an emerging new anti-cancer mechanism resulting in IMCD for treatment resistant cancers. Our most advanced product candidate is HSB-1216, an IMCD modulator, targeting a variety of solid tumors. In a clinical pilot study conducted in Germany by the University of Heidelberg, the active drug in HSB-1216 was found to reduce tumor burden in treatment resistant cancers, including TNBC and epithelial carcinomas. Our goal is to submit an IND to the FDA in 2023 and start a clinical study with HSB-1216 in 2023; however, no assurance can be provided that our IND will be accepted by the FDA in 2023, if at all. If our IND is accepted by the FDA, our HSB-1216 clinical study will focus on expanding upon the clinical pilot study conducted in Germany. If we are able to start our clinical study with HSB-1216 in 2023, we anticipate that initial clinical data from such trial will be released either the end of 2023 or early 2024. We use Quatramer™, our proprietary tumor targeting platform, to enhance the uptake of HSB-1216 in the TME with an extended duration of action and minimal off-target toxicity. In addition, TridentAI, our artificial intelligence precision medicine platform, is used to identify biomarkers in our clinical programs to target specific patient segments.
The discovery of regulated cell death processes, such as apoptosis and autophagy, has enabled novel target discovery for drug development. Ferroptosis, a form of IMCD, is an emerging regulated cell death process which decreases intracellular iron or the LIP. Cancer cells increase the LIP leading to unregulated cell growth and metabolism. Decreasing the LIP induces iron-led ROS production and lipid peroxidation, two key hallmarks of ferroptosis/IMCD. HSB-1216 binds iron in the cytoplasm of cancer cells and decreases the LIP, thereby inducing ferroptosis/IMCD, leading to regulated cell death.
Quatramer is a tumor targeting platform which allows us to leverage and exploit key tumor targets and novel emerging pathways such as IMCD to facilitate the delivery of potent drugs directly to the TME, while sparing healthy tissue. By efficiently extending the circulation half-life, as well as targeting delivery to the tumor site, Quatramer traps drugs into the TME. This emerging orthogonal anti-cancer approach utilizes a fundamental recognized mechanism of iron mediated tumor growth and metabolism. We are building a portfolio of long-acting, potent anti-cancer drug candidates using the Quatramer platform.
TridentAI uses an artificial intelligence precision medicine platform to identify novel biomarkers. TridentAI integrates diverse public datasets, including TCGA to identify novel gene signatures to stratify patients prospectively in clinical trials. Quatramer tumor targeting also allows us to segment patients by exploiting TridentAI’s findings by (i) synthetic lethal sensitivities with novel combinations, (ii) pursue undruggable targets such as c-myc and (iii) target tumors with a high degree of cell plasticity indicative of recurrent/drug resistant phenotype.
The critical components of our business strategy to achieve our goals include:
● Developing our drug candidate, HSB-1216, in solid tumors.
Data from a clinical pilot use study in Germany led us to progress HSB-1216 into IND-enabling studies with the ultimate goal of submitting an IND to the FDA in 2023.
● Developing our combination drug candidate, HSB-888, for pediatric sarcomas.
HSB-888 is in IND-enabling trials with the ultimate goal of submitting an IND to the FDA in 2024.
● Leveraging our Trident Artificial Intelligence Platform.
TAI is a computational intelligence platform that identifies synthetic lethal sensitivities associated with degree of cell plasticity.
● Developing and commercializing Quatramer in collaboration with leading pharmaceutical companies.
In addition to our internal development programs, we actively seek opportunities to collaborate with recognized biopharmaceutical companies to develop Quatramer incorporating therapeutic payloads from their proprietary product portfolios.
● Leveraging our novel platform to develop a pipeline of high value Quatramer leads.
The tunability of our technology allows us to efficiently expand our pipeline of Quatramer, both on our own and in collaboration with others, through various combinations of targeted DNA encoded for anti-tumor cytokines and therapeutic payloads, which enables us to move into other areas of oncology, including immuno-oncology whereby we could increase the effectiveness of ICIs.
● Commercializing proprietary Quatramer based products, including HSB-1216, directly in the United States and with collaborators outside the United States.
We own HSB-1216 and our other proprietary pipeline and expect to maintain similar rights with respect to other proprietary Quatramer we develop.
● Continuing to extend and protect our product technology and Quatramer through our intellectual property portfolio.
We seek to protect our novel platform through U.S. and international patents as well as know-how and trade secrets relating to the design and manufacturing of our technology.
Recent Developments
On January 14, 2022, we closed the initial public offering of our common stock pursuant to which we issued and sold an aggregate of 3,750,000 shares of our common stock for a purchase price of $4.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $13.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses borne by us.
Trends and Uncertainties-COVID-19
The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 on our business, operations, pre-clinical and clinical development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, COVID-19 variants, and the future impact of COVID-19 on our clinical trial enrollment, clinical trial sites, CROs, third-party manufacturers, and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. To the extent possible, we are conducting business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications to employee travel and with many of our employees and consultants working remotely. We will continue to actively monitor the evolving situation related to COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. At this point, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and clinical development timelines and plans, including the resulting impact on our expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We did not recognize revenues for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include personnel costs associated with research and development activities, including third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials, stock based compensation and manufacture drug supplies and materials. Research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred.
We accrue costs incurred by external service providers, including contract research organizations and clinical investigators, based on estimates of service performed and costs incurred. These estimates include the level of services performed by third parties, patient enrollment in clinical trials, administrative costs incurred by third parties, and other indicators of the services completed. Based on the timing of amounts invoiced by service providers, we may also record payments made to those providers as prepaid expenses that will be recognized as expense in future periods as the related services are rendered.
We have incurred research and development expenses related to the development of HSB-1216. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase as we plan for and commence our clinical trials of HSB-1216 and HSB-888.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials of our product candidates, HSB-1216 and HSB-888, or any other product candidates we may develop or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our current and future product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of clinical trials of our current product candidates, as well as of any future clinical trials of our future product candidates and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
● uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
● the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including their safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
● significant and changing government regulations and regulatory guidance; and
● the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to slower than expected patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and consulting related expenses, including stock based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees and other corporate expenses, including legal fees relating to corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses and other operating costs that are not specifically attributable to research activities.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates. We also incur expenses associated with being a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq, director and officer insurance expenses, corporate governance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Acquired In-process Research and Development Expense
Research and development costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses and asset purchases are charged to research and development expense if the technology licensed has not reached technological feasibility which includes manufacturing, clinical, intellectual property and/or regulatory success which has no alternative future use. The licenses purchased by us require substantial completion of research and development and regulatory and marketing approval efforts in order to reach technological feasibility. As such, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the purchase price of licenses and assets acquired was classified as acquired in-process research and development expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Change in Redemption Value
We account for derivative instruments in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivative and Hedging, which establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other financial instruments or contracts, and requires recognition of all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. Our derivative financial instrument consists of an embedded feature contained in our convertible debt that we call the “redemption liability.”
The initial fair value of the redemption feature relating to the convertible debt instruments is treated as a debt discount and amortized over the term of the related debt using the straight-line method, which approximates the interest method. If a loan is paid in full, any unamortized financing costs will be removed from the related accounts and charged to operations. Amortization of debt discount is recorded as a component of interest expense. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2015-03, Interest - Imputation of Interest, the unamortized debt discount is presented in the accompanying balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of the related debt.
The redemption liability includes a provision that provides the noteholder with certain conversion and put rights at various conversion or redemption values as well as certain call options for us. The fair value of the redemption liability is calculated under Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, determined based upon a Probability-Weighted Expected Returns Method (“PWERM”). This PWERM was determined to be the most appropriate method of estimating the value of possible redemption or conversion outcomes over time, since we have not entered into a priced equity round through December 31, 2021. The significant assumptions utilized in these calculations are the possible exit scenarios (either a conversion of the principal and accrued interest of the Notes in the event of a Next Equity Financing, a repayment of the Notes and accrued interest in the event of a Corporate Transaction (as defined in the Notes) or a repayment of the Notes and accrued interest at maturity), the pre-money valuation of our common stock, the probabilities of such exit events occurring and discounts/premiums available to the noteholders at such measurement dates. At December 31, 2020, we assumed a 40% probability of a Next Equity Financing event occurring at IPO pricing and a 5% probability of a Corporate Transaction. The calculation of the redemption liability at December 31, 2021 is based upon the actual incremental value derived by the noteholders at the IPO date.
Deferred Offering Costs
Deferred offering consisted of legal, accounting, printing, and filing fees that the Company capitalized which will be offset against the proceeds from the our initial public offering.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $995,531, or 117.5%, to $1,842,803 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $847,272 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in expenses for pre-clinical activities of $512,279; stock based compensation expense of $406,024 related to research and development team members; and consulting expenses of $78,357. These increases were offset by decreases of $1,129 in various other expenses.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
Acquired in-process research and development expense was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $289,200 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $289,200. The in-process research and development expenses represent expenses incurred with the acquisition of Farrington that closed during the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $693,335, or 103.2%, to $1,365,214 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $671,879 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $598,665 in stock based compensation expense; $164,862 in accounting expenses; $8,665 in insurance expenses; and $3,080 in legal expenses. These increases were offset by a decreases of $34,786 in consulting expenses and $47,151 in various other expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $584,743, or 237.2%, to $831,277 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $246,534 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily related to the issuance of convertible promissory notes. See Note 4 of our consolidated financial statements.
Change in Redemption Value
The change in redemption value decreased by $2,195,137, or 605.6%, to $1,832,651 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $362,486 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as the redemption liability was re-evaluated in light of the actual fair value increment provided to the debt holders upon completion of our initial public offering in January 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred operating losses in the amount of approximately $3.2 million and have an accumulated deficit of approximately $6.9 million at December 31, 2021. We have financed our working capital requirements through December 31, 2021 primarily through the issuance of convertible promissory notes payable issued to related parties.
On January 14, 2022, we closed our initial public offering (“IPO”) of 3,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $4.00 per share. The gross proceeds from the IPO were $15.0 million, prior to deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering expenses. The net proceeds from the IPO were approximately $13.0 million. We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 562,500 shares of common stock at the public offering price less discounts and commissions, to cover over-allotments; however, this option expired unexercised. Additionally, and as a result of the completion of the IPO, all of our related party convertible debt and accrued interest was converted into an aggregate of 1,225,384 shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of the convertible note.
We believe our cash on hand after the IPO is sufficient to meet our operating obligations and capital requirements for at least twelve months from the issuance of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Thereafter, we may need to raise further capital through the sale of additional equity or debt securities or other debt instruments to support our future operations.
Cash Flow Activities for the Years Ended December 31, 2021and 2020
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,086,244 which consisted of net loss of $2,206,643, partially offset by $73,184 in non-cash charges and other adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities and $1,047,215 in net increase in operating accounts. The non-cash charges consist of stock compensation expenses of $1,239,269, amortization of debt discount of $666,566 offset by decrease in fair value of redemption liability of $1,832,651. The net increase in operating activities was primarily due to an increase of $850,293 in accounts payable and accrued expenses, an increase in accrued interest of $164,646 and a decrease of $32,276 in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $898,748. The net increase in financing activities was from net cash proceeds of $1,078,015 from the issuance of convertible promissory notes offset by deferred offering costs of $179,267.
Convertible Promissory Notes
Commencing in May 2017, we issued convertible promissory notes (the “Notes”) to certain investors to help finance our operations. The principal amount of such notes ranged from $1,000 to $300,000. Interest on the unpaid principal balance accrued at a rate of 5% per annum, computed on the basis of the actual number of days elapsed and a year of 365 days. Unless earlier converted into shares of our common stock or preferred stock (“Equity Securities”), the principal and accrued interest was due and payable by us on demand by the holders at any time after the earlier of (i) the maturity date of each Note and (ii) the closing of the Next Equity Financing. “Next Equity Financing” means the next sale or series of related sales of our Equity Securities pursuant to which we receive gross proceeds of not less than $5,000,000 for Notes issued in 2017 and through November 2020 and $7,500,000 for Notes issued after November 2020 (including the aggregate amount of debt securities converted into Equity Securities upon conversion or cancellation of Notes).
In general, the maturity date was two years from the date of issuance, except for the Notes issued in December 2020 and thereafter, in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $2,135,000, which had a maturity date of three years from the date of issuance. For Notes issued in 2017 through September 2018, the default interest rate of 20% was added to the Notes for the period after the maturity date (“default period”).
As discussed below, the Notes automatically converted into the type of Equity Securities issued in the Next Equity Financing upon closing of the IPO. The number of shares of such Equity Securities to be issued was equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the outstanding principal and unpaid accrued interest due on the Note on the date of conversion by the lesser of (i) 80% of the price paid per share of Equity Securities by the investors in the Next Equity Financing, or (ii) an equity valuation of $25 million ($50 million for notes issued after December 2020). In connection with the closing of our IPO, in January 2022, notes in the aggregate amount of approximately $3,920,640, including interest accrued thereon, were converted into an aggregate of 1,225,384 shares of our common stock.
On September 27, 2020, we issued a related party note holder notes (“Exchange Notes”) in exchange for seven Notes which were in default (“Original Notes”) at such time by more than 90 days. The Original Notes had a principal of approximately $265,000 and accrued interest of $37,000 at December 31, 2019. As of September 27, 2020, the aggregate outstanding principal of the Original Notes was approximately $265,000 and accrued interest (which included the default interest rate of 20% as described above) was approximately $71,000. The Exchange Notes took the then principal and accrued interest of the Original Notes and added an original issue discount of 37.5% to determine the new principal, which amounted to an aggregate of $537,968. The Company accounted for this transaction as a debt extinguishment, and the incremental amount of the principal of the notes payable of $201,737 was recorded to accumulated deficit (analogous to a “deemed dividend”), since the notes were with related parties, and included in the calculation of loss per share.
On September 27, 2020, we issued certain related party note holders Exchange Notes in exchange for five Notes payable which were in default. As of such date, the aggregate outstanding principal and interest was approximately $26,000, which included the 20% default interest rate. The new Exchange Notes in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $26,000 had substantially the same terms as the original Notes. There were no accounting entries required upon the re-issuance of such Exchange Notes.
Effective October 1, 2020, all Notes which matured, and were not repaid or converted, were rolled over on substantially the same terms as the Original Notes (“Rolled Over”). Approximately $805,000 of such Original Notes were Rolled Over through December 31, 2021, of which approximately $166,000 occurred prior to December 31, 2020 and $639,000 occurred between January 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021. Since the terms of the new notes are not substantially different from the Original Notes, this was not accounted for as a debt modification or debt extinguishment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The estimation process often may yield a range of potentially reasonable estimates of the ultimate future outcomes, and management must select an amount that falls within that range of reasonable estimates. Estimates are used in the following areas, among others: research and development expense recognition, valuation of common shares and stock options, allowances of deferred tax assets, valuation of debt related instruments, accrued expenses and liabilities, and cash flow assumptions regarding going concern considerations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Research and development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses include personnel costs associated with research and development activities, including third party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials and manufacture drug supplies and materials. We accrue for costs incurred by external service providers, including contract research organizations and clinical investigators, based on our estimates of service performed and costs incurred. These estimates include the level of services performed by third parties, patient enrollment in clinical trials, administrative costs incurred by third parties, and other indicators of the services completed.
Acquired in-process research and development
We have acquired, and may in the future acquire, rights to develop and commercialize new product candidates and/or other in-process research and development assets. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s ASC 730-10-25-1, Research and Development, the up-front acquisition or licensing payments are expensed as acquired in-process research and development provided that the drug has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing, and, absent obtaining such approval, have no alternative future use.
Stock based compensation
Stock based compensation represents the cost related to stock based awards granted to our employees, directors and consultants and our affiliates. We measure stock based compensation costs at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognize the cost over the requisite service period.
We recognize compensation costs resulting from the issuance of stock based awards to employees, non-employees and directors as an expense in our consolidated statements of operations over the requisite service period based on a measurement of fair value for each stock based award. The fair value of each option grant is estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value is amortized as compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. As of December 31, 2021, we were a private company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimated our expected stock volatility based on the historical data regarding the volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies. The expected term of stock options granted to non-employees was between five and seven years. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. The fair value of common stock was determined with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation expert when issuing stock options and computing its estimated stock based compensation expense and value of shares issued in acquiring product candidates. The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of significant levels of management judgment. In order to determine the fair value, we considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock, our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations; the likelihood of achieving various liquidity events; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions.
Fair value measurements
We apply ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement (“ASC 820”), which establishes a framework for measuring fair value and clarifies the definition of fair value within that framework. ASC 820 defines fair value as an exit price, which is the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in our principal or most advantageous market in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy established in ASC 820 generally requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The calculation of the redemption liability at December 31, 2021 is based upon the actual incremental value derived by the noteholders at the IPO date.
Debt discount and derivative instruments
The initial fair value of the redemption value relating to the convertible debt instruments is treated as a debt discount and amortized over the term of the related debt using the straight-line method, which approximates the interest method. If a loan is paid in full, any unamortized financing costs will be removed from the related accounts and charged to operations. Amortization of debt discount is recorded as a component of interest expense. In accordance with ASU 2015-03, Interest - Imputation of Interest, the unamortized debt discount is presented in the accompanying balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of the related debt.
We account for derivative instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivative and Hedging, which establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other financial instruments or contracts and requires recognition of all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. Our derivative financial instrument consists of an embedded feature contained in our convertible debt that is bifurcated and accounted for separately. See Note 4 of our audited consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Emerging growth companies can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have chosen to take advantage of the extended transition periods available to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies provided under the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with public company effective dates for complying with new or revised accounting standards. For as long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we also intend to take advantage of certain other exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies including, but not limited to, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory stockholder vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments not previously approved, exemption from the requirement of auditor attestation in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting and exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis). We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC, (ii) the end of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more during such fiscal year, (iii) the date on which we issue more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt in a three-year period or (iv) the end of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of our IPO.