ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Hippo Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we,” “our,” “Hippo” and “the Company” refer to the business and operations of Hippo Enterprises Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination and to Hippo Holdings Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company’s Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-259040) filed with the SEC on August 24, 2021.
Overview
Hippo is a different kind of home protection company, built from the ground up to provide a new standard of care and protection for homeowners. Our goal is to make homes safer and better protected so that customers spend less time worrying about the burdens of homeownership and more time enjoying their homes and the life within. Harnessing real-time data, smart home technology, and a growing suite of home services, we have created an integrated home protection platform.
The home insurance industry has long been defined by incumbents that we believe deliver a passive, high- friction experience to policyholders. We view these incumbents as constrained by outdated captive-agent distribution models, legacy technology, and strong incentives not to disrupt their businesses. Accordingly, the industry has not seen meaningful innovation in decades. We believe this results in a flawed customer experience that creates a transactional, adversarial relationship-one that pits insurance companies and their “policyholders” against each other in a zero-sum game. The outcome of this misalignment is an experience that is out of touch with the needs of modern homeowners.
As a digital-first, customer-centric company, we offer an improved customer value proposition and are well-positioned to succeed in this growing, $110 billion market. By making our policies fast and easy to buy, designing coverages around the needs of modern homeowners, and offering a proactive, white-glove claims experience, we have created an active partnership with our customers to better protect their homes, which saves our customers money and is expected to deliver a better economic outcome for Hippo.
Beyond a core insurance experience that is simple, intuitive, and human, we focus our resources on Hippo’s true promise: better outcomes for homeowners. Through our unique Smart Home program, customers may detect and address water, fire, and other issues before they become major losses. And we help our customers maintain their homes with on-demand maintenance advice and access to home check-ups designed to reduce the probability of future losses. In short, we have created an integrated home protection platform, which offers a growing suite of proactive features designed to prevent loss and provide greater peace of mind.
Our partnership with our customers is designed to create a virtuous cycle. By making homes safer, we help deliver better risk outcomes and increase customer loyalty, which improves our unit economics and customer lifetime value (“LTV”). This enables us to invest in expanding our product offering, customer value proposition, and marketing programs, which help attract more customers to the Hippo family. This growth generates more data and insights to fuel further innovation in our product experience and improved underwriting precision. The result is even safer homes and more loyal customers. We believe this virtuous cycle, combined with our significant existing scale, deep partnerships, and compelling unit economics, will propel Hippo to become a trusted household name synonymous with home protection.
Our Business Model
There are four key components to our economic model. First, as a managing general agent (“MGA”), we manage the customer-facing experience of insurance, including sales and marketing, underwriting, policy issuance
and administration, and claims administration. In exchange for these services, we earn recurring commission and fees associated with the policies we sell. While we have underwriting authority and responsibility for administering policies and claims, we do not take the bulk of the risk associated with these policies on our own balance sheet. Rather, we work with a diversified panel of highly-rated insurance companies who pay us commission in exchange for the opportunity to take the insurance risk on their own balance sheets.
We also earn commission income as a licensed insurance agency selling non-Hippo policies to our customers. Today, we earn agency commission income when we cross sell automobile, flood, earthquake, umbrella, and other policies to our homeowners customers. When a customer seeking homeowners insurance is located in an area where Hippo policies are unavailable, we work to place them with another carrier. When a particular home does not meet our underwriting criteria, we also work to place these customers with another carrier when possible. As we broaden our agency offerings, we expect to distribute additional types of insurance products offered by other carriers, which we expect will contribute to growth of this business. Commission income on these policies recurs as the policies renew, allowing us to earn margin relative to our customer acquisition cost.
The third way we generate revenue is through our carriers insurance platforms offering insurance-as-a-service to other MGAs who are willing to share economics with a carrier that can provide the capital and regulatory licenses needed for their business, commonly referred to as “fronting fees.” The economic benefits to us of providing this service extend beyond profit margins on these premiums and include capital efficiency benefits as the diversity of insurance offered allows us to secure more cost-effective reinsurance coverage. Given our diverse portfolio of homeowners insurance, the regulatory capital we are required to set aside for premium generated by these third parties is lower than these parties would need to set aside if they were to provide their own capital.
Finally, we earn revenue in the form of earned premium when we retain risk on our own balance sheet rather than ceding it to third-party reinsurers.
In the future, we anticipate generating additional revenue through our offering of value-added services such as home monitoring and maintenance.
Our Asset-Light Capital Model and Reinsurance
We have historically pursued an asset-light capital strategy to support the growth of our business. Even though we acquired a licensed carrier in 2020, we generally retain only as much risk on our balance sheet as is necessary to secure attractive terms from the reinsurers who bear the risk of the policies we sell. Those reinsurers usually insist that insurance companies like ours retain some risk to ensure alignment of interests. For policies written in 2021, we retained approximately 12% of the premium associated with Hippo homeowners policies on our own balance sheet and expect to see this increase modestly over time.
This strategy also helps support our growth: third-party reinsurance helps decrease the statutory capital required to support new business growth. As a result, we expect to be able to grow at an accelerated pace with lower capital investments upfront than we would otherwise require. We have a successful track record of securing strong reinsurance treaties, providing a solid foundation for a long-term, sustainable model.
Reinsurance
We utilize reinsurance primarily to support the growth of our new and renewal insurance business, to reduce the volatility of our earnings, and to optimize our capital management.
As a MGA, we underwrite homeowners insurance policies on behalf of our insurance company subsidiaries (Spinnaker Insurance Company and Spinnaker Specialty Insurance Company) and other non-affiliated third-party insurance carriers. These carriers purchase reinsurance from a variety of sources and in a variety of structures. In the basic form of this arrangement, fronting insurance carriers will typically cede a large majority of the total insurance premium they earn from customers, in return for a proportional amount of reinsurance protection. This is known as “ceding” premium and losses through a “quota share” reinsurance treaty.
The fronting carrier and the MGA are paid a percentage of the ceded premium as compensation for sales and marketing, underwriting, insurance, support, claims administration, and other related services (in totality, known as a ceding commission). As additional protection against natural catastrophes or other large loss events, the fronting carrier frequently purchases additional, non-proportional reinsurance.
Without reinsurance protection, the insurer would shoulder all of the insurance risk itself and would need incremental capital to satisfy regulators and rating agencies. Reinsurance allows a carrier to write more business while reducing its balance sheet exposure and volatility of earnings.
Proportional Reinsurance Treaties - Hippo
For our primary homeowners reinsurance treaty commencing in 2021, we secured proportional reinsurance from a diverse panel of nine third-party reinsurers with AM Best ratings of “A-” or better. We retain approximately 12% of the premium through our insurance company subsidiaries or our captive reinsurance company, RH Solutions Insurance Ltd. (“RHS”). Additionally, the reinsurance contracts are subject to contingent commission adjustments and loss participation features, which aligns our interests with those of our reinsurers. We also seek to further reduce our risk retention through purchases of non-proportional reinsurance described below in the section titled “Non-Proportional Reinsurance.”
Non-Proportional Reinsurance - Hippo
In 2021, we also purchased two forms of non-proportional reinsurance: excess of loss (“XOL”) and per-risk. Through our ownership of our insurance company subsidiaries, we are exposed to the risk of larger losses and natural catastrophe events that could occur on the risks we are assuming from policies underwritten by us or other MGAs. We are also exposed to this risk through our captive reinsurer, which takes on a share of the risk underwritten by our MGA business.
Our XOL program provides protection to us from catastrophes that could impact a large number of insurance policies. We buy XOL so that the probability of losses exceeding the protection purchased is no more than 0.4%, or equivalent to a 1:250 year return period. This reinsurance also caps losses at a level which protects us from all but the most severe catastrophic events.
Our per-risk program protects us from large, individual claims that are less likely to be associated with catastrophes, such as house fires. We have purchased this coverage for the benefit of our retained shares for losses on single policies in excess of $500,000.
Reinsurance - Other Spinnaker MGA Programs
As the fronting carrier for other MGAs, Spinnaker has reinsurance in place for several other MGA programs. Those programs are supported by a diversified panel of high-quality reinsurers similar to those on Hippo’s panel. The treaties are a mix of quota share and XOL in which approximately 80% to 100% of the risk is ceded. Spinnaker’s catastrophic risk retention is managed to a 1:250 year loss event across all programs.
With all our reinsurance programs, we are not relieved of our primary obligations to policyholders in the event of a default or the insolvency of our reinsurers. As a result, a credit exposure exists to the extent that any reinsurer fails to meet its obligations assumed in the reinsurance agreements. To mitigate this exposure to reinsurance insolvencies, we evaluate the financial condition of our reinsurers and, in certain circumstances, hold substantial collateral (in the form of funds withheld, qualified trusts, and letters of credit) as security under the reinsurance agreements.
Fiscal Year 2022 Reinsurance Programs
Proportional Reinsurance Treaties - Hippo
For our primary homeowners reinsurance treaty commencing in 2022, we secured proportional, quota share reinsurance from a diverse panel of eleven third-party reinsurers. All reinsurers are either rated “A-” Excellent or
better by AM Best, or are appropriately collateralized. We expect to retain approximately 10% of the premium through our insurance company subsidiaries or our captive reinsurance company, RHS. Additionally, the reinsurance contracts are subject to contingent commission adjustments and loss participation features, which aligns our interests with those of our reinsurers. Similar to the prior year, in the fiscal year 2022 reinsurance programs we saw increased use of loss participation features in the reinsurance agreements, which may increase the amount of risk retained by our insurance company subsidiaries in excess of our pro rata participation. We also seek to further reduce our risk retention through purchases of non-proportional reinsurance described below in the section titled “Non-Proportional Reinsurance.”
Non-Proportional Reinsurance - Hippo
We also purchase non-proportional XOL reinsurance. Through our ownership of our insurance company subsidiaries, we are exposed to the risk of natural catastrophe events that could occur on the risks we are assuming from policies underwritten by us or other MGAs. We are also exposed to this risk through our captive reinsurer, which takes on a share of the risk underwritten by our MGA business.
Our XOL program provides protection to us from catastrophes that could impact a large number of insurance policies. We buy XOL so that the probability of losses from a single occurrence exceeding the protection purchased is no more than 0.4%, or equivalent to a 1:250 year return period. This reinsurance protects us from all but the most severe catastrophic events.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On August 2, 2021, we completed the Business Combination and the PIPE Investment. For more information, see Notes 1 and 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part 2, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, Hippo Enterprises Inc. has been deemed the accounting “acquirer” or predecessor and Hippo Holdings Inc. is the successor SEC registrant, which means that Hippo Enterprises Inc.’s financial statements for periods prior to the Business Combination will be disclosed in Hippo Holdings Inc.’s periodic reports filed with the SEC.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, we need to continue to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to satisfy regulatory requirements and customary practices applicable to an SEC-registered and NYSE-listed company. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures imposed to contain it severely impacted businesses worldwide, including many in the insurance sector. Insurers of travel, events, or business interruption have been directly and adversely affected by claims from COVID-19 or the lock-down it engendered. Other insurance businesses, including property and casualty lines, have also been indirectly impacted in varying ways, including the dependency on in-person inspections during a time when such in-person interactions have been discouraged. In addition, insurance businesses dependent on office-based brokers and teams that are poorly equipped to work from home have been negatively impacted. The broader economic volatility may hurt insurers in other ways. For instance, with interest rates near all-time lows, many insurers have and may continue to see their return on capital drop, while those selling premium or discretionary products may see an increase in churn and a decrease in demand.
The magnitude and duration of the global pandemic and the impact of actions taken by governmental
authorities, businesses and consumers, including the availability and acceptance of vaccines, to mitigate health risks continue to create significant uncertainty, particularly as new strains of the virus emerge.
Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, our business has continued to grow.
•We write and place home insurance and other insurance products from our agencies that have so far been largely unaffected by COVID-19.
•Our systems are entirely cloud-based and accessible to our teams from any browser anywhere in the world. Customers’ phone calls are routed to our team’s laptops and answered and logged from wherever they happen to be. Internal communication has been via email, Slack, and Zoom since our founding. Our teams are able to access systems, support customers and collaborate with each other from anywhere, much as they did before the pandemic.
•Our customers’ experience has also been largely unaffected by COVID-19 related disruptions.
•We have initiated virtual inspections for our underwriting requirements and claims processing to keep our employees, agents, policy holders and potential policy holders safe. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic effects on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our production, loss ratios, recoverability of premium, our operations, and the fair value of our investment portfolio.
We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic effects on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our production, loss ratios, recoverability of premium, operations, and the fair value of our investment portfolio.
Production, Loss Ratios, and Recoverability of Premium
COVID-19 has reduced our ability to perform interior home inspections on risks we underwrite and may impact loss ratios as time at home has increased and has impacted collection of premium where moratoriums have been imposed restricting cancellation of policies for non-payment. During 2020 and 2021, we also witnessed increased cost of labor and costs associated with materials like timber. These higher costs have a direct impact to the cost of handling claims and result in more than normal loss expenses.
Operations
The COVID-19 pandemic has also had and continues to have a significant impact on our business operations, including with respect to employee availability and productivity, temporary increases in regulatory restrictions on operating activities (e.g., moratoria, rate actions or claim practices) that may impact our profitability, the availability and performance of third-party vendors, including technology development, home inspections and repairs, and marketing programs. We may also be impacted by cybersecurity risks related to our new dependency on a remote workforce.
Our Investment Portfolio
We seek to hold a high-quality, diversified portfolio of investments. During economic downturns, certain investments may default or become impaired due to deterioration in the financial condition of an insurer that guarantees an issuer’s payments on such investments. Given the conservative nature of our investment portfolio, we do not expect a material adverse impact on the value of our investment portfolio or a long-term negative impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows as it relates to COVID-19.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results
Our financial condition and results of operations have been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the following:
Our Ability to Attract New Customers
Our long-term growth will depend, in large part, on our continued ability to attract new customers to our platform. We intend to continue to drive new customer growth by highlighting our consumer-focused approach to homeowners insurance across multiple distribution channels. In particular:
•Our growth strategy is centered around accelerating our existing position in markets that we already serve by increasing our direct-to-consumer advertising, increasing the number of agents selling Hippo policies, and growing our network of partners within existing partner channels.
•In addition to efforts in states where we are currently selling insurance, we also expect to drive growth by expanding into new markets across the United States and by continuing to develop new strategic partnerships with key players involved in the real estate transaction ecosystem.
•Finally, we plan to deepen our relationships with our customers by offering value-added services, both directly and through partners, that are not specifically insurance products, such as home maintenance, home monitoring, and home appliance warranties.
Our ability to attract new customers depends on the pricing of our products, the offerings of our competitors, our ability to expand into new markets, and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts. Our ability to attract customers also depends on maintaining and strengthening our brand by providing superior customer experiences through our proactive, tech-enabled strategy.
We face competition from traditional insurers who have more diverse product offerings and longer established operating histories, as well as from new, technology-driven entrants who may pursue more horizontal growth strategies. These competitors may mimic certain aspects of our digital platform and offerings and have more types of insurance products and can offer customers the ability to “bundle” multiple coverage types together, which may be attractive to many customers.
Our Ability to Retain Customers
Our ability to derive significant lifetime value from our customer relationships depends, in part, on our ability to retain our customers over time. Strong retention allows us to build a recurring revenue base, generating additional premium term over term without material incremental marketing costs. Our customers typically become more valuable to us over time because retention rates have historically increased with the age of customer cohorts and because non-catastrophic loss frequency declines as cohorts mature.
As we expect to broadly retain our customers, we expect our book of business to evolve to be weighted more towards renewals versus new business over time, as is the case with our more mature competitors. We expect that this would enable us to benefit from the higher premium retention rates and inherently lower frequency of losses that characterize renewed premiums.
Our ability to retain customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our products, offerings of our competitors, and our ability to continue delivering exceptional customer service and support.
Our Ability to Expand Nationally Across the United States
We believe that national expansion will be a key driver of the long-term success of our business. As of December 31, 2021, we were authorized to sell Hippo Homeowners policies in 37 states. We expect to apply our highly scalable model nationally, with a tailored approach to each state that is driven by the regulatory environment and local market dynamics. We hope to expand rapidly and efficiently across different geographies while maintaining a high level of control over the specific strategy within each state.
We expect to benefit from our ability to provide insurance across an increasing number of states in the United States. State expansion should create a broader base from which to grow while increasing the geographic diversity in our base of customers and premium. We expect that this greater diversity will reduce the impact of catastrophic weather events in any one geographic region on our overall loss ratio, improving the predictability of our financial results over time as we scale. We believe that increased geographic diversity will also improve our ability to secure attractive terms from reinsurers, which would improve our overall cost structure and profitability.
Our Ability to Expand Fee Income and Premium Through Cross-Sales to Existing Customers
Our strategy to increase the value we are providing to our customers is to offer incremental services to assist our customers in better maintaining and protecting their homes. As we roll out these services, we expect to be able to generate incremental, non-risk-based service and fee income from our existing customers. We expect these home protection services not only to generate incremental revenue, but also to reduce losses for our customers, and-by implication-our loss ratios. Our success in expanding revenue and reducing losses by offering these services depends on our ability to market these services, our operational ability to deliver value to our customers, and the ability of these services to reduce the probability of loss for an average homeowner.
We are also in the early stages of cross-selling non-homeowner insurance products across our customer base. Cross-sales allow us to generate additional premium per customer, and ultimately higher revenue and fee income, without material incremental marketing spend. Our success in expanding revenue through cross-sales depends on our marketing efforts with new products, offerings of our competitors, additional expansion into new states, and the pricing of our bundled products.
Our Ability to Manage Risk
We leverage data, technology, and geographic diversity to help manage risk. For instance, we obtain dynamic data from various sources and use advanced statistical methods to model that data into our pricing algorithm. Incorporating these external data sources and utilizing the experience gained with our own customer base should lead to better underwriting, reduced loss frequency, and-adjusting for weather related events-lower loss ratios over time. While our current reinsurance framework helps us manage the volatility of earnings, reducing our overall gross loss ratio is critical to our success. Our ability to incorporate new data sources as they become available and to use them to improve our ability to accurately and competitively price risk is central to our growth strategy.
Seasonality of Customer Acquisition
Seasonal patterns can impact both our rate of customer acquisition and the incurrence of claims losses. Based on historical experience, existing and potential customers move more frequently during the summer months of the year, compared to the rest of the calendar year. As a result, we may see greater demand for new or expanded insurance coverage, and increased engagement resulting in proportionately more growth during the third quarter. We expect that as we grow, expand geographically, and launch new products, the impact of seasonal variability on our rate of growth may decrease.
Additionally, seasonal weather patterns impact the level and amount of claims we receive. These patterns include hurricanes, wildfires, and coastal storms in the fall, cold weather patterns and changing home heating needs in the winter, and tornados and hailstorms in the spring and summer. The mix of geographic exposure and products within our customer base impacts our exposure to these weather patterns, and as we diversify our base of premium such that our exposure more closely resembles the industry exposure, we should see the impact of these events on our business more closely resemble the impact on the broader industry.
A More Diverse and Resilient Business Model
There are four components in our economic model:
1. MGA
2. Agency
3. Insurance as a Service
4. Risk Retention
Prior to our acquisition of Spinnaker on August 31, 2020, our economics were driven by our MGA and Agency business. We now have a more diverse and resilient model, as well as the infrastructure to support our growth.
This structural evolution of our business model has several implications:
Substantive: We are retaining more risk on our balance sheet and accordingly both our net earned premium and our net loss and loss adjustment expenses are expected to be higher.
Financial presentation: The direct acquisition costs associated with the premium written on our carrier will shift from sales and marketing to insurance related expense and will be offset by the corresponding ceding commission and amortized over the lifetime of the policy. Only the excess ceding commission over our direct acquisition costs will be recognized as revenue. All else being equal, for the exact same amount of premium we expect:
•our excess ceding commission recorded as revenue will be lower
•our sales and marketing expense will be lower
•our bottom-line results will be unchanged
When comparing our year-over-year financial results and analyzing trends, we need to take into consideration these structural changes and their implications.
Acquisition of Spinnaker Insurance Company
In August 2020, we completed the acquisition of Spinnaker, giving us direct control over the insurance and reinsurance placement aspect of our business. We believe the Spinnaker acquisition will enable us to maintain a capital-light model while retaining risk in a way that aligns our interests with those of the reinsurance market. We also believe it will benefit our economics; while we expect to continue writing business on third-party carriers, we will no longer need to pay a fee to third parties for carrier services on the portion of business we write on Spinnaker. Our financial results in 2021 reflect a full year of Spinnaker’s operations compared to a partial year in 2020. For more information, see the section titled “Results of Operations” below.
Prior to the Spinnaker acquisition, Hippo received MGA commission income for the policies placed by Hippo on Spinnaker paper, and we recognized this commission income at the policy effective dates, net of risk retained by Hippo. The expense incurred for third-party sales commissions (i.e., acquisition costs) was presented on a gross basis in the statement of operations for the period January 1, 2020 to August 31, 2020, and was included in a sales and marketing line item and was not offset against the commission revenue.
After the acquisition, we have consolidated the results of Spinnaker, which impact our results of operations as follows:
•Premium for the risk retained by us is recognized on a pro-rata basis over the policy period.
•Ceding commission on premium ceded to third-party reinsurers is deferred as a liability and recognized on a pro-rata basis over the term of the policy, net of acquisition costs. To the extent ceding commission received exceeds direct acquisition costs, the excess is presented as revenue in the commission income, net line on our statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The consolidated company (Hippo and Spinnaker) began to earn ceding commission on premium ceded to third-party reinsurers in September 2020 and the ceding commission is recognized net of acquisition costs, on a pro-rata basis over the term of the policy.
Acquisition costs incurred to acquire the Spinnaker policies are deferred and amortized over the term of the policies. Those costs include sales commissions, premium taxes, and board and bureau fees. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs is included in insurance-related expenses on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Loss and LAE incurred, net of losses ceded to reinsurers, will be reflected in the statement of operations for the risk we retain on the Spinnaker policies.
Investment income, net representing interest earned from fixed maturity securities, short-term securities and other investments, and the gains or losses from the sale of investments is presented as part of revenue.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP as determined by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), and pursuant to the regulations of the SEC.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Gross Written Premium
Gross written premium is the amount received or to be received for insurance policies written or assumed by us and our affiliates as a carrier, without reduction for policy acquisition costs, reinsurance costs, or other deductions. In addition, gross written premium includes amounts received from our participation in our own reinsurance treaty. The volume of our gross written premium in any given period is generally influenced by:
•New business submissions;
•Binding of new business submissions into policies;
•Bound policies going effective;
•Renewals of existing policies; and
•Average size and premium rate of bound policies.
Ceded Written Premium
Ceded written premium is the amount of gross written premium written or assumed by us and our affiliates as a carrier that we cede to reinsurers. We enter into reinsurance contracts to limit our exposure to losses, as well as to provide additional capacity for growth. Ceded written premium is treated as a reduction from gross written premium written during a specific period of time over the reinsurance contract period in proportion to the period of risk covered. The volume of our ceded written premium is impacted by the level of our gross written premium and decisions we make to increase or decrease retention levels.
Net Earned Premium
Net earned premium represents the earned portion of our gross written premium for insurance policies written or assumed by us and less ceded written premium (any portion of our gross written premium that is ceded to third-party reinsurers under our reinsurance agreements). We earn written premiums on a pro-rata basis over the term of the policies.
Commission Income, Net Includes:
a.MGA Commission: We operate as an MGA for multiple insurers. We design and underwrite insurance products on behalf of the insurers culminating in the sale of insurance policies. We earn recurring commission and policy fees associated with the policies we sell. While we have underwriting authority and responsibility for administering claims (see Claim Processing Fee below), we do not take the risk associated with policies on our own balance sheet. Rather, we work with affiliated and unaffiliated carrier platforms and a diversified panel of highly rated reinsurance companies who pay us commission in exchange for the opportunity to take that risk on their balance sheets. Our performance obligation associated with these contracts is the placement of the policy, which is met on the effective date. Upon
issuance of a new policy, we charge policy fees and inspection fees (see Service and Fee Income below), retain our share of ceding commission, and remit the balance premium to the respective insurers. Subsequent ceding commission adjustments arising from policy changes such as endorsements are recognized when the adjustments can be reasonably estimated.
b.Agency Commission: We also operate licensed insurance agencies that are engaged solely in the sale of policies, including non-Hippo policies. For these policies, we earn a recurring agency commission from the carriers whose policies we sell, which is recorded in the commission income, net line on our statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Similar to the MGA businesses, the performance obligation from the agency contracts is placement of the insurance policies.
For both MGA and insurance agency activities, we recognize commission received from insurers for the sale of insurance contracts as revenue at a point in time on the policy effective dates. Cash received in advance of policy effective dates is recorded on the consolidated balance sheets, representing our portion of commission and premium due to insurers and reinsurers, and hold this cash in trust for the benefit of the insurers and reinsurers as fiduciary liabilities. The MGA commission is subject to adjustments, higher or lower (commonly referred to as “commission slide”), depending on the underwriting performance of the policies placed by us. We are required to return a portion of our MGA commission due to commission slide received on the policies placed by MGA if the underwriting performance varies due to higher Hippo programs’ loss ratio from contractual performance of the Hippo programs’ loss ratio or if the policies are cancelled before the term of the policy; accordingly, we reserve for commission slide using estimated Hippo programs’ loss ratio performance, and a cancellation reserve is estimated as a reduction of revenue for each period presented in our statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
c.Ceding Commission: We receive commission based on the premium we cede to third-party reinsurers for the reimbursement for our acquisition and underwriting services. Excess ceding commission over the cost of acquisition is included in the commission income, net line on our statements of operations and comprehensive loss. For the policies that we write on our own carrier as MGA, we recognize this commission as ceding commission on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss. We earn commission on reinsurance premium ceded in a manner consistent with the recognition of the earned premium on the underlying insurance policies, on a pro-rata basis over the terms of the policies reinsured. We record the portion of ceding commission income, which represents reimbursement of successful direct acquisition costs related to the underlying policies as an offset to the applicable direct acquisition costs.
d.Carrier Fronting Fees: Through our insurance-as-a-service business, we earn recurring fees from the MGA programs we support. We earn fronting fees in a manner consistent with the recognition of the earned premium on the underlying insurance policies, on a pro-rata basis over the terms of the policies. This revenue is included in the commission income, net line on our statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
e.Claim Processing Fees: As an MGA, we receive a fee that is calculated as a percent of the premium from the insurers in exchange for providing claims adjudication services. The claims adjudication services are provided over the term of the policy and recognized ratably over the same period. This revenue is included in the commission income, net line on our statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Service and Fee Income
Service and fee income mainly represents policy fees and other revenue. We directly bill policyholders for policy fees and collect and retain fees per the terms of the contracts between us and our insurers. Similar to the commission revenue, we estimate a cancellation reserve for policy fees using historical information. The performance obligation associated with these fees is satisfied at a point in time upon completion of the underwriting process, which is the policy effective date. Accordingly, we recognize all fees as revenue on the policy effective date.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income represents interest earned from fixed maturity securities, short-term investments and other investments, and the gains or losses from the sale of investments. Our cash and invested assets primarily consist of fixed-maturity securities, and may also include cash and cash equivalents, equity securities, and short-term investments. The principal factors that influence net investment income are the size of our investment portfolio and the yield on that portfolio. As measured by amortized cost (which excludes changes in fair value, such as changes in interest rates), the size of our investment portfolio is mainly a function of our invested equity capital along with premium we receive from our customers less payments on customer claims.
Net investment income also includes an insignificant amount of net realized gains (losses) on investments, which are a function of the difference between the amount received by us on the sale of a security and the security’s amortized cost, as well as any allowances for credit losses recognized in earnings, if any.
Expenses
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Loss and loss adjustment expenses represent the costs incurred for losses net of amounts ceded to reinsurers. We enter into reinsurance contracts to limit our exposure to potential losses as well as to provide additional capacity for growth. The expenses are a function of the size and term of the insurance policies, the loss experience and loss participation features associated with the underlying risks. LAE are based on actuarial assumptions and management judgements, including losses incurred during the period and changes in estimates from prior periods. Loss and LAE also include employee compensation (including stock-based compensation and benefits) of our claims processing teams, as well as allocated occupancy costs and related overhead based on headcount.
Insurance-Related Expenses
Insurance-related expenses primarily consist of amortization of direct acquisition commission costs and premium taxes incurred on the successful acquisition of business written on a direct basis and credit card processing fees not charged to our customers. Insurance-related expenses also include employee compensation (including stock-based compensation and benefits) of our underwriting teams, as well as allocated occupancy costs and related overhead based on headcount. Insurance-related expenses are offset by a portion of ceding commission income, which represents reimbursement of successful acquisition costs related to the underlying policies. Additionally, insurance-related expenses include the costs of providing bound policies and delivering claims services to our customers. These costs include underwriting technology service costs including software, data services used for performing underwriting, and third-party call center costs in addition to personnel-related costs.
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation (including stock-based compensation and benefits) for our technology staff, which includes technology development, infrastructure support, actuarial, and third-party services. Technology and development also include allocated facility costs and related overhead based on headcount.
We expense development costs as incurred, except for costs related to internal use software development projects, which are capitalized and subsequently depreciated over the expected useful life of the developed software. We expect our technology and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and develop activities to achieve our technology development roadmap.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of sales commission, advertising costs, and marketing
expenditures, as well as employee compensation (including stock-based compensation and benefits) for employees
engaged in sales, marketing, data analytics, and customer acquisition. Sales and marketing also include allocated facility costs and related overhead based on headcount.
We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing to attract and acquire new customers and to increase our brand awareness. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase over time as we continue to hire additional personnel to scale our business, increase commission payments to our produces and partners as a result of our premium growth, and invest in developing a nationally-recognized brand. We expect that sales and marketing costs will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period-to-period as a percentage of revenue in the near-term. We expect that-in the long-term-our sales and marketing costs will decrease as a percentage of revenue as we continue to drive customer acquisition efficiencies and as the proportion of renewals to our total business increases.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation (including stock-based compensation and benefits) for our finance, human resources, legal, and general management functions, as well as facilities, insurance, and professional services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and other regulatory bodies, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Interest and Other (Income) Expense
Interest and other (income) expense after the Business Combination in August 2021 primarily consists of fair value adjustments on outstanding warrants. Prior to the Business Combination interest and other (income) expense primarily consisted of interest expense incurred for convertible promissory notes, fair value adjustments on preferred stock warrant liabilities, and fair value adjustments on the embedded derivative on our convertible promissory notes.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we record deferred income tax assets and liabilities based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial statement and income tax basis of existing assets and liabilities. We measure these differences using the enacted statutory tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which differences are expected to reverse. We recognize the effect on deferred income taxes of a change in tax rates in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets and liabilities to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including historical levels of income, expectations, and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
Key Operating and Financial Metrics and Non-GAAP Measures
We regularly review the following key operating and financial metrics in order to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends in our business, prepare financial projections, and make strategic decisions.
The non-GAAP financial measures below have not been calculated in accordance with GAAP and should be considered in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, GAAP results. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indicator of our operating performance, liquidity, or cash flows generated by operating, investing, and financing activities, as there may be significant factors or trends that it fails to address. We caution investors that non-GAAP financial information-by its nature-departs from traditional accounting conventions. Therefore, its use can make it difficult to compare our current results with our results from other reporting periods and with the results of other companies.
Our management uses non-GAAP financial measures, in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, as an integral part of managing our business and to, among other things: (i) monitor and evaluate the performance of our business operations and financial performance; (ii) facilitate internal comparisons of the historical operating performance of our business operations; (iii) review and assess the operating performance of our management team;
(iv) analyze and evaluate financial and strategic planning decisions regarding future operating investments; and (v) plan for and prepare future annual operating budgets and determine appropriate levels of operating investments.
The results of Spinnaker since the date of acquisition (August 31, 2020) have been consolidated with ours and are reflected in the following table.
Total Generated Premium
We define Total Generated Premium (“TGP”) as the aggregate written premium placed across all of our business platforms for the period presented. We measure TGP as it reflects the volume of our business irrespective of choices related to how we structure our reinsurance treaties, the amount of risk we retain on our own balance sheet, or the amount of business written in our capacity as an MGA, agency, or as an insurance carrier/reinsurer. We calculate TGP as the sum of:
i)Gross written premium (“GWP”) - a GAAP measure defined below; and
ii)Gross placed premium - premium of policies placed with third-party insurance companies, for which we do not retain insurance risk and for which we earn a commission payment, and policy fees charged by us to the policyholders on the effective date of the policy.
Our Total Generated Premium for the year ended December 31, 2021 grew 82% year-over-year to $606.1 million from $333.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth was driven primarily by growth across channels in existing states, expansion into five new states compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, expansion of our independent agent network, launch of new strategic partnerships, maintaining premium retention levels, and growth of non-Hippo written premium supported by our insurance company Spinnaker.
Our Total Generated Premium for the year ended December 31, 2020 does not include $71.8 million of written premium from non-Hippo programs written by Spinnaker prior to the acquisition which closed on August 31, 2020.
The following table presents Total Generated Premium for the years ended December 31, (in millions):
The decrease in Gross Placed Premium is a direct result of the Spinnaker acquisition. After the acquisition, premium that would have been placed as a MGA and included in Gross Placed Premium is now recognized as Gross Written Premium as we take on the risk.
Total Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenue was $91.2 million, an increase of $39.6 million compared to $51.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by increases in net earned premium, commission income, and service and fee income of $21.8 million, $10.4 million, and $8.2 million, respectively. These amounts were partially offset by a decrease in net investment income of $0.8 million.
Net Loss Attributable to Hippo
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss attributable to Hippo was $371.4 million, an increase of $229.9 million compared to $141.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by an increase in interest and other expense of $172.9 million, due to an increase in fair value losses recorded on preferred stock warrants and the derivative liability on our convertible promissory notes, and interest expense. In addition, there was an increase in losses and loss adjustment expense of $59.1 million due the growth in our business in which we retain risk, abnormally high weather-related losses, including the Texas winter storm in February 2021 (“Uri”), and a higher concentration in areas impacted by the weather-related losses. There was also an increase in sales and marketing expense of $25.6 million. These amounts were partially offset by a gain of $47.0 million recognized upon the extinguishment of our convertible promissory notes and related derivative liability and an increase in revenues of $39.6 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure, as net loss attributable to Hippo excluding net investment income, depreciation and amortization, interest expense, stock-based compensation, other non-cash fair market value adjustments for outstanding preferred stock warrants and derivative liabilities on the convertible promissory notes, and contingent consideration for one of our acquisitions and other transactions that we consider to be unique in nature, gain on extinguishment of debt, and income taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted EBITDA loss was $172.4 million, an increase of $82.0 million compared to $90.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to an increase in our loss and loss adjustment expense due to the growth in our business in which we retain risk, abnormally high weather-related losses, including Uri, and a higher concentration in areas impacted by the weather-related losses. The
increase was also due to an increase in employee-related costs, excluding stock-based compensation, driven by an increase in headcount to support our growth.
The following table provides a reconciliation from net loss attributable to Hippo to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented (in millions):
Gross Loss Ratio
Gross Loss Ratio, expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of the Gross Losses and LAE to the Gross Earned Premium (in millions).
The following table provides a reconciliation of Gross Loss Ratio by named event Property Claims Services (“PCS”) and non-PCS events.
(1) Defined as the excess portion of non-weather losses in excess of $0.1 million loss per claim
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Gross Loss Ratio was 138% compared with 109% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the impact of abnormal PCS catastrophic events, including Texas winter storm Uri in February 2021 and an elevated volume of other catastrophic events compared to prior year, with our larger events involving wind, wildfires, and hailstorms. We also experienced unfavorable prior year development of $6.2 million, primarily from Hurricane Sally, related to non-Hippo program business supported
by our carrier, Spinnaker. Texas winter storm Uri was 26 percentage points of our Gross Loss Ratio for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the company released $15.0 million of reserves as a result of favorable development from prior quarters, partially offset by unfavorable prior year development as mentioned above. As a result, the fourth quarter gross loss ratio improved by 13 percentage points, 4 percentage points of which related to PCS events and 9 percentage points of which related to non-PCS events. The full year 2021 Gross Loss Ratio was adversely impacted by less than 2 percentage points, primarily from the Hurricane Sally development mentioned above, which was completely ceded to reinsurers.
Net Loss Ratio
Net loss ratio expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of the net losses and LAE, to the net earned premium (in millions).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Net Loss Ratio was 217% compared with 148% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in our loss and loss adjustment expense as a result of growth in our business where we retain risk, the impact of abnormally high PCS catastrophic events, and loss participation features in several of our proportional reinsurance treaties.
The fourth quarter reserve releases produced a 34 percentage point favorable impact on our fourth quarter net loss ratio, 18 percentage points of which related to PCS events and 16 percentage points of which related to non-PCS events. There was no impact on the full year 2021 net loss ratio from prior period reserve changes because, as mentioned above, the exposure was completely ceded to reinsurers.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations data for the periods indicated (dollars in millions):
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Earned Premium
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net earned premium was $38.9 million, an increase of $21.8 million compared to $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases are due to year-over-year growth of our total book of business and our acquisition of Spinnaker, which closed on August 31, 2020.
The following table presents gross written premium, ceded written premium, net written premium, change in unearned premium, and net earned premium for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions).
Commission Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, commission income was $37.5 million, an increase of $10.4 million, or 38%, compared to $27.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in ceding commission and agency commissions of $20.1 million and $3.9 million, respectively. This amount was partially offset by a decrease in our MGA commission of $13.5 million as a direct result of the structural change in our business due to the acquisition of Spinnaker.
Service and Fee Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, service and fee income was $14.5 million, an increase of $8.2 million, or 130%, compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to increased policy fees and other revenue due to an increase in the volume of policies placed by our MGA services.
Net Investment Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net investment income was $0.3 million, a decrease of $0.8 million, compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due primarily to a decrease in interest rates compared to the same period in the prior year. We mainly invested in corporate securities, residential mortgage-backed securities, and other fixed maturities securities issued by the U.S. government and agencies.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, loss and loss adjustment expenses were $84.4 million, an increase of $59.1 million, compared to $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in our loss and loss adjustment expense as a result of the growth in our business in which we retain risk as well as loss participation clauses in several of our proportional reinsurance treaties, and a higher concentration in areas impacted by PCS catastrophic-related losses. Despite the Texas winter storm in February 2021 being a large gross event for the Company, our reinsurance protection limited our exposure on a net basis.
Insurance-Related Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, insurance-related expenses were $41.7 million, an increase of $22.4 million or 116%, compared to $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to a $10.2 million increase in amortization of deferred direct acquisition costs, $4.1 million increase in underwriting costs, $4.2 million increase in employee-related costs, and $2.3 million increase in amortization expense attributable to capitalized internal use software. These amounts were partially offset by a decrease of $3.1 million in profit sharing expenses.
The primary components of insurance related expenses are listed below (in millions):
(1) included in Employee-related costs are $4.2 million and $0.8 million related to our underwriting department, respectively.
(2) included in Other are $5.3 million and $1.4 million related to overhead allocations, consultants, product filings, agent appointment fees, and other operating expenses, respectively.
Direct acquisition costs were $36.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $23.0 million were offset by ceding commission income.
Direct acquisition costs were $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $0.9 million was offset by ceding commission income.
Technology and Development Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, technology and development expenses were $36.2 million, an increase of $18.2 million, or 101%, compared to $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in employee-related costs of $18.9 million, including an increase in stock-based compensation of $6.6 million, driven by an increase in headcount to support our long-term product roadmap and business growth. The increase was also driven by a $1.5 million increase in consulting and professional services in support of our growth initiatives. These amounts were partially offset by an increase in capitalized costs for the development of internal use software of $6.4 million.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, sales and marketing expenses were $95.0 million, an increase of $25.6 million, or 37%, compared to $69.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in employee-related expenses of $12.5 million, including an increase in stock-based compensation of $2.9 million, driven by an increase in headcount to support our growth, an increase of $16.7 million in advertising costs, an increase of $7.0 million in service fees related to the issuance of a convertible promissory note, and an increase of $1.8 million in licensing fees. These amounts were partially offset by a decrease in direct acquisition costs of $22.2 million, which have now been deferred and the related amortization included in insurance related expenses after the acquisition of Spinnaker in the third quarter of 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses were $49.2 million, an increase of $12.4 million, or 34%, compared to $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in employee-related expenses of $4.6 million, net of a decrease in stock-based compensation of $1.6 million, driven by an increase in headcount to support our growth. The increase was also driven by an increase in corporate and directors and officers insurance expense of $3.5 million and an increase in professional services and consulting expenses of $3.3 million, related to the increased cost of public company requirements.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on the extinguishment of the convertible promissory notes and related derivative liability of $47.0 million compared to none in the prior year.
Interest and Other (Income) Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest and other (income) expense was $198.9 million, an increase of $172.9 million compared to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in fair value losses recorded on preferred stock warrants of $105.4 million due to the increase in the fair market value of our preferred stock and an increase in fair value losses recorded on the derivative liability on our convertible promissory notes of $54.8 million through the settlement in connection with the Business Combination. In addition, interest expense on the convertible promissory notes increased by $22.5 million. These amounts were partially offset by fair value gains on warrants of $10.3 million.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, income tax expense was $0.7 million, an increase of $2.5 million, compared to a benefit of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the $2.0 million deferred tax benefit that we recognized in 2020 in connection with the acquisition of Spinnaker, which was partially offset by state income taxes of $0.2 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
In July 2020, we issued shares of our Series E Convertible Preferred Stock for aggregate proceeds of $150 million.
In November and December 2020, we raised an additional $365.0 million of cash by issuing convertible promissory notes.
In August 2021, we completed the Business Combination. In connection with this transaction, we received net proceeds of approximately $450 million. We also received proceeds of $29.0 million from the exercise of preferred stock warrants immediately prior to the Business Combination.
We are a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) of New York, which provides secured borrowing capacity. Our borrowing capacity as of December 31, 2021, is $22.9 million, and there were no outstanding amounts under this agreement.
Our existing sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, we had $818.7 million of cash and restricted cash and $64.0 million of available-for-sale fixed income securities and short-term investments.
To date, we have funded operations primarily with issuances of convertible preferred stock, convertible promissory notes, and from net proceeds from the PIPE Investment, the Business Combination, and revenue. Until we can generate sufficient revenue and other income to cover operating expenses, working capital, and capital expenditures, we expect the funds raised as discussed above to fund our cash needs. Our capital requirements depend on many factors, including the volume of issuance of insurance policies, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, investments in information technology systems, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. In the future, we may raise additional funds through the issuance of debt or equity securities or through borrowing. We cannot assure that such funds will be available on favorable terms, or at all.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in millions):
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $124.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $59.1 million, from $65.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to an increase in our loss and loss adjustment expense due to the growth in our business in which we retain risk, abnormally high weather-related losses, including Uri, and a higher concentration in areas impacted by the weather-related losses. The increase was also due to an increase in employee-related costs of $35.7 million, excluding stock-based compensation, driven by an increase in headcount to support our growth. These amounts were partially offset by other changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, due primarily to purchases of investments.
Cash used in investing activities was $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to maturities and sales of investments partially offset by cash paid for acquisition, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $480.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of net proceeds from the Business Combination of $450.3 million and proceeds from the exercise of preferred stock warrants of $29.0 million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $518.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We are party to various contractual obligations that we will be required to satisfy over the short and long term. The majority are discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and primarily include purchase commitments, lease payments, and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense. The estimation of the unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses is based on various complex and subjective judgments. Actual losses paid may differ, perhaps significantly, from the reserve estimates reflected in our consolidated financial statements. Similarly, the timing of payment of our estimated losses is not fixed and there may be significant changes in actual payment activity. The assumptions used in estimating the likely payments due by period are based on our historical claims payment experience and industry payment patterns, but due to the inherent uncertainty in the process of estimating the timing of such payments, there is a risk that the amounts paid can be significantly different from the amounts disclosed.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, which requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Our consolidated financial statements include amounts that, either by their nature or due to requirements of GAAP, are determined using best estimates and assumptions. Management has discussed and reviewed the development, selection, and disclosure of critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. While we believe that the amounts included in our consolidated financial statements reflect our best judgment, actual amounts could ultimately materially differ from those currently presented.
For further information, see Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the audited consolidated financial statements.
Revenue
For a description of policies with respect to revenue recognition, see “Components of Results of Operations - Revenue” in this section along with Note 1 in the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in our consolidated financial statements.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserve
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves
Recorded loss and loss adjustment expense reserves represents management’s best estimate of the amounts yet to be paid for all loss and loss adjustment expenses that will be paid on claims that occurred during the period and prior, whether those claims are currently known or unknown. We hold a provision for loss and loss adjustment expense reserve as of a given date based on actuarial analysis.
Loss and loss adjustment expense reserves at December 31, 2021 are the amount of ultimate loss and loss adjustment expense less the paid amounts as of December 31, 2021.
Ultimate loss and loss adjustment expense is the sum of the following items:
1.Loss and loss adjustment expense paid through a given evaluation date
2.Case reserves for loss and loss adjustment expense for losses that have been reported but not yet paid as of a given evaluation date
3.IBNR for loss and loss adjustment expense include an estimate for future loss payments on incurred claims not yet reported and for expected development on reported claims
Case reserves are established within the claims adjustment process based on all known circumstances of a claim at the time. In addition, IBNR reserves are established by the Company based on reported loss and loss adjustment expenses and estimates of ultimate loss and loss adjustment expenses based on generally accepted actuarial reserving techniques that consider quantitative loss experience data and qualitative factors as appropriate.
Inherent in the estimates of ultimate loss and loss adjustment expenses are expected trends in claims severity and frequency among other factors that could vary significantly as claims are settled. The Company’s loss and loss adjustment expense reserves are continually reviewed, and adjustments, if any, are reflected in current operations in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in the period in which they become known. The establishment of new loss and loss adjustment expense reserves or the adjustment of previously recorded loss and loss adjustment expense reserves could result in significant positive or negative changes to our financial condition for any particular period. While the Company believes that it has made a reasonable estimate of loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, the ultimate loss experience may not be as reliably predicted as may be the case with other insurance expenses, and it is possible that actual loss and loss adjustment expenses will be higher or lower than the loss and loss adjustment reserve amount recorded by the Company.
Information Used in the Determination of the Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserve
In order to estimate the provision for the recorded loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, we use information developed from both internal and independent external sources. This includes internal and external loss and claim count emergence patterns, pricing change information, internal and external loss and exposure trend information, as well as underwriting process changes. In addition, we use commercially available risk analysis models, and overall market share assumptions to estimate our loss and loss adjustment expense reserves related to specific loss events.
Actuarial Methods Used in the Determination of the Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserve
When the applicable information has been obtained, we use several actuarial methods to create estimates of the ultimate incurred losses in connection with the underwritten business. Our actuarial analysis uses inputs from our underwriting and claims departments, including pricing assumptions. The actuarial methods used to estimate loss and loss adjustment expense reserves are reported and/or paid loss and claim count development methods as well as reported and/or paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods.
As appropriate, unallocated loss adjustment expenses are estimated using a Paid to Paid Method, whereby, historical paid unallocated loss adjustment expense is compared as a ratio to the paid loss and allocated loss adjustment expense amounts for the same calendar period. Based on this information, selected ratios are applied to the case reserve and estimated IBNR for loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses to estimate the provision for the unpaid unallocated loss adjustment expense.
Based on the methods used for each accident period, estimates of ultimate loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses are selected. The Chief Executive Officer, President, Chief Risk Officer and Chief Financial Officer, meet on a quarterly basis to review the recommendations made by the actuarial department, and determine the best estimate to be recorded for the reserve for loss and loss adjustment expense reserves on the balance sheet.
Significant Assumptions Employed in the Recording of the Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserve
The most significant assumptions used in the determination of the recorded reserve for loss and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2021 are historical aggregate claim reporting and payment patterns, which is assumed to be indicative of future loss development and trends. Additionally, claim counts are used for analyses relating to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, earthquakes, and wildfires as losses from these events are inherently more difficult to estimate due to the potential exposure of the catastrophic events. Other assumptions considered include information developed from internal and independent external sources such as premium, rate and cost trends, litigation and regulatory trends, legislative activity, climate change, social and economic patterns.
The above assumptions most significantly influence our determination of initial expected loss ratios and expected loss reporting and payment patterns which are the key inputs that impact variability in the estimate of the reserve for loss and loss adjustment expenses. While there can be no assurance that any of the above assumptions as utilized will prove to be correct, we believe that these assumptions represent a realistic and appropriate basis for estimating the reserve for loss and loss adjustment expense reserves.
The following table summarizes gross and net reserves for unpaid loss and LAE as of December 31, (in millions):
Sensitivity Analysis
The table below shows the impact of reasonably likely changes to our held unpaid amounts after consideration of our proportional and non-proportional reinsurance as of December 31, 2021.
The following table illustrates the impact on the loss and loss adjustment expense reserve of a 10% increase and decrease applied to the subject ultimate loss and loss adjustment expenses (in millions):
For additional information refer to Note 10, Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, of the audited consolidated financial statements.
Reinsurance Recoverable
We also estimated the amount of reinsurance recoverable from reinsurance contracts. Reinsurance assets include reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that are estimated as part of our loss reserving process and, consequently, are subject to similar judgments and uncertainties. This estimate requires significant judgment for which key considerations include:
•paid and unpaid amounts recoverable;
•any balances in dispute or subject to legal collection;
•the financial wellbeing of a reinsurer (i.e. insolvent, liquidated, in receivership or otherwise subject to formal or informal regulatory restriction);
•the likelihood of collection of the reinsurance recovery considering factors such as, amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, disputes, any collateral or letters of credit held and other relevant factors.
For additional information refer to Note 11, Reinsurance, to the audited consolidated financial statements.
Recoverability of Our Net Deferred Tax Asset
The evaluation of the recoverability of our deferred tax asset and the need for a valuation allowance requires us to weigh all positive and negative evidence to reach a conclusion, that it is more likely than not, that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will be realized. The weight given to the evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. The more negative evidence that exists, the more positive evidence is necessary and the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed.
We consider a number of factors to reliably estimate future taxable income so we can determine the extent of our ability to realize net operating loss (“NOL”), foreign tax credits, realized capital loss and other carryforwards. These factors include forecasts of future income for each of our businesses and actual and planned business and operational changes, both of which include assumptions about future macroeconomic and company-specific conditions and events. We subject the forecasts to stresses of key assumptions and evaluate the effect on tax attribute utilization.
As of December 31, 2021, we have U.S. federal and state NOL carryforwards of $373.8 million and $136.6 million, respectively. We have $53.3 million of Dual Consolidating Losses in a 953(d) company, RH Solutions Insurance (Cayman) Ltd. The provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 eliminated the 20-year carryforward period so that federal NOLs generated in tax years after December 31, 2017 do not expire. For such amounts
generated prior to 2018, the 20-year carryforward periods continue to apply. For additional information refer to Note 18, Income Taxes, to the audited consolidated financial statements.
For additional information refer to Note 18, Income Taxes, to the audited consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations, which requires, among other things, the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize the fair value of all assets acquired and liabilities assumed; the recognition of acquisition-related costs in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for which the acquirer becomes obligated after the acquisition date; and contingent purchase consideration to be recognized at their fair values on the acquisition date with subsequent adjustments recognized in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identified assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Operating results of the acquired entity are reflected in our consolidated financial statements from date of acquisition.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed for an acquisition and allocate the purchase price to its respective net tangible and intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgement and estimates including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs, and cash flows, discount rates and selection of comparable companies and comparable transactions. For material acquisitions, we engage the assistance of valuations specialists in concluding on fair value measurements of certain assets acquired or liabilities assumed in a business combination. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with corresponding offset to goodwill.
For additional information refer to Note 20, Acquisitions, to the audited consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired from our acquisitions. Intangible assets other than goodwill have also been identified as part of our acquisitions when determining the fair value of assets acquired.
Intangible assets other than goodwill included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets primarily include assets related to customer relationships, the value of business acquired, developed technology and agency and carrier relationship. The valuation of these assets used valuation methods appropriate for determining the market value of each asset. These valuation methodologies use various assumptions which included discount rates, the cost of capital, and forecasting, among others.
Goodwill is not amortized, but instead it is assessed for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist.
The goodwill impairment test is performed at the reporting unit level. We initially perform a qualitative analysis to determine if it is more likely than not that the goodwill balance is impaired. If a qualitative assessment is not performed or if a determination is made that it is not more likely than not that their value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, then we will perform a two-step quantitative analysis. First, the fair value of each reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we perform a hypothetical purchase price allocation based on the reporting unit’s fair value to determine the fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. Any resulting difference will be recorded as a charge to operations in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in the period in which the determination is made.
Intangible assets with a finite life are amortized over the estimated useful life while intangible assets with an indefinite useful life are not amortized. Finite-lived intangibles are reviewed for impairment when indicators of impairment are present and indefinite-lived intangibles are assessed for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist.
We evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of such asset may not be recoverable. Should there be an indication of impairment, we test for recoverability by comparing the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset to the carrying amount of the asset or asset group. If the asset or asset group is determined to be impaired, any excess of the carrying value of the asset or asset group over its estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment loss. As of December 31, 2021, neither our initial valuation nor subsequent valuations have indicated any impairment of our goodwill and intangible assets.
For additional information, refer to Note 6, Goodwill and Note 7, Intangible Assets, in the audited consolidated financial statements.
Fair value of Common Stock
We have historically granted stock options at exercise prices equal to the fair value as approved by our Board of Directors on the date of grant. In the absence of a public trading market, management considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of the date of each stock option grant, including:
•relevant precedent transactions involving our capital stock;
•the liquidation preferences, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to the common stock;
•our actual operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and projections;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood and timing of achieving a liquidity event for the shares of common stock underlying the stock options, such as an initial public offering, given prevailing market conditions;
•any adjustment necessary to recognize a lack of marketability of the common stock underlying the granted options;
•recent secondary stock sales and tender offers;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In addition, our Board of Directors considered the independent valuations completed by a third-party valuation consultant and approved the fair value of common stock presented by the management. The valuations of our common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
In determining the fair value of common stock, we established the enterprise value of our business using the market approach and the income approach. In the cases where a financing took place in close proximity to the Valuation Date, we estimated the enterprise value by reconciling to the most recent round of equity financing. Under the income approach, forecasted cash flows are discounted to the present value at a risk-adjusted discount rate. The valuation analyses determine discrete free cash flows over multiple years based on forecasted financial information provided by our management and a terminal value for the residual period beyond the discrete forecast. Projected cash flows are discounted based on the estimated weighted-average cost of capital in order to estimate the enterprise value. Under the market approach, a group of publicly traded companies with similar financial and operating characteristics to Hippo are selected. Company-specific selected multiples were then ultimately applied to the Company’s historical and projected financial data and incorporated adjustments to reflect differences between the Company and the guideline companies with respect to expected growth, profitability, and business risk.
In allocating the equity value of our business among the various classes of equity securities prior to December 2020, the valuation utilized the option pricing model (“OPM”) method. The OPM analysis assumes that as the value of the Company increases, each equity holder benefits from certain value components. The analysis determined the ranges of equity values at which the various Company stakeholders receive value. The maximum values of these ranges, or “break points”, are based on the full liquidation preference amounts, the points at which option and warrant holders choose to exercise, and the points at which the preferred shareholders would be indifferent between converting their shares into common stock and retaining their preferred shares. Next, the Black-Scholes option pricing model isolated the value allocated to each “range”, calculated as the difference between the option values at each break point. Based on the Company’s capital structure, the analysis calculated the percentage of each range attributable to each share class. For each range, the value allocable to each share class was then calculated by multiplying the value of each range by each security’s respective ownership percentage of the range. For each security, the value derived from each range was summed in order to determine the aggregate value of each share class. The total value of each share class was divided by the security’s respective fully diluted shares outstanding, in order to calculate the per share value for each security on a marketable basis. Lastly, a discount for lack of marketability was applied to the common stock value to conclude on the value on a non-marketable basis. The exclusive reliance on the OPM until December 2020 was appropriate when the range of possible future outcomes was difficult to predict and resulted in a highly speculative forecast.
On December 31, 2020 and through August 2, 2021, we used a hybrid method utilizing a combination of the OPM and the probability weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The PWERM is a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common stock based upon an analysis of future values for Hippo, assuming various outcomes. The common stock value is based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns considering each of the possible outcomes available as well as the rights of each class of shares. The future value of the common stock under each outcome is discounted back to the valuation date at an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate and probability weighted to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. We considered two different scenarios: (a) a SPAC Scenario, and (b) a Remain Private Scenario. Under the hybrid/PWERM method, we used the OPM in the Remain Private scenario and the if-converted method under the SPAC scenario. The if-converted method presumes that all shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock convert into our Common Stock based upon their conversion terms and differences in the rights and preferences of the share of our redeemable convertible preferred stock are ignored. The liquidation method presumes payment of proceeds in accordance with the liquidation terms of each class of stock, which was taken into consideration in the OPM under the Remain Private scenario.
After the allocation to the various classes of equity securities, a discount for lack of marketability (“DLOM”) was applied to arrive at a fair value of common stock under each scenario. A DLOM was meant to account for the lack of marketability of a stock that was not publicly traded. In making the final determination of common stock value, consideration was also given to recent secondary transactions that took place involving the common stock (if applicable).
Application of these approaches and methodologies involves the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of and timing associated with possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock. Following the Business Combination, it is not necessary to determine the fair value of New Hippo Common Stock as the shares are traded in a public market.
For additional information refer to Note 17, Stockholders’ Equity, in the audited consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Embedded Derivatives
Our convertible promissory note contains features determined to be embedded derivatives from its host. Embedded derivatives are separated from the host contract and carried at fair value when the embedded derivative
possesses economic characteristics that are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics of the host contract and a separate, standalone instrument with the same terms would qualify as a derivative instrument. The derivative is measured both initially and in subsequent periods at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
Our valuation of embedded derivative liabilities has historically been measured using a with or without approach. The key assumptions used for the valuation is estimation of the timing and probability of expected future events, i.e., liquidity, financing, or maturity event.
For additional information refer to Note 13, Convertible Promissory Notes and Derivative Liability, in the audited consolidated financial statements.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock are classified as a liability as the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock is considered redeemable and may require us to transfer assets upon exercise. The warrants are recorded at fair value upon issuance and are subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date. Changes in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability are recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the exercise or expiration of the warrants, conversion of our redeemable convertible preferred stock into our common stock or until the redeemable convertible preferred stock is otherwise no longer redeemable. At that time, the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability will be reclassified to redeemable convertible preferred stock or additional paid-in capital, as applicable.
For additional information refer to Note 16, Convertible Preferred Stock, in the audited consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We currently qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. Accordingly, we are provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting guidance either (1) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (2) within the same time periods as private companies.
We have elected to adopt new or revised accounting guidance within the same time period as private companies, unless management determines that it is preferable to take advantage of early adoption provisions offered within the applicable guidance. Our utilization of these transition periods may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the transition periods afforded under the JOBS Act.