Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
References to the “Company”, “our”, “us” or “we” refer to Hamilton Lane Alliance Holdings I, Inc. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on September 15, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target.
Our Sponsor is HL Alliance Holdings Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 12, 2021. On January 15, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A Common Stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,600,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $15.9 million, of which approximately $9.7 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,013,333 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $7.5 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $276.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a Trust Account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. We must complete an initial Business Combination with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding any deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the income
earned on the Trust Account). However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target business sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 15, 2023, (as such period may be extended pursuant to the Certificate of Incorporation, the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in each case, to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues from September 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after the Initial Public Offering.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $2.0 million, which consisted of $3.7 million in the change of fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $32,000 income from investments held in the Trust Account, partly offset by approximately $1.0 million of general and administrative expenses, approximately $459,000 of financing costs associated with issuance of the warrants, and $200,000 of franchise tax expenses,
For the period from September 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $6,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses and franchise tax expenses.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $187,000 in cash and working capital of approximately $94,000, inclusive of $600,000 in loans payable to our Sponsor.
Prior to our Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares to our Sponsor and a loan of $300,000 from our Sponsor under an unsecured promissory note provided. We fully repaid the unsecured promissory note of $300,00 on January 20, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account, and loans from the Sponsor of $600,000.
Our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors intend, but are not obligated, to provide Working Capital Loans as needed to meet liquidity needs. On March 26, 2021 we entered into a promissory note with our Sponsor in the principal amount of up to $300,000 and on July 22, 2021, we entered an additional promissory note in the with the Sponsor, (collectively, the “Agreements”), pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to $2.0 million from the Sponsor for ongoing expenses reasonably related to the business of the Company and the consummation of the Business Combination. In March 2021, we borrowed $300,000, and in August 2021 we borrowed an additional $300,000 under these Agreements. As of December 31, 2021, the total balance of $600,000 was outstanding related to these Agreements, and $1.7 million was available under the $2.0 million promissory note. All unpaid principal under these Agreements will be due and payable in full on the effective date of the Business Combination.
See Note 5 to the financial statements in Part 2 Item 8 for a description of the Agreements and the underlying promissory notes.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will use the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination
candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Initial Business Combination.
However, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that if we are unable to complete a Business Combination by January 15, 2023, then we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after the Combination Period. We intend to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On September 22, 2020, our Sponsor subscribed to purchase 14,375,000 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”), and fully paid for those shares on September 23, 2020. Shares and the associated amounts reflected: (i) the reverse stock split of Class B Common Stock in October 2020, (ii) the forfeiture of 7,441,176 shares of Class B Common Stock by our Sponsor in December 2020, and (iii) the 6-to-5 stock split of Class B Common Stock in January 2020, resulting in an aggregate of 4,870,588 shares of Class B Common Stock outstanding. In November 2020, our Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of the independent directors. The initial stockholders agreed to forfeit up to 400,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 15.0% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock after the Initial Public Offering. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on January 15, 2021; thus, these 400,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
Of the 4,870,588 shares of Class B Common Stock outstanding, an aggregate of 1,803,922 shares (up to 235,294 Contingent Founder Shares were subject to forfeiture by our Sponsor if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or in part by the underwriters) (the “Contingent Founder Shares”) are not transferable, assignable or salable until (A) with respect to half of the Contingent Founder Shares, if the last reported sale price of Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.50 (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing one year after the closing of the initial Business Combination until two years after the closing of the initial Business Combination, and (B) with respect to the remaining Contingent Founder Shares, if the last reported sale price of Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $15.00 (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing two years after the closing of the initial Business Combination until three years after the closing of the initial Business Combination. Our Sponsor will forfeit the Contingent Founder Shares for no consideration to the extent the $12.50 and $15.00 trading price thresholds described in clauses A and B are not met during the specified periods. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on January 15, 2021; thus, these 235,294 Contingent Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private Placement of 5,013,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $7.5 million.
Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A Common Stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable for cash (except as described below) and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our Sponsor agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell the Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination. The Sponsor transferred 1,478,933 of its Private Placement Warrants to certain employees of its ultimate parent entity, Hamilton Lane Incorporated, as permitted transferees for services rendered to Hamilton Lane Incorporated in connection with the Company.
Related party loans
On September 22, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed $300,000 under the Note and fully repaid the Note on January 20, 2021.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors intend, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans could be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $2.0 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 we had $600,000 of Working Capital Loans outstanding. As of December 31, 2020 there were no Working Capital Loans outstanding.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, (and any shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the
periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account on the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our outstanding common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 27,600,000 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet. There was no Class A common stock issued or outstanding at December 31, 2020.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value, which approximates fair value. The change in the carrying value of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit and Class A common stock.
Derivative Warrant liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”), Embedded Derivatives (“ASC 815-15”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
All of our outstanding warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a likely modified Black-Scholes model. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering has been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants, a Level 1 measurement, on December 31, 2021. Subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants has been estimated based on the observed price for Public Warrants, a Level 2 measurement, on December 31, 2021.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) adjusted for the effects of a deemed dividend to Class A stockholders by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of weighted average shares of Class B common stock outstanding was reduced for an aggregate of 1,803,922 shares of Class B common stock (the “Contingent Founder Shares”) held by the Sponsor that are subject to forfeiture and transfer restrictions unless and until the trading price of Class A common stock exceeds certain price thresholds during specified periods of time following the closing of the Initial Business Combination.
We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,213,333 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per common share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common stock for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-balance sheet arrangements; commitments and contractual obligations; quarterly results
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the principal executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.