ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of Helbiz’s financial condition and results of operations together with its consolidated financial statements and the related notes. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere, including information with respect to its plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should read the “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
The following discussion refers to the financial results of Helbiz, Inc., for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020. For purposes of this following discussion the terms “we”, ‘our” or “us” or “the Company” and similar references refers to Helbiz and its affiliates. Except for per share data and as otherwise indicated, all dollar amounts set out herein are in thousands.
Overview
Helbiz, Inc. (and with its subsidiaries, where applicable, “Helbiz” or the “Company”) was incorporated in the state of Delaware in October 2015 with headquarter in New York, New York. The Company is an intra-urban transportation company that seeks to help urban areas reduce their dependence on individually owned cars by offering affordable, accessible, and sustainable forms of personal transportation, specifically addressing first and last mile transport.
Founded on a proprietary technology platform, the Company offers a sharing economy that allows users to instantly rent electric vehicles directly from the Helbiz mobile application. The Company currently has a strategic footprint in growing markets with offices in New York, Milan, Belgrade and Singapore, with additional operational teams around the world. The Company currently has electric vehicles operating in the United States and Europe.
During 2021, the Company decided to enter into a new business line: the acquisition and distribution of media content including live sport events. The Company developed a new app, Helbiz Live, which is separate from the micro-mobility platform. Starting in August 2021, the Company began broadcasting the Italian Serie B Soccer League in the United States, Italy and Serbia, and it has expanded its content in October 2021 to include on its app in Italy (i) two live soccer matches per day of the German Cup (DFB-Pokal) and highlights of each round of the German Cup, (ii) weekly highlights of NFL football games and other NFL branded content, and (iii) two live season games per week of both NCAA Basketball and NCAA Football leagues.
During 2021, the Company decided to expand its offering to final customers, through its wholly-owned Italian subsidiary, Helbiz Kitchen Italia S.r.l. In July 2021, the Company launched a delivery-only “ghost kitchen” restaurant concept that specializes in preparing healthy-inspired, high-quality, fresh, made-to-order meals, in Milan.
Business Combination and Organization
On August 12, 2021, Helbiz consummated a business combination, by and among GreenVision Acquisition Corp. (“GRNV”) and its subsidiary, Helbiz Holdings Inc (name of Helbiz, Inc. as private Company, before August 12, 2021) and Salvatore Palella (as representative of the shareholders of Helbiz Holdings Inc.). On the Closing Date, GRNV changed its name to Helbiz, Inc. as the name of the entity surviving the business combination.
In connection with the execution of the business combination, GRNV entered into subscription agreements with multiple investors for an aggregate of 2,650,000 GRNV units at $10.00 per unit, with each unit consisting of one Class A Common Stock and a warrant to purchase one Class A Common Stock exercisable at $11.50, for aggregate gross proceeds of $26.5 million (the “PIPE Investment”), of which proceeds $5 million was in the form of cancelation of Helbiz Holdings Inc. promissory notes.
As a result of the aforementioned business combination, each Helbiz Holdings share issued and outstanding immediately prior to the business combination date was canceled and automatically converted into the right to receive 4.63 (the “conversion ratio”) GRNV shares of the respective class.
Key Financial Measures and Indicators
Annual Active Platform Users (“AAPU”). We define AAPUs as the number of unique users who completed a ride on our platform at least once in a given year. While a unique user can use multiple product offerings on our platform in a given year, that unique user is counted as only one AAPU. We use AAPUs to assess the adoption of our platform and frequency of transactions, which are key factors in our penetration of the markets in which we operate.
Trips. We define Trips as the number of completed rides in a given year. To further clarify, a single-use Helbiz ride is recognized as a unique “Trip” upon completion of each ride. We believe that Trips is a useful metric to measure the scale and usage of our platform.
Active Markets. We track the number of active markets (cities). We believe that increasing the markets for expansion is fundamental to the success of our core business for the foreseeable future.
Italian licenses
We are a substantial operator in Italy in the micro-mobility environment, based on number of licenses awarded, and number of vehicles authorized. In 2020, we provided the following services in the following Italian cities:
• e-scooter services: Milan, Verona, Pisa, Modena, Ravenna, Cesena, Latina, Pescara, Naples, Bari and Montesilvano; and
• e-scooter and e-bike services: Rome and Turin.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we provided the following services in the following Italian cities:
• e-scooter services: Rome, Milan, Turin, Naples, Parma, Palermo, Collegno, Pisa, Modena, Ravenna, Latina, Pescara, Bari, Ferrara, Otranto, Fiumicino, Montesilvano, Cesena, Reggio Emilia, Parma, Frosinone, Catania, San Giovanni Teatino and Santarcangelo di Romagna.;
• e-bike services: Rome, Cesena, Latina, Ferrara and Turin; and
• e-mopeds services: Milan, Turin, Florence, Genova, Rimini, Tigullio, and Pescara.
United States licenses
In the fourth fiscal quarter of 2019, we started to expand operations to the United States with our electric sharing services. In 2020, we provided the following services in the following United States cities:
• e-scooter services: Miami (Florida), Alexandria (Virginia), Arlington (Virginia) and Atlanta (Georgia).
• e-bike services: Washington, D.C. and Atlanta, Georgia.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we provided the following services in the following cities:
• e-scooter services: Washington (D.C.), Sacramento, (California), Santa Barbara (California), Alexandria (Virginia), Richmond (Virginia), Arlington (Virginia), Miami (Florida), Jacksonville (Florida), Miami Lakes (Florida), Atlanta (Georgia), Oklahoma City (Oklahoma), Waterloo (Iowa), Flint (Michigan) and Durham (North Carolina);
• e-bike services: Washington, D.C. and Atlanta, Georgia.
On June 30, 2021, we closed the operations in Atlanta.
Impact of COVID-19 to our Business.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic. In response to the pandemic and corresponding health risks, we temporarily paused few operations to safeguard the health and safety of our customers and employees. After ensuring our fleets could operate safely and in compliance with local guidelines, we resumed all the market operations starting in the second quarter of 2020 with the expanded goal of providing an affordable transportation option to communities in need of socially distanced forms of transportation.
The COVID-19 pandemic reduced global travel and altered daily commutes, which significantly impacted demand for shared micro-mobility. We believe COVID-19 has accelerated the adoption of our offerings in some cities and created additional tailwinds for shared micro-mobility as people seek out socially distanced and environmentally conscious modes of transportation. However, as the situation continues to evolve, the existence of new variants, additional restrictions, or other actions taken to mitigate the pandemic could harm our results of operations.
Impact of the launch of new business lines.
Helbiz Media
Helbiz launched Helbiz Live in the middle of August 2021, its streaming media content offering, in conjunction with the beginning of the 2021-2022 season of the Italian Serie B soccer league.
In connection with the launch of Helbiz Live, Helbiz entered in the following agreements:
• Helbiz Media acquired the rights to broadcast, on a non-exclusive basis in Italy, approximately 390 Serie B regular season games for the next three seasons at a cost of €12 million (approximately $14.4 million) per season. On December 31, 2021, we paid the first three tranches equaling €4.8 million (approximately $5.7 million).
• Helbiz Media has been appointed by the League Serie B as the exclusive distributor of the Series B international media rights and as a result of such agreement, Helbiz Media will commercialize such international rights on behalf of the League Series B with a minimum commitment of €2.5 million per season (approximately $3 million) that Helbiz Media will guarantee to the League Series B. As of December 31, 2021, the Company paid the first four tranches totaling €770 thousand (approximately $910 thousand). This results in an additional cost to Helbiz of at least €2.5 million annually. However, Helbiz will retain sales revenues up to the first €2.5 million with sales revenues exceeding the €2.5 million threshold subject to a revenue sharing arrangement between Helbiz Media and League Series B.
• Helbiz has signed a service agreement with an Italian media company for advisory services, operational support for set-up, content integration and distribution support for the Serie B contents. The operational costs for the services will be between $1.4 million and $2.2 million per season.
• Helbiz has hired 8 people to support this business line.
• Helbiz Media invested and will continue to invest up to $1.5 million in promotional and marketing activities, per Serie B season, but has no obligation to do so.
• Helbiz expanded its content offering in October 2021 by acquiring the rights to broadcast on its app in Italy the two live soccer matches per day during the German Cup (DFB-Pokal) and highlights of each round of the German Cup as well as weekly highlights of NFL football games and other NFL branded content.
• Helbiz expanded its content offering in November 2021 by partnering with ESPN to broadcast on its App in Italy (i) two NCAA college football games and two NCAA men’s college basketball games per week, (ii) 10 NCAA football bowl games, including the semifinals and finals and (iii) 20 NCAA men’s basketball tournament games, including the semi-finals and the finals.
The table below shows the Helbiz Media revenues recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021, which represents the first period of operations.
Helbiz Kitchen
In June 2021 Helbiz launched Helbiz Kitchen, a delivery-only “ghost kitchen” restaurant concept that specializes in preparing healthy-inspired, high-quality, fresh, made-to-order meals.
In connection with the launch of Helbiz Kitchen, Helbiz entered in the following agreements:
• A lease agreement for a facility in Milan, Italy (approximately 21,500 square foot), at a cost of €120,000 ($144,000) per year.
• The hiring of approximately 50 people.
• Procurement of raw materials for approximately €250,000 ($300,000), for setting-up the business operations.
• Purchase of 20 e-mopeds for €98,000 ($120,000).
The revenues generated by Helbiz Kitchen from the launch (July 2021) of the services, recorded as Other revenues in the statement of operations, are immaterial.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our net revenue for those periods. Percentages presented in the following tables may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
(1) Includes stock-based compensation for employees and services received, as follows
Net Revenue
Total revenue increased by $8,416, or 190%, from $4,418 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $12,834 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to the core business, mobility, and the related main caption: “pay per ride”. In detail, the increase followed our growth in the micro-mobility sharing market in Italy and United States. Additionally, the revenue growth benefits from the launch of the new business line: Helbiz Media for $2,770; generated from August 2021 to December 2021.
Mobility revenues
Mobility revenues increased by $5,699, or 135%, from $4,208 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $9,907 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In May 2020, we introduced a subscription offer called Helbiz Unlimited which allows a customer to use our e-scooters and e-bikes in exchange for a monthly fee. During the year ended December 31, 2021, more than 45,000 Helbiz Unlimited have been purchased by riders, generating a cumulative revenue of $1,450 with an increase of $1,031, or 246%, from $419 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Media revenues
During July 2021, the Company decided to enter into a new business line: the international distribution and broadcasting of media contents, including live sports events. Media Revenues are mainly composed by international commercialization and distribution of media contents to media partners, in the Business to Business (“B2B") environment. In detail, the Company recorded revenues in connection with the commercialization of the rights to broadcast, outside of Italy, the Italian Lega Serie BKT football (“LNPB”), during the year ended December 31, 2021 the revenues recorded for those agreements amounted to $1,961.
Additionally, in August 2021 we entered in the Business to Customer (“B2C”) media environment, through the launch of its entertainment App, Helbiz Live. We recorded Revenues for $307 from Helbiz Live monthly and yearly subscriptions, and $502 from Sponsorship agreements.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Revenue increased by $25,976 or 330%, from $7,870 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $33,846 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase was primarily due to: (i) Mobility expansion through a larger fleet size and the opening of several new cities across Europe and the United States, and (ii) the launch of Helbiz Media business line with significant expenses related to the acquisition of media contents, which contributed for $9,415.
Depreciation, Amortization and write-off expenses, one of the main drivers of Cost of Revenue related to Mobility, increased by $3,425, or 111%, from $3,082 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $6,507 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Mobility Cost of Revenues for year-end December 31, 2021 is impacted for $2,750 by the lease agreement for the DC operating license (the lease agreement expired on December 31, 2021).
Research and Development
Research and Development expenses increased by $1,222 or 76%, from $1,604 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $2,826 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase is mainly driven by the continuous investments in the in-house IT engineering team, as well as the in-house development of Helbiz Kitchen integration and Helbiz Live platform.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $6,607 or 126%, from $4,808 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $10,875 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is in line with our strategy focused on significant investment in advertising, promotional and business development initiatives. The marketing activities are followed by our employees and third-party advisors. Stock-based compensation registered a 154% increase, from $577 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $1,468 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase is primarily related to the issuance of 115,958 Class A Common shares to communication and advertising consultants.
General and Administrative
General and Administrative expenses increased by $14,336 or 142%, from $10,075 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $24,411 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is mainly driven by our investment in the personnel-related compensation costs, hiring employees and professional service fees. Additionally, the General and Administrative costs increased significantly following our merger and related listing process. Stock-based compensation registered a 54% increase, from $3,543 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $5,469 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase is primarily related to: (i) the issuance of 289,550 Class A Common shares to our SEC legal counsel and other consultants, (ii) issuance of 225,000 stock options and 225,000 restricted stocks under the 2021 Omnibus Plan, and (iii) grant of the CEO Performance Award.
Total other income (expense), net
Interest expenses, net
Interest expenses increased by $2,059, or 92%, from $2,232 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $4,291 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase is mainly driven by new financial liabilities, entered by us for supporting the expansion of the mobility business and the launch of Media activities.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
Fair value adjustment shows an increase of 4,370, increased by 108% from $4,062 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $8,432 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The negative impact is mainly driven by the events described below:
• In March 2021, we recorded a loss of $4,128 for an increase of the fair value of the 2020 Warrants Purchase Agreement, exercised on March 26, 2021.
• On September 21, 2021, I-bankers exercised on a cashless basis the 287,500 Private Warrants issued by GRNV, and we issued 165,289 Class A Common Shares. The exercise of the aforementioned warrants generated a loss amounted to $4,537 which represents the fair value adjustment of the warrants from August 12, 2021, (business combination closing date) to September 21, 2021.
• We recorded a $233 gain related to the fair value adjustment of the 2,100,000 GRNV Sponsor Private Warrants for the period from August 12, 2021, (Business combination closing date) to December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from outside sources of invested capital. We have had, and expect that we will continue to have, an ongoing need to raise additional cash from outside sources to fund its operations and expand its business. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be harmed. Successful transition to attaining profitable operations depends upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $21,143 thousand, excluding restricted cash of $109 thousand. Cash and cash equivalents consisted of bank deposits in U.S. Dollar and Euro.
We collect the fees from riders using a third-party processing payment provider. In detail, we collect the fees between 2 to 5 days after the completion of the ride. We also collect charges and fees from partners for specific advertising or co-branding activities, within 30 days from the events. Additionally, Helbiz Live media operators pay Helbiz Live within 60 days for the international audiovisual rights.
We plan to continue to fund its operations and expansion plan, including the new business lines (Helbiz Live and Helbiz Kitchen) through debt and equity financing, for the next twelve months.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth and expanded operations, including the new business lines. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all.
We intend to continue to evaluate and may, in certain circumstances, take preemptive action to preserve liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. As the circumstances around the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain, we continue to actively monitor the pandemic’s impact on us worldwide, including our financial position, liquidity, results of operations, and cash flows.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows activities.
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $42,991 of cash, resulting from our net loss of $71,971, partially offset by non-cash expenses for $27,895 and net changes in operating assets and liabilities for $1,085. Non-cash expenses are mainly related to: (i) equity-based compensation for $7,379, (ii) changes in fair value of financial instruments for $8,432, (iii) depreciation, amortization, and loss on disposal of assets for $7,018, and (iv) interest expenses not paid, for $3,576.
Net changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily in the increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $10,801, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable, other current assets and security deposits of $9,716.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities used $11,697 of cash. In detail, we used $9,366 directly invested in our business expansion through the purchase of new electric vehicles to expand the operating fleet in several new cities, $1,984 invested in acquisition of new businesses to purchase MiMoto (net of cash acquired), and $347 used for purchasing intangible assets such as operating licenses.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities provided $75,947 of cash. The net proceeds from issuance of financial liabilities generated a positive cash flow of $51,167, partially offset by the repayment of existing financial liabilities for $5,064. In addition, the exercise of Warrants generated a positive cash flow of $7,631, the settlement of the 2020 Subscription receivables generated a positive cash flow of $4,033, and the sale of Class A common shares generated a positive cash flow amounted to $923. Finally, the completion of the Business Combination with GRNV generated a positive cash flow of $20,281, partially offset by payments of offering costs and other commission related to the listing process for $3,024.
Indebtedness
The following table summarizes our indebtedness as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company expects to settle the principal of the financial liabilities outstanding based on the following annual re-payment schedule.
(A) The 2022 principal repayment has been reduced for $8.5 million related to conversion of the 2021 Convertible Notes occurred from January 1, 2022, to April 13, 2022. In detail, we issued 3,149,657 Class A Common Shares in exchange for $8.5 million of principal and $0.4 million of accumulated interest.
2021 Convertible Debts, net
On October 12, 2021 (“closing date”), the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with YA II, Ltd. (the “Note holder”), pursuant to the terms of the SPA, the Company issued to the Note holder the followings: (i) 150,000 shares of Class A common stock as a commitment fee, at closing date (ii) a first convertible note in the principal amount of $15 million, at closing date (iii) 1,000,000 Warrants to buy 1,000,000 Class A common shares with an exercise price of $20.00 per share, at closing date (iv) a second convertible note in the principal amount of $10 million, issued on October 27, 2021, and (v) a third convertible note in the principal amount of $5 million, issued on November 12, 2021. In exchange for the issuances of the commitment Shares, the three convertible notes and the warrants, the Company received from the Note holder proceeds of $30 million.
Each of the three convertible note matures on the one-year anniversary date of the issuance of such convertible note and bears interest at a rate of 5% per annum. In case of an event of default under the convertible notes, the interest rate increases to 15% per annum. Based on the SPA, the Company is required to pay a redemption premium under certain circumstances, and the maximum value of the redemption premium is $3,000,000.
The three convertible notes are convertible by the Note holder upon issuance. The conversion price will be lower of $20.00 or 92.5% of the lowest daily volume-weighted average price of the Class A Common Stock during the five consecutive trading days immediately preceding the conversion date, provided that the conversion price may not be less than the Floor Price, settled at issuance as $10.00 for the first note, $8.25 for the second note and $8.55 for the third note.
We did not make any cash payment as of the day of this prospectus, while we resettled the Floor Prices for the Convertible Notes starting from January 2022. Based on the new Floor Prices the Note holder converted approximately $8.9 million of the Convertible Notes into 3,149,657 Class A Common Stock.
12.7% Secured Long Term Loan, net
On March 23, 2021, the Company entered into a $15,000 secured term loan facility with an institutional lender. The loan agreement has a maturity date of December 1, 2023, with a prepayment option for the Company after 12 months. At inception, the company prepaid interests and an insurance premium for $2,783.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company accounted the loan as Non-Current Financial liabilities net of intermediary fees and bank fees.
Long-term loans
On November 5, 2020, the Company, through one of its wholly-owned Italian subsidiaries, obtained a loan for Euro 3,500 from an Italian bank with 4.5% as annual interest rate and November 30, 2026 as Maturity date. During the years ended on December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company re-paid $59 (Euro 52) and $0 of the principal amount, respectively; in line with the re-payment plan.
On March 15, 2021, the Company, through one of its wholly-owned Italian subsidiaries, obtained a loan for Euro 2,000 from an Italian bank with 5.4% as annual interest rate and March 31, 2024 as Maturity date. During the year ended on December 31, 2021, the Company re-paid $216 (Euro 190) of the principal amount, in line with the re-payment plan.
On May 31, 2018, MiMoto obtained a loan for Euro 450 from an Italian bank. On April 1, 2021, as a result of the MiMoto acquisition, the Company assumed the fair value of the loan amounted to Euro 316 with 2.7% as annual interest rate and February 28, 2025 as Maturity date. No repayment of the principal has been made by the Company during the year ended on December 31, 2021, in line with re-payment plan.
On May 21, 2020, MiMoto entered in a loan agreement with an Italian bank, for Euro 400. On April 1, 2021, the Company assumed the MiMoto financial liability at its fair value, amounted to Euro 400 with 2.4% as annual interest rate and May 21, 2026 as Maturity date. No repayment of the principal has been made by the Company during the year ended on December 31, 2021, in line with re-payment plan.
On October 17, 2017, MiMoto obtained a loan for Euro 200 with an Italian bank. On April 1, 2021, as a result of the MiMoto acquisition, the Company assumed the fair value of the loan amounted to Euro 65 with 3.5% as annual interest rate and October 19, 2022 as Maturity date. No repayment of the principal has been made by the Company during the year ended on December 31, 2021, in line with re-payment plan.
Securities outstanding as of December 31, 2021
As of December 31, 2021, we had the following outstanding securities:
The merged entity did not have outstanding Preferred Stocks.
Public Warrants
As of December 31, 2021, the Public Warrants outstanding are 7,736,416 with a strike price of $11.50. On September 23, 2021, the Public Warrants became exercisable for cash by the effectiveness of a registration statement covering the shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants. During October 2021, investors exercised for cash 663,584 Public Warrants.
The Public Warrants will expire five 5 years from the consummation of a Business Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
We may call the warrants for redemption, in whole and not in part, at a price of $0.01 per warrant:
• at any time while the warrants are exercisable,
• upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrant holder,
• if, and only if, the reported last sale price of the Class A shares of common stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share, for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period ending on the third business day prior to the notice of redemption to warrant holders, and
• if, and only if, there is a current registration statement in effect with respect to the shares of common stock underlying such warrants at the time of redemption and for the entire 30-day trading period referred to above and continuing each day thereafter until the date of redemption.
If we call the Public Warrants for redemption, management will have the option to require all holders that wish to exercise the Public Warrants to do so on a “cashless basis,” as described in the warrant agreement. The exercise price and number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a stock dividend, extraordinary dividend or recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. However, the warrants will not be adjusted for issuances of shares of common stock at a price below its exercise price. Additionally, in no event will we be required to net cash settle the warrants.
Convertible Note Warrants
On October 12, 2021, the Company issued to YA II, Ltd. (the “Convertible Note holder”), 1,000,000 Warrants to buy 1,000,000 Class A common shares with an exercise price of $20.00 per share. On November 12, 2021, the Company filed a registration statement covering the shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the mentioned Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, the Convertible Note Warrants outstanding are 1,000,000.
The Convertible Note Warrants will expire five years from the issuance date.
The exercise price and number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a stock dividend, extraordinary dividend or recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. However, the warrants will not be adjusted for issuances of shares of common stock at a price below its exercise price.
Private Warrants
As of December 31, 2021, the warrants categorized as liability are composed by the 2,100,000 GRNV Sponsor Private Warrants, which have identical terms of the Public Warrants (categorized as equity) underlying the Units sold in the GRNV Initial Public Offering and PIPE transaction.
Additionally, the GRNV Sponsor Private Warrants will be exercisable on a cashless basis and be non-redeemable so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the GRNV Sponsor Private Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the GRNV Sponsor Private Warrants will be redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants.
Lock-Up Agreement
On August 12, 2021, we entered in a series of lock-up agreements with Helbiz Holdings shareholders that held at least 75,000 shares of common stock of Helbiz Holdings or 347,590 shares of common stock of Helbiz, Inc. Under those lock-up agreements, it was agreed that until (i) the first anniversary of the Closing of the Business Combination with respect to the our CEO and Founder and (ii) the six month anniversary of the Closing with respect to other Helbiz shareholders owning at least 75,000 shares, such Helbiz securityholders, directly or indirectly, will not: (i) offer for sale, sell, pledge or otherwise dispose of (or enter into any transaction or device that is designed to, or could be expected to, result in the disposition by any person at any time in the future of) any shares of our common stock, or any other of our securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for any shares of such common stock which are owned as of the Closing Date; (ii) enter into any swap or other derivatives transaction that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic benefits or risks of ownership of the Lockup Shares, whether any such transaction is to be settled by delivery of the Lockup Shares or other securities, in cash or otherwise; or (iii) make any demand for or exercise any right or cause to be filed a registration statement, including any amendments thereto, with respect to the registration of any Lockup Shares or any other of our securities, other than pursuant to the separate registration rights agreement between us and the former Helbiz Holdings securityholders.
Related Party Transactions
During May and June 2021, our majority shareholder and sole director has lent Helbiz, funds on an interest-free basis for cumulative gross proceeds of $2,010 through Promissory Notes. On August 16, 2021, the Company repaid the principal of the 0% CEO Promissory Notes.
During the period ended December 31, 2020, our majority shareholder and sole director repaid $1,042 of a loan that we made to him. Our majority shareholder and sole director completely settled all amounts that he owed to us during 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Leases
We entered into various non-cancellable operating lease agreements for office facilities, permit and brand licensing, e-mopeds leases, corporate vehicles’ licensing, and corporate housing with lease periods expiring through 2024. These agreements require the payment of certain operating expenses, such as non-refundable taxes, repairs and insurance and contain renewal and escalation clauses. The terms of the leases provide for payments on a monthly basis and sometimes on a graduated scale. We recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period and has accrued for rent expense incurred but not paid.
Future annual minimum lease payments as of December 31, 2021, are as follows:
Lease expenses under operating leases were $5,203 for the year ended on December 31, 2021, and $1,216 for the year ended on December 31, 2020. In detail, the 2021 lease expenses are highly impacted by a non-recurring annual lease agreement entered with Skip Transport, Inc on January 1, 2021, for a cumulative amount recorded as Cost of Revenues of $2,750. Based on the mentioned lease agreement, the Company leased: (i) the transportation license to operate e-scooters in Washington D.C, and (ii) Skip’s mobile application in specific areas.
Media rights - Purchase Commitments
During 2021, the Company decided to enter into a new business line: the acquisition, commercialization and distribution of contents including live sport events to media partners and final viewers. In order to commercialize and broadcast media contents, the Company entered into non-cancellable Content licensing and Service agreements with multiple partners such as LNPB. These agreements require the payment of certain fees and contain renewal and escalation clauses. The terms of the agreements provide for payments on a periodical basis and on a graduated scale. The Company recognizes expense on a straight-line basis over the agreement period and has accrued for expense incurred but not paid.
Future annual minimum payments related to Media rights’ agreements as of December 31, 2021, are as follows.
Content licensing expenses, recorded as Cost of Revenues, were $9,415 for the year ended on December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Shared vehicle revenues
We applied the following steps to achieve the core principle of ASC 606.
1.
Identification of the Contract, or Contracts, with a Customer: We considered the Terms of Conditions (“ToC”) accepted by riders in identifying the contracts. The ToC defines the fees charged, each party’s rights and obligations and payment terms.
2.
Identification of the Performance Obligations in the Contract:
Pay per ride - each ride is considered a separate performance obligation as each transaction is capable of being distinct.
Mobility subscriptions - We have one performance obligation: the availability of electric vehicles in specific geofences.
3.
Determination of the Transaction Price: We earn fees from the riders based on the sum of unlocking fee and per minute fees or subscription fees. Based on the nature of each contract the entire amount of consideration received from the riders is included in the transaction price, excluding the sales taxes. We do not record any significant Financing Component given that the customer paid for the services in advance, and the timing of the transfer of those services is at the discretion of the customer.
4.
Allocation of the Transaction Price to the Performance Obligations in the Contract: We determined that the contract contains only one performance obligation, as a result, there is no allocation of the transaction price.
5.
Recognition of Revenue when, or as, the Company Satisfies a Performance Obligation: We recognize revenue upon completion of a ride as its performance obligation is satisfied upon the completion of the ride. For subscription fees, we recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the subscription period.
Media revenues - Commercialization of Media rights (B2B)
We recorded revenues in connection with the commercialization of the rights to broadcast, outside of Italy, the Italian Lega Serie BKT football (“LNPB”). We applied the following steps to achieve the core principle of ASC 606.
1.
Identification of the Contract, or Contracts, with a Customer: We have signed an agreement with each media partner, who operates in the broadcast and media market.
2.
Identification of the Performance Obligations in the Contract: We are responsible for delivering the media contents to the media partner. As a result, we identified only one performance obligation: the delivery of media contents to the media partner.
3.
Determination of the Transaction Price: We analyzed the following criteria, using management judgement, to determine if we are acting as Principal or Agent in those transactions: (i) controlling the goods or services before it is transferred to customers, (ii) inventory risk, and (iii) discretion in establishing prices. We concluded that we are acting as Principal in those service agreements as we obtained control over the media content rights, we have inventory risk, and we have discretion in establishing the prices. As result, we are entitled to recognize the gross selling price as transaction price. In addition, we exclude all sales taxes and withholding taxes required by governmental authorities from the measurement of the transaction price.
4.
Allocation of the Transaction Price to the Performance Obligations in the Contract: We determined that the contract contains only one performance obligation, as a result, there is no allocation of the transaction price.
5.
Recognition of Revenue when, or as, the Company Satisfies a Performance Obligation: We identified one performance obligation: the delivery of media contents. Revenues are recognized ratably over the licensing period in conjunction with the distribution of the media contents to the media partners.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the fair value recognition and measurement provisions of GAAP, which requires compensation cost for the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards to be recognized over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures when they occur. The fair value of stock-based awards, granted or modified, is determined on the grant date at fair value, using appropriate valuation techniques.
Service-Based Awards
We record stock-based compensation expense for service-based stock options and restricted stock on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. For stock options with only service-based vesting conditions, we utilize Black-Scholes option-pricing model as valuation model, which incorporates the following assumptions.
- Expected stock price volatility: we estimate the volatility of common stock on the date of grant based on the weighted-average historical stock price volatility of its own shares or comparable publicly traded companies in our industry group.
- Expected term: It is estimated using the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option.
- Risk-free interest rate: based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant with a term equal to the expected term.
- Expected dividend yield: we have not paid and do not anticipate paying dividends on common stock, as a result is 0.0%.
For restricted stock, granted under the employee stock purchase plan, subject only to a service condition for vesting, we measure the awards based on the market price of its common stock at the grant date.
Performance-Based Awards
The performance-based conditions generally are satisfied upon achieving specified performance targets, such as our financial or operating metrics, and/or the occurrence of a qualifying event, defined as the earlier of (i) the closing of certain specific liquidation or change in control transactions, or (ii) an initial public offering (“IPO”). We record stock-based compensation expense for performance-based equity awards only if performance-based conditions are considered probable to be satisfied.
Market-Based Awards
We have granted stock options that vest only upon the satisfaction of all the following conditions: service-based conditions, performance-based conditions, and market-based conditions. The performance-based condition is satisfied upon achieving specified performance targets, such as the occurrence of a qualifying event, as described above for performance-based awards. The market-based conditions are satisfied upon the achievement of specified Company’s market valuations.
For market-based awards, we determined the Business Combination date as the grant-date of the award. At the grant-date, we measured the fair value of the awards utilizing a Monte Carlo valuation model, which incorporates various assumptions including expected stock price volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rates, expected date of a qualifying event, and expected capital raise percentage. We estimated the volatility of common stock on the date of grant based on the weighted-average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly traded companies in its industry group. We estimated the expected term based on various exercise scenarios. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense for market-based equity awards such as stock options on an accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period, and only if performance-based conditions are considered probable to be satisfied. We determine the requisite service period by comparing the derived service period to achieve the market-based condition and the explicit service-based period, using the longer of the two service periods as the requisite service period.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of the reporting unit may be in excess of its fair value. As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, the Company first performs a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If, as a result of its qualitative assessment, it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test will be required. Alternatively, the Company may bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative impairment test. During the annual assessment no impairment loss has been identified for the periods presented.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions of entities or asset groups that qualify as businesses using the acquisition method of accounting. In detail, the acquisition method required that the purchase price of the acquisition is allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over those fair values is recorded as goodwill. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment consist of equipment, computers and software, furniture and fixtures, and rental scooters. Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using a straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the related asset. Depreciation for property and equipment commences once they are ready for our intended use. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred, and improvements and betterments are capitalized. When assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the consolidated balance sheet and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in the consolidated statement of operations in the period realized.
The table below, shows the useful lives for the depreciation calculation using the straight-line method:
Leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the remaining term of the lease, or the useful life of the assets.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
We determine the fair value of financial assets and liabilities using the fair value hierarchy established in the accounting standards. The hierarchy describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value, as follows.
Level 1 -
Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2 -
Inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 -
Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurements. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement in its entirety requires management to make judgments and consider factors specific to the asset or liability.
Our financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, warrants, convertible debts, equity compensation for employees, derivatives, promissory notes and accounts payable. Management believes that the carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and short-term debts approximate the fair value due to the short-term nature of those instruments. Warrants and derivatives are classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as they are valued using significant unobservable inputs or data in inactive markets. We use a third-party valuation specialist to assist management in its determination of the fair value of its Level 3. These fair value measurements are highly sensitive to changes in these significant unobservable inputs and significant changes in these inputs would result in a significantly higher or lower fair value.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risks
Not applicable.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Under the JOBS Act, an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different transition dates for public and private companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We meet the definition of an emerging growth company and have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company, or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements and the reported results of operations contained therein may not be directly comparable to those of other public companies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Helbiz did not have, during the periods presented, and it does not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The new standard establishes a right-of-use (ROU) model that requires a lessee to record a ROU asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with terms longer than 12 months. The lease assets and liabilities to be recognized are both measured initially based on the present value of the lease payments. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the income statement. This update is effective for annual periods beginning January 1, 2022, and interim periods beginning January 1, 2023, with early adoption permitted. The Company plans to adopt this standard as of the effective date for private companies using the modified retrospective approach of all leases entered into before the effective date. While the Company is currently reviewing its lease portfolio and evaluating and interpreting the requirements under the new guidance, including available accounting policy elections, it expects that its non-cancellable operating lease commitments will be subject to the new guidance and recognized as right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The Company is currently assessing the impact of this accounting standard on its shared vehicles revenues and rental leases.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”, which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by eliminating the requirement to separate embedded conversion features from the host contract when the conversion features are not required to be accounted for as derivatives under Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or that do not result in substantial premiums accounted for as paid-in capital. By removing the separation model, a convertible debt instrument will be reported as a single liability instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. This new standard also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for contracts to qualify for equity classification and simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculations by requiring that an entity use the if-converted method and that the effect of potential share settlement be included in diluted earnings per share calculations. This new standard will be effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years with early adoption permitted. The Company will adopt this standard effective January 1, 2022, using the modified retrospective method. In the consolidated balance sheets, the adoption of this new guidance is estimated to result in:
- an increase of approximately $3.4 million to the total carrying value of the convertible notes to reflect the full principal amount of the convertible notes outstanding net of issuance costs,
- a reduction of approximately $4.2 million to additional paid-in capital to remove the equity component separately recorded for the beneficial conversion features associated with the convertible notes, and
- a cumulative-effect adjustment of approximately $0.8 million to the beginning balance of accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2022.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options, (“ASU 2021-04”) which clarifies the accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. Specifically, ASU 2021-04 requires the issuer to treat a modification of an equity-classified warrant as an exchange of the original warrant. The difference between the fair value of the modified warrant and the fair value of the warrant immediately before modification is then recognized as an issuance cost or discount of the related transaction. ASU 2021-04 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. ASU 2021-04 should be applied prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring after the effective date. Either the full or modified retrospective adoption method is allowed. The Company is currently assessing the impact of adopting this standard on the consolidated financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-8, “Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers”, creating an exception to the recognition and measurement principles in ASC 805, Business Combinations. The amendments require an acquirer to use the guidance in ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, rather than using fair value, when recognizing and measuring contract assets and contract liabilities related to customer contracts assumed in a business combination. In addition, the amendments clarify that all contracts requiring the recognition of assets and liabilities in accordance with the guidance in ASC 606, such as contract liabilities derived from the sale of nonfinancial assets within the scope of ASC 610-20, Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets, fall within the scope of the amended guidance in ASC 805. This new standard will be effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently assessing the impact of adopting this standard on the consolidated financial statements.