Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, and includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included in the fore-part in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Heliogen is a leader in next generation concentrated solar energy (“CSE”). We are developing a modular, A.I.-enabled, concentrated solar energy plant that will use an array of mirrors to reflect sunlight and capture, concentrate, store and convert it into cost-effective energy on demand. Our unique system will have the ability to cost-effectively generate and store thermal energy at very high temperatures. The ability to produce high-temperature heat, and the inclusion of thermal energy storage, distinguishes our solution from clean energy provided by typical photovoltaic (“PV”) and wind installations which do not produce thermal energy and are only able to produce energy intermittently unless battery storage is added. The system will be configurable for several applications, including the carbon-free generation of clean power (electricity), industrial-grade heat (for use in industrial processes), and green hydrogen, based on a customer’s needs.
We have developed innovations in the process of concentrating sunlight which we believe fundamentally improve its potential to efficiently and cost effectively collect and deliver energy to industrial processes. We believe we will be the first technology provider with the ability to deliver cost-effective renewable energy capable of replacing fossil fuels used in industrial processes that require high temperature heat and/or nearly 24/7 operation. In addition, we believe our disruptive, patented design and A.I. technology will address a fundamental problem confronted by many renewable sources of energy: intermittency. An intermittent power supply does not match the continuous power demand of industry and the grid. Without storage, wind and PV-based renewable energy generation may rapidly fluctuate between over-supply and under-supply based on resource availability. As the grid penetration of intermittent resources increases, these fluctuations may become increasingly extreme. We believe our technology will contribute to solving this problem. Our solar plants will have the ability to store very high temperature energy in solid media. This energy will then be dispatchable, including during times without sunlight, to cost-effectively deliver near 24/7 carbon-free energy in the form of heat, electric power or green hydrogen fuel.
The three use categories will be configured as follows, forming the backbone of three business lines:
HelioHeat - The production of heat or steam for use in industrial processes will be enabled by the baseline system.
HelioPower - With the baseline system as the foundation, the addition of a turbine generator system will then enable power generation.
HelioFuel - Building on the Power system described above, hydrogen fuel production will be enabled by further adding an electrolyzer system to the baseline system.
Our technological innovations will enable the delivery of our HelioHeat, HelioPower and HelioFuel solutions to customers. HelioHeat plants will produce carbon-free heat (e.g. process steam or hot air) to support industrial processes. HelioPower plants will deliver solar thermal energy to a heat engine to produce electrical power. HelioFuel plants will couple a HelioPower plant with an electrolyzer to produce green Hydrogen fuel. All three solutions will be enabled by Heliogen’s proprietary heliostat design and artificial intelligence technology, and will integrate TES to enable operation nearly 24/7, overcoming the intermittency of other solar energy technologies.
For each of the three above solutions, we are offering multiple support models to customers looking to deploy Heliogen’s technology:
•Contracting with owner-operators to build turnkey facilities that deploy Heliogen’s technology (Heliogen will contract with engineering, procurement and construction (“EPC”) partners for constructing the facility);
•Selling heliostats (and associated software control systems) to owner-operators and/or EPC contractors;
•Providing asset maintenance support services during operation, for completed facilities that use Heliogen’s technology; and
•Providing project development support services to help customers advance readiness to break ground in advance of final investment decisions.
In the future, we will also be prepared to offer Heliogen’s IP through a licensing model to third parties interested in manufacturing and installing the hardware.
Recent Developments
Customer Contracts
On March 28, 2022, Heliogen entered into a series of commercial agreements (collectively, the ‘”Agreements”) with Woodside Energy (USA) Inc. (“Woodside”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of leading Australian energy producer Woodside Petroleum Ltd. for the commercial-scale demonstration and deployment of Heliogen’s AI-enabled concentrated solar energy technology in California and the marketing of Heliogen’s technology in Australia. Pursuant to the terms of the commercial-scale demonstration agreement (the “Project Agreement”), Heliogen has agreed to complete the engineering, procurement, and construction of a new 5 MWe HelioPower facility to be built in Mojave, California for testing, research and development. The two companies also agreed to include the scope and associated funding from Heliogen’s $39 million award from the U.S. Department of Energy’s Solar Energy Technology Office. As a result, in addition to commercial-scale demonstration of Heliogen’s 5 MWe power module, the project will also include the deployment and testing of an innovative approach to converting the thermal energy produced by Heliogen’s facility into power with a smaller footprint than traditional steam turbines.
In addition to the Project Agreement, Heliogen and Woodside have also signed a collaboration agreement to jointly market Heliogen’s technology in Australia (the “Australia Collaboration Agreement”) with the objective to deploy further commercial-scale modules of HelioHeat, HelioPower, and HelioFuel offerings. Under this arrangement, the parties expect to define product offerings that use Heliogen’s modular technology for potential customers (including Woodside) in Australia and are establishing a roadmap to identify and engage with those customers. For additional information on the Agreements, see “Part II, Item 9B. Other Information” contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Athena Business Combination
On December 30, 2021 (“the Closing Date”), we consummated the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, dated July 6, 2021, by and among Athena, Merger Sub, and Legacy Heliogen (the “Business Combination Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, a business combination of Legacy Heliogen and Athena was effected by the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Heliogen, with Legacy Heliogen surviving the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Athena (the “Merger,” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, the “Business Combination”). In connection with the consummation of the Merger on the Closing Date, Athena changed its name from Athena Technology Acquisition Corp. to Heliogen, Inc. (the “Company”) and Legacy Heliogen changed its named from Heliogen, Inc. to Heliogen Holdings, Inc. The Business Combination resulted in net proceeds of $159.4 million in cash (including proceeds from the Athena trust account, less redemptions, and a PIPE investment of $165.0 million, offset by transaction costs paid at closing).
Brenda Solar Energy Zone
In December 2021, the United States Bureau of Land Management awarded the Company the exclusive right to lease land in the Brenda Solar Energy Zone (the “Brenda SEZ”). Heliogen intends to develop a green hydrogen facility on the Brenda site, capable of producing approximately 20,000 metric tons of hydrogen per year. The Brenda SEZ is an ideal location for commercial-scale green hydrogen production due to the ample local water supply and its close proximity to potential offtake partners and key distribution channels.
ICARUS
In December 2021, the Company successfully completed the first technical demonstration of an autonomous field maintenance system, Heliogen’s Installation & Cleaning Autonomous Robot & Utility Solution, or ICARUS. Once enhanced and deployed at scale, this system is expected to reduce the time and cost associated with construction and ongoing maintenance.
Bloom Energy
In November 2021, we successfully generated green hydrogen in a test that integrated Heliogen’s solar energy technology and Bloom Energy Corporation’s solid oxide, high-temperature electrolyzer. The trial demonstrated that the companies’ combined technology can produce hydrogen 45 percent more efficiently than traditional low-temperature PEM and alkaline electrolyzers. Electricity accounts for nearly 80 percent of the cost of producing hydrogen from electrolysis. Substituting our concentrated solar energy system for some of the electricity used to run the electrolyzer during the hydrogen production process significantly reduces production cost since heat is a much lower cost source of energy than electricity. The ability to use heat instead of electricity improves the economics of green hydrogen production.
HelioHeat Acquisition
In September 2021, Heliogen acquired HelioHeat GmbH (“HelioHeat”), a private limited liability company in Germany pursuant to a share purchase and transfer agreement (the “HelioHeat Acquisition”). HelioHeat is engaged in the development, planning and construction of renewable energy systems and components, including a novel solar receiver. Heliogen acquired HelioHeat in order to own and use HelioHeat’s particle receiver technology in future commercial-scale facilities for our customers and leverage the expertise of its assembled workforce.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Business
Growth Opportunity
Heliogen’s growth is tied to the global phenomenon commonly described as “the energy transition” - that is, the shift in energy supply from burning fossil fuels to harnessing low-carbon and renewable sources of energy. Data linking the role of carbon emissions in accelerating climate change has led to shareholders and activists applying pressure to companies and governments to take action. This trend has been on the rise since the signing of the Paris Agreement in 2015, led largely by Europe. As a result, the energy transition has become a major focus of both private and public sector leaders around the world. Companies and governments have begun setting ambitious goals to reduce GHG emissions and to use renewable resources to sustainably power their operations.
Heliogen’s growth strategy is to harness the significant demand by delivering technology that enables scalable, distributed, solar-thermal energy plants that can create heat, steam, power, and “clean” hydrogen- i.e., without the carbon emissions produced by fossil fuel energy sources. Our solutions target the end markets with a need for heat, electric power, and hydrogen. Such markets include the oil & gas, power, cement, steel, and mining industries.
Heliogen’s technology platform allows modular plants for heat, steam, power, and/or hydrogen to be built at customer locations. The Company’s strategy to achieve scale is through modularity and repeatability, with minimal custom re-engineering compared to prior iterations of this technology. The majority of the plant will be built in a factory that can be scaled to produce many plants per year. Heliogen will be able to further scale by replicating that factory in multiple regions as we expand globally.
Leveraging the modularity of the system and repeatability of its implementation, in the near to medium term, Heliogen will partner with contractors and other supply chain participants to execute projects. In the long term, the Company expects to license our core, patent-protected technology to owner-operators and EPC companies who can each deploy many plants, to achieve a scale and growth trajectory that can take advantage of the size of the market opportunity. Licensing could enable Heliogen to improve the pace of our deployments, as well as increase our profit margins, beyond what could be achieved solely through our direct implementation.
In order to support Heliogen’s growth as described above, we will continue its dedication to research and development and to iterating on its novel combination and integration of hardware and software. We are working to harness our specialty of using more software, more automation, more robotics, and more algorithms to reduce the quantity of materials, the amount of human labor, and the duration of time required to deliver our projects at scale.
Geographically we are focused initially on the U.S., but plan to position the Company to respond to global demand in locations with strong solar resource such as Mexico, South America, Australia, Africa and parts of Europe in the future. Global energy demand is expected to increase by 35% in the next two decades, due to an increase in population and the economic growth of developing countries. Demand for carbon-free replacements for current energy sources will further increase the demand for Heliogen’s products.
Market Opportunity
Capital expenditure investments for solar and on- and off-shore wind capacity between 2020 and 2030 are projected to be approximately $8.5 trillion globally in order to achieve the carbon emissions reductions that would support the 1.5 degree global warming target established by the Paris Agreement. The global renewable energy market had total revenues of $692.8 billion in 2020, representing a compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”) of 8.9% between 2016 and 2020. The global renewable energy market is expected to continue its upward growth over the next years, reaching $1.1 trillion by 2027. At the same time, the global total addressable market for energy storage is predicted to reach approximately $56.0 billion by 2027 in comparison to $8.0 billion in 2020, representing a CAGR of approximately 33%. Growing at a CAGR of approximately 43% between 2020 and 2027, the cumulative requirement for global storage capacity is expected to become a 534 gigawatt-hour (“GWh”) opportunity in 2027.
We plan to also provide solutions for hydrogen production and industrial heat, so we believe our total addressable market is even larger. Our potential sales pipeline is diverse, ranging from utilities and independent power producers, oil and gas companies, mining and metals companies, and manufacturers of steel and cement. The worldwide energy industry generates annual revenues of approximately $8.6 trillion. In addition, the worldwide clean energy market is expected to reach $24 trillion by the end of the decade.
Government Targets and Corporate Initiatives
Governments, corporations, and investors are making concerted efforts and setting aggressive targets to reduce GHG emissions and phase out fossil fuel use. Such initiatives include setting timelines for zero-emission targets, establishing caps on CO2 emissions, and instituting certain other environmental sustainability initiatives. For example, in the U.S., the Biden Administration has declared the following key environmental targets: (i) a carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035, (ii) a net-zero (i.e., carbon reduction is equal to or greater than carbon emissions) economy by 2050 and (iii) to achieve in 2030 a 50-52% reduction from 2005 levels in economy-wide net GHG pollution. In the private sector, companies have also committed to environmental sustainability initiatives. Leading financial and corporate institutions have requested that all boards of directors prepare and disclose a plan to be compatible with a net-zero economy and to commit to launching investment products aligned to a net-zero pathway. Individually and collectively, these initiatives support the increased demand for renewable fuels, transportation, energy storage, renewable power, low-carbon process heat, and energy efficiency.
The key driver for renewable energy generation and storage will be increased reliance on intermittent renewable energy resources like solar PV and wind. As penetration of these renewable sources increases, the intermittency of these resources can put strain on the grid if the operator is unable to fully match supply with demand. This strain can lead to an inability to supply power when it is needed and increased costs to consumers.
Energy storage can help reduce this strain. However, beyond a threshold level of renewable penetration, current solutions to energy storage, such as batteries, are insufficient to ensure grid reliability. Research from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, a national laboratory of the U.S. Department of Energy, suggests that this threshold may be around 30% renewable penetration based on its Eastern Renewable Generation Integration Study; which found that the Eastern Interconnection, one of the largest power systems in the world, can accommodate upwards of 30% of wind and solar photovoltaic power. California is already at this level and we expect other specific geographies both in the United States and abroad will be there soon. Bloomberg New Energy Finance projects that the United States as a whole will exceed this target by 2029. In order to maintain system stability and achieve mandated decarbonization goals, longer duration energy storage options must be deployed. We believe Heliogen’s technology will be among a small list of available technologies that will be able to respond to this energy storage need in order to maintain grid reliability.
To note, changes in elected officials may directly result in changes to U.S. government mandates and available programs as well as indirectly result in changes to support from the private sectors. Such changes may have an adverse impact on the growth of renewable energy.
Competitive Strengths
We believe we have a first-mover advantage over other industry competitors as we have been committed since our founding in 2013 to the development of solar energy solutions that enable decarbonization of our economy. This is evidenced by our rich portfolio of intellectual property. We have demonstrated capability to concentrate sunlight to produce heat at temperatures ranging from 150 to 1,000 degrees centigrade, made possible by our first-of-a-kind ability to achieve high mirror adjustment accuracy. We have patented the most valuable parts of our technology at each stage of development. Beyond the patents, our journey as a company and the deep bench of experience across our leadership team
has provided and continues to provide invaluable learnings and technical know-how that we believe will be difficult to rival. We continue to develop and maintain our knowledge base, which we believe provides us with a substantial strategic head start and competitive advantage against competition in the concentrated solar energy and energy storage spaces. We also continue to target incremental and transformational improvements across all aspects of our technology in order to reduce costs and improve performance.
Competitive Forecast Economics
Historically, CSE companies have struggled to compete with PV solar due to high costs. However, while the cost of photovoltaic solar has decreased dramatically in the last decade, the issue of intermittency remains unresolved. In addition, PV does not offer an efficient solution for generating heat. As a result, PV solar may be uneconomical for many industrial processes that require heat and/or reliable delivery.
We believe our projected economics will be competitive with other prevalent sources of clean energy that include storage. For example, on a forward-looking basis, our future targets estimate a cost of less than 5 cents per MWh for power and less than $2.00 per kilogram of hydrogen, which is competitive with alternative sources. This analysis assumes subsidized economics with 60% debt at an 8% interest rate and 40% equity at a 12% cost over a 30-year projection period. Additionally, these projections are based on expected cost reductions associated with manufacturing production efficiencies, module-enabled economies of scale, and mechanical improvements such as elimination of an expensive slew-drive gearbox that is enabled by the closed-loop tracking system.
Raw Materials
The most important raw materials required for our CSE systems are steel (sheet, tube, bar, extrusions), stainless steel (pipe), glass (float glass), copper (wiring), aluminum (die castings, extrusions), commodity electrical & electronics components, ceramics & ceramic fibers, thermal insulation materials, bauxite particles and/or silica sand and concrete. Our components are produced by suppliers both domestically and internationally where most raw materials are readily available and purchased by those independent contractors and suppliers in the country of manufacture. Many major equipment and systems components are procured on a single or sole-source basis, but where multiple sources exist, we work to qualify multiple suppliers to minimize supply chain risk. We also mitigate risk by maintaining safety stock for key parts and assemblies with lengthy procurement lead times. We use a variety of agreements with suppliers to protect our intellectual property and processes to monitor and mitigate risks of the supply base causing a business disruption. The risks monitored include supplier financial viability, the ability to increase or decrease production levels, business continuity, quality and delivery.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant supply chain disruptions globally, and similar to other companies in our industry, we have observed significant commodity price inflation in recent months, in some cases by upwards of 30% to 100%. Russia’s invasion of and military attacks on Ukraine, including indirect impacts as a result of sanctions and economic disruption, may further complicate existing supply chain constraints. Shortages, price increases and/or delays in shipments of our raw materials and purchased component parts, have occurred and may continue to occur in the future which may have a material adverse effect on our results of operations if we are unable to successfully mitigate the impact, such as steel, glass, concrete and adhesives, which are used as components of supplies or materials utilized in our operations.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic. As the pandemic has continued to evolve, including the emergence of additional SARS-CoV-2 variants that have proven especially contagious or virulent, the ultimate extent of the impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition will be driven primarily by the severity and duration of the pandemic, the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies. During the year ended December 31, 2021, despite the continued COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to operate our business at full capacity, including all of our manufacturing and research and development operations, with the adoption of enhanced health and safety practices for our stakeholders.
Results of Operations
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue - we recognize revenue over time using the incurred costs method for our contracts with customers that include projects under development and engineering and design services.
Cost of Sales - cost of sales consists primarily of direct labor and direct external vendor costs related to our revenue contracts. No allocation of depreciation and amortization has been recognized due to the nature of work being performed and the impact would be immaterial.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense - selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, professional fees, insurance costs, and other business development and selling expenses.
Research and Development Expense - research and development (“R&D”) expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs; the cost of products, materials, and outside services used in our R&D activities.
Factors Impacting Comparability
Athena Business Combination - On December 30, 2021, we completed the closing of the Business Combination with Athena contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, dated July 6, 2021, by and among Athena, Merger Sub, and Legacy Heliogen, following the approval at the Special Meeting held on December 28, 2021. While the legal acquirer in the Business Combination Agreement was Athena, for financial accounting and reporting purposes under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), Legacy Heliogen was the accounting acquirer and the Transaction were accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization.”
A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting for the accounting acquirer, and the consolidated financial statements of the combined company represent the continuation of the historical consolidated financial statements of Legacy Heliogen in many respects. Under this method of accounting, Athena is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes and the Business Combination is accounted for as a recapitalization of Legacy Heliogen (i.e., a capital transaction involving the issuance of stock by Legacy Heliogen for the net assets of Athena accompanied by a recapitalization).
As a result of the Business Combination, Legacy Heliogen is the successor SEC registrant, and Legacy Heliogen’s historical consolidated financial statements for previous periods are presented in periodic reports filed with the SEC. The most significant changes in Legacy Heliogen’s reported financial position and results relate to the following:
•Net cash proceeds received by Heliogen of $159.4 million as a result of the Business Combination (reflecting proceeds from Athena’s trust account, less redemptions, and a PIPE investment of $165.0 million, offset by transaction costs paid at closing);
•The conversion of Legacy Heliogen’s legacy preferred stock, SAFE Instruments, and warrants to shares of common stock as part of the Merger; and
•The assumption of Athena’s public and private warrants, which are accounted for at fair value.
Additionally, since Legacy Heliogen became the successor to an SEC-registered and NYSE-listed company, we adopted and will continue to evaluate and implement procedures and processes to comply with public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We have incurred and expect to incur additional annual expenses as a result of being a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and professional services for accounting, audit, legal and other customary services required of a public company.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
___________________
n/m - not meaningful
Revenue and Gross Loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized revenue of $8.8 million driven primarily by $6.5 million in services revenue related primarily to engineering and design services and $2.3 million in project revenue for amounts recognized related to the development and completion of our first commercial-scale facility. Prior to 2021, we had not recorded significant amounts of revenue as our focus was primarily on research and development of our CSE technology. During 2021, we contracted with several customers expected to be involved in the development and completion of our first commercial-scale facilities which resulted in a large engineering and design contract that was completed entirely within 2021. As we transition to 2022, we are recognizing project revenue as we satisfy performance obligations associated with the construction and deployment of our CSE technology in a commercial-scale facility.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized gross loss of $4.9 million due primarily to recognition of contract losses of $6.5 million at the inception of three contracts, including one contract related to our first commercial-scale facility. These losses were offset by $1.6 million of gross profit earned on the engineering and design service contract completed in 2021.
We recognized a gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to cost overruns relating to a revenue contract for engineering and design service.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
SG&A increased approximately $26.7 million, from $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was driven primarily by our growth to support commercial operations, resulting in higher headcount and related employee expenses of approximately $16.5 million, professional and consulting services to support public company readiness efforts of $5.8 million, and facilities and office related expenses of $4.4 million due to expansion of our facilities in Pasadena, California and Long Beach, California.
Research and Development Expense
R&D expense increased $9.9 million, from $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due primarily to headcount growth and related consulting services associated with our continuing development efforts related to our commercial-scale offering.
SAFE Instruments Remeasurement
In the first half of 2021, we entered into Simple Agreements for Future Equity (“SAFE Instruments” or “SAFE”) financing transactions with third-party investors in connection with a private round of funding to provide investors an opportunity to convert into common or preferred stock, upon defined triggering events. Pursuant to the SAFE agreement provisions, the SAFE Instruments were converted to common stock immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination. See Note 1 of our accompanying consolidated financial statements, for further discussion on the SAFE Instruments converted to common stock as related to the Merger. Due to the terms of the SAFE Instruments, the SAFE Instruments were measured at fair value at each reporting period and through the date of conversion resulting in the recognition of a $86.9 million loss on the remeasurement during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to Notes 4 and Note 14 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for the accounting for and significant inputs to the valuation of the SAFE Instruments, respectively, as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Warrant Remeasurement
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through the closing of the Business Combination, we had outstanding warrants to purchase our preferred stock that were subject to fair value accounting. Upon consummation of the Business Combination, those warrants were converted into common stock. As part of the Business Combination, we assumed the outstanding public and private warrants of Athena, which were accounted for at fair value. We incurred a $6.7 million loss during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the change in valuation on our warrant liabilities, compared to a loss of $7 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss in 2021 is comprised of a $3.0 million loss related to Heliogen’s preferred stock warrants which converted immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination and $3.7 million in loss recognized in the period after December 30, 2021 for the Athena public and private warrants assumed by Heliogen as part of the Business Combination based on fair value at December 31, 2021. Refer to Notes 4 and 14 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for the accounting for and for significant inputs to the valuation of warrants as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Heliogen’s principal source of liquidity has historically been proceeds from private investors through the issuance of SAFE Instruments, preferred stock, and common stock. As a result of the Business Combination with Athena, Heliogen received net cash proceeds of $159.4 million. Additionally, Heliogen began recognizing revenue in 2020, had increased revenues in 2021, and is in the process of negotiating further revenue contracts with customers as we progress toward the development and completion of our first commercial-scale CSE facilities. Our principal uses of cash are for selling, general and administrative expenses and R&D expenditures in support of Heliogen’s development of its technology and operational growth efforts. To date, Heliogen has not had any material bank debt and has no material outstanding debt on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. Total liquidity for Heliogen, including cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments, totaled $222.4 million and $18.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
The Company’s material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations consist primarily of long-term operating leases related to our Pasadena, California and Long Beach, California office leases. Refer to Note 12 of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a maturity analysis of our operating leases.
With the funds raised in connection with the Business Combination, inclusive of the PIPE financing, we believe that our existing liquidity should provide the ability to meet our contractual obligations and continue our current R&D efforts and development of our first commercial facilities and will be sufficient to meet our near-term cash requirements. However, we could potentially use these available financial resources sooner than expected due to delays in project execution or higher than anticipated costs and, thus we may need to incur additional indebtedness or issue additional equity to meet our operating needs. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in developing our new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our business, growth and results of operations. While we believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, cash flow from operations, and issuances of equity securities or debt offerings, our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Summary of Cash Flows
A summary of the Company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities is presented in the following table:
Net Cash from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $31.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $7.0 million cash used for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a $24.1 million increase in use of operating cash, driven primarily by higher operating costs of $20.4 million, net of changes in accruals, in 2021 compared to 2020 due to Heliogen’s ramp-up of operations and increases in headcount, deposits paid to third parties for feasibility studies associated with ongoing project development activities of $1.1 million, our Pasadena, California office lease of $0.4 million, and $1.5 million in restricted cash in connection with our Long Beach, California office lease. These increases were partly offset by cash receipts of $5.1 million associated with our large engineering and design contract that was fully completed in 2021.
Net Cash from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $38.6 million and consisted of cash invested in available-for-sale debt securities of $49.3 million offset by maturities of $16.2 million, cash consideration paid for the HelioHeat Acquisition, net of acquired cash, of $1.7 million, and $3.8 million for additions to property, plant, and equipment primarily comprising $2.1 million in machinery, equipment and improvements for our new Long Beach manufacturing facility and $1.4 million in office and computer equipment to support our headcount growth. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.3 million and primarily represents leasehold improvements to our facilities.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities totaled $242.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven primarily by $159.4 million from the closing of the Business Combination, inclusive of the PIPE proceeds, net of transactions costs, $83.4 million cash received from the issuance of the SAFE Instruments and $0.5 million cash received from the exercise of stock options, partly offset by $0.4 million for repayment of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan received in 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities totaled $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was due primarily to $10.2 million cash received from the issuance of preferred stock and $0.4 million cash received from the PPP loan.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Although these estimates are based on our knowledge of current events and actions we may undertake in the future, actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue over time as work is performed using the incurred costs method, which we believe is the method that most accurately reflects our progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligation. Under this method, revenue arising from fixed-price contracts, which include cost reimbursable contracts with a cap, is recognized as work is performed based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligations.
Incurred costs include all direct material, labor, and subcontract costs, and those indirect costs related to contract performance, such as indirect labor, supplies, and tools. Cost-based input methods of revenue recognition require us to make estimates of net contract revenues and costs to complete the projects. In making such estimates, significant judgment is required to evaluate assumptions related to the amount of net contract revenues, including the impact of any performance incentives, liquidated damages, and other payments to customers. Significant judgment is also required to evaluate assumptions related to the costs to complete the projects, including materials, labor, contingencies, and other system costs. If the estimated total costs on any contract are greater than the net contract revenues, we recognize the entire estimated loss in the period the loss becomes known and can be reasonably estimated.
Share-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends, which are described in greater detail below.
Fair value of our common stock - The estimated fair value of our common stock required significant judgment by management, including the valuation methodology used, weighting of potential scenarios, and discount rate. Our common stock was measured at fair value using a probability-weighted method considering two potential outcomes: a merger with a special purpose acquisition company exit scenario and a stay private scenario. In addition, we applied a discount for lack of marketability, which was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Expected Term - The expected term of the options represents the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding.
Expected Volatility - Prior to the Business Combination, we had no trading history for our common stock. Thus, expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield of zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with maturities commensurate with the expected term of the awards.
Expected Dividends - The expected dividends assumption is based on the expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future; therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of stock options granted involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and significantly different assumptions or estimates are used, the expenses related to our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
SAFE Instruments and Warrants
For Legacy Heliogen’s SAFE Instruments and preferred stock warrants, we determined the fair value of these instruments at each reporting period end and through the date of conversion as part of the Business Combination. The determination of fair value required significant judgment by management, including the valuation methodology used, weighting of potential scenarios, and discount rate. The SAFE Instruments and Legacy Heliogen preferred stock warrants were initially measured at fair value using a probability-weighted method considering two potential outcomes: a merger
with a special purpose acquisition company exit scenario and a stay private scenario. On December 30, 2021, immediately prior to their conversion, the SAFE Instruments and Legacy Heliogen preferred stock warrants were remeasured at fair value utilizing the income approach based on the Merger occurring on the valuation date. In addition, we applied a discount for lack of marketability, which was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Following the closing of the Business Combination, Athena’s public and private warrants became Heliogen warrants for which liability classification remained. At each reporting end, we are required to measure the fair value of the public and private warrants. The Public Warrants are traded on an exchange and thus management uses the closing price of the warrants at each period end. In assessing the valuation of the private warrants, management assessed the value holders of the private warrants would receive in a redemption scenario and concluded that due to the make-whole exercise provision, the value of private warrants approximates the value of the Public Warrants. Thus, we have estimated the fair value of the private warrants based on the closing price of the Public Warrants.
Business Combination
For our acquisition of HelioHeat GmbH, we accounted for the acquisition as a business combination under U.S. GAAP. Under business combination accounting, we estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill, as of the acquisition date, is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, our actual results may differ from estimates.
Contingent consideration arrangements are recognized at their acquisition date fair value using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model and included as part of purchase price at the acquisition date. Contingent consideration arrangements are classified as liabilities and are remeasured to fair value at each reporting period, with any change in fair value being recognized in the consolidated statement of operations. The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration is based primarily on estimates of meeting the applicable contingency conditions as per the terms of the applicable agreements.
The purchase price allocation for the HelioHeat Acquisition is preliminary as of December 31, 2021 pending the completion of a valuation of the expected intangible asset to be recognized related to developed technology associated with HelioHeat’s particle receiver technology and the completion of a valuation of this intangible asset. All other amounts recognized were finalized as of December 31, 2021.