Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to "Part II-Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 17, 2021, which is incorporated herein by reference.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted the global economy and strained the hospitality industry since the beginning of 2020. Our Asia Pacific region began experiencing the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in January 2020, while the pronounced negative results and suspensions of hotel operations in the Americas and Europe, Middle East and Africa ("EMEA") regions did not begin until mid-March 2020. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the pervasiveness and severity of travel restrictions and stay-at-home directives have varied by country and state and fluctuated based on a number of factors, including: (i) COVID-19 infection surges and contractions; (ii) the emergence of new strains and variants of the virus; and (iii) the distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations, which commenced in late 2020. The pandemic had a material adverse impact on our results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 when compared to periods prior to the onset of the pandemic, and although all periods were significantly impacted by the pandemic, none of these periods are considered comparable, and no periods affected by the pandemic are expected to be comparable to future periods. Although we have observed signs of economic recovery, we cannot determine when the global economy will fully recover. Accordingly, given the ongoing nature of the pandemic, the ultimate impact that it will have on the Company's business, financial performance and results of operations remains uncertain.
Although certain restrictions have been reinstated with the spread of new variants of the virus, the broader distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations beginning in early 2021 and the overall easing of travel and other restrictions generated renewed interest in travel and tourism activities in many markets around the globe in 2021. However, the continued spreading of COVID-19 and its related variants could result in travel and other restrictions being implemented or reinstated in the affected areas, where our hotels may be located, in future periods, yielding further negative effects on our operations.
While the restrictions and the reduction in travel resulted in the suspensions of operations at certain hotels throughout 2020, reopenings significantly outpaced new suspensions and resuspensions during 2021, with approximately 360 hotels suspended for some period of time during the year ended December 31, 2021. Nearly all of the hotels that suspended operations at some point since the start of the pandemic had reopened as of December 31, 2021.
Overview
Our Business
Hilton is one of the largest hospitality companies in the world, with 6,837 properties comprising 1,074,791 rooms in 122 countries and territories as of December 31, 2021. Our premier brand portfolio includes: our luxury hotel brands, Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts, LXR Hotels & Resorts and Conrad Hotels & Resorts; our emerging lifestyle hotel brands, Canopy by Hilton, Tempo by Hilton and Motto by Hilton; our full service hotel brands, Signia by Hilton, Hilton Hotels & Resorts, Curio Collection by Hilton, DoubleTree by Hilton and Tapestry Collection by Hilton; our focused service hotel brands, Hilton Garden Inn, Hampton by Hilton and Tru by Hilton; our all-suites hotel brands, Embassy Suites by Hilton, Homewood Suites by Hilton and Home2 Suites by Hilton; and our timeshare brand, Hilton Grand Vacations. As of December 31, 2021, we had 128 million members in our award-winning guest loyalty program, Hilton Honors, a 13 percent increase from December 31, 2020.
Segments and Regions
We analyze our operations and business by both operating segments and geographic regions. Our operations consist of two reportable segments that are based on similar products or services: (i) management and franchise and (ii) ownership. The management and franchise segment provides services, including hotel management and licensing of our IP. This segment generates its revenue from: (i) management and franchise fees charged to third-party hotel owners; (ii) licensing fees from HGV and strategic partnerships, including co-branded credit card arrangements, for the right to use our IP; and (iii) fees for managing hotels in our ownership segment. As a manager of hotels, we typically are responsible for supervising or operating the hotel in
exchange for management fees. As a franchisor of hotels, we charge franchise fees in exchange for the use of one of our brand names and related commercial services, such as our reservation system, marketing and information technology services, while a third party manages or operates such franchised hotels. The ownership segment primarily derives earnings from providing nightly hotel room sales, food and beverage sales and other services at our consolidated owned and leased hotels.
Geographically, we conduct business through three distinct geographic regions: (i) the Americas; (ii) EMEA; and (iii) Asia Pacific. The Americas region includes North America, South America and Central America, including all Caribbean nations. Although the U.S., which represented 70 percent of our system-wide hotel rooms as of December 31, 2021, is included in the Americas region, it is often analyzed separately and apart from the Americas region and, as such, it is presented separately within the analysis herein. The EMEA region includes Europe, which represents the western-most peninsula of Eurasia stretching from Iceland in the west to Russia in the east, and the Middle East and Africa ("MEA"), which represents the Middle East region and all African nations, including the Indian Ocean island nations. Europe and MEA are often analyzed separately and, as such, are presented separately within the analysis herein. The Asia Pacific region includes the eastern and southeastern nations of Asia, as well as India, Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Island nations.
System Growth and Development Pipeline
Our strategic objectives include the continued expansion of our global portfolio and fee-based business. As we enter into new management and franchise contracts, we expand our business with minimal or no capital investment by us as the manager or franchisor, since the capital required to build and maintain hotels is typically provided by the third-party owner of the hotel with whom we contract to provide management services or license our IP. Prior to approving the addition of new hotels to our management and franchise development pipeline, we evaluate the economic viability of the hotel based on its geographic location, the credit quality of the third-party owner and other factors. By increasing the number of management and franchise contracts with third-party owners, over time we expect to increase revenues, overall return on invested capital and cash available to support our business needs. While these objectives have not changed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the current economic environment has posed certain challenges to the execution of our strategy, which have included and may continue to include delays in openings and new development. See further discussion on our cash management policy, as detailed in "-Liquidity and Capital Resources."
We are focused on the growth of our business by expanding our share of the global hospitality industry through our development pipeline, which includes hotels that we expect to add to our system in the future. The following table summarizes our development activity:
____________
(1)Rounded to the nearest hundred.
(2)Represents net unit growth for the year ended December 31, 2021 of 5.6 percent.
(3)Hotels in our system are under development throughout 115 countries and territories, including 28 countries and territories where we do not currently have any existing hotels.
(4)In our development pipeline, as of December 31, 2021, 198,000 of the rooms were under construction and 249,600 of the rooms were located outside of the U.S. Nearly all of the rooms in our development pipeline are within our management and franchise segment. We do not consider any individual development project to be material to us.
Brexit
In June 2016, the U.K. held a referendum in which voters approved an exit from the E.U. (commonly referred to as "Brexit"). In December 2020, the U.K. and the E.U. reached a new bilateral trade and cooperation deal governing their future relationship (the "EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement"), which was fully implemented from May 1, 2021. While the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement provides clarity in respect of the intended future relationship between the U.K. and the E.U. and some detailed matters of trade and cooperation, it remains unclear what general long-term economic, financial,
trade and legal implications the U.K. withdrawal from the E.U. will have and how it will ultimately affect our business. While our results as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 were not materially affected by Brexit specifically, we will continue to monitor the potential impact of Brexit on our business in future periods.
Principal Components and Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
Revenues
Principal Components
We primarily derive our revenues from the following sources:
•Franchise and licensing fees. Represents fees earned in connection with the licensing of one of our brands, as well as fees from licensing agreements to use our IP. Under our long-term franchise contracts with hotel owners, franchisees typically pay us franchise fees that include: (i) monthly royalty fees, generally based on a percentage of the hotel's monthly gross room revenue, and, in some cases, a percentage of gross food and beverage revenues and other revenues, as applicable and (ii) application, initiation and other fees for when new hotels enter the system, when there is a change of ownership of a hotel or when contracts with properties already in our system are extended. Consideration to incentivize hotel owners to enter into franchise contracts with us is amortized over the life of the applicable contract as a reduction to franchise and licensing fees. Our non-hotel licensing agreements are predominantly with HGV and strategic partners, including co-branded credit card providers.
•Base and incentive management fees. Represents fees earned in connection with the management of hotels. Terms of our management contracts vary, but our fees generally consist of a base fee, which is typically based on a percentage of the hotel's monthly gross revenue and, when applicable, an incentive fee, which is typically based on the hotel's operating profits, normally over a one-calendar year period, and, in some cases, may be subject to a stated return threshold to the hotel owner. Outside of the U.S., our fees are often more dependent on hotel profitability measures, either because of a single management fee structure where the entire fee is an incentive fee, or because our two-tier fee structure is more heavily weighted toward the incentive fee than the base fee. Consideration to incentivize hotel owners to enter into management contracts with us is amortized over the life of the applicable contract as a reduction to base and other management fees.
•Owned and leased hotels. Represents revenues derived from the operations of our consolidated owned and leased hotels, including hotel room sales, accommodations sold in conjunction with other services, food and beverage sales and other ancillary goods and services. These revenues are primarily derived from two categories of customers: transient and group. Transient guests are individual travelers who are traveling for business or leisure. Group guests are traveling for group events that reserve rooms for meetings, conferences or social functions, which may be sponsored by corporate, social, military, educational, religious or other organizations or associations. Group business usually includes a block of room accommodations, as well as other ancillary services, such as meetings facilities and catering and banquet services. A majority of our food and beverage sales and other ancillary goods and services are provided to customers who are also occupying rooms at our hotels. As a result, occupancy affects all components of our owned and leased hotel revenues.
•Other revenues. Represents revenues generated by the incidental support of hotel operations for owned, leased, managed and franchised hotels, including our purchasing operations, and other operating income.
•Other revenues from managed and franchised properties. Represents amounts that are contractually reimbursed to us by property owners, either directly as costs are incurred or indirectly through program fees billed and collected in advance related to certain costs and expenses supporting the operations of the related properties. The direct reimbursements by property owners are for payroll and related costs if the property employees are legally our responsibility, and certain other operating costs of the managed and franchised properties' operations. We have no legal responsibility for the employees or the liabilities associated with operating franchised properties or certain of our managed properties. Revenues and expenses for these direct reimbursements have no net effect on operating income (loss) or net income (loss). The monthly program fee that is paid by hotel franchisees and property owners of hotels that we manage is based on the underlying hotel's sales or usage and relates to the costs of our brands and shared services, including: (i) advertising and marketing programs; (ii) internet, technology and reservation systems; and (iii) quality assurance programs. Other revenues from managed and franchised properties also includes revenues related to our Hilton Honors guest loyalty program, which are primarily derived from payments from hotel franchisees and third-
party owners of hotels we manage that participate in the program, as well as co-branded credit card providers. We are contractually required to use these fees that we collect solely for these programs.
Factors Affecting our Revenues
The following factors affect the revenues we derive from our operations:
•Consumer demand and global economic conditions. Consumer demand for our products and services is closely linked to the performance of the general economy and is sensitive to business and personal discretionary spending levels. Among other factors, declines in consumer demand due to adverse general economic conditions, risks reducing or otherwise negatively affecting travel patterns, lower consumer confidence and adverse political conditions can reduce the amount of management and franchise fee revenues we are able to generate and/or reduce the revenues and profitability of the operations of our owned and leased hotels. Further, competition for hotel guests and the supply of hotel services affect our ability to sustain or increase rates charged to customers of our hotels. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, several of these factors, as well as health and safety concerns, had a significant effect on global economic conditions and consumer demand for our products and services. Also, declines in hotel profitability during an economic downturn directly affect the incentive portion of our management fees, which is based on hotel profitability measures. As a result, changes in consumer demand and general business cycles have historically subjected, are currently subjecting and could in the future subject our revenues to significant volatility.
•Contracts with third-party owners and franchisees and relationships with developers. We depend on our long-term management and franchise contracts with third-party hotel owners and hotel franchisees for our management and franchise fee revenues. The success and sustainability of our management and franchise business depends on our ability to perform under our management and franchise contracts and maintain good relationships with third-party owners and franchisees. Our relationships with these third parties allow us to maintain our current presence as contracts mature and also generate new incremental opportunities for property development that can support our growth. Growth and maintenance of our hotel system and earning fees related to hotels in development are dependent on the ability of developers and owners to access capital for the development, maintenance and renovation of properties. We believe that we have good relationships with our third-party owners, franchisees and developers and are committed to the continued growth and development of these relationships. These relationships exist with a diverse group of owners, franchisees and developers and are not significantly concentrated with any one particular third party.
Expenses
Principal Components
We primarily incur the following expenses:
•Owned and leased hotels. Reflects the operating expenses of our consolidated owned and leased hotels, including room expenses, food and beverage costs, other support costs and property expenses. Room expenses include compensation costs for housekeeping, laundry and front desk staff, as well as supply costs for guest room amenities and laundry. Food and beverage costs include costs for wait and kitchen staff and food and beverage inventory. Other support expenses include: costs associated with property-level management; utilities; sales and marketing; operating hotel spas; operating telephones, parking and other guest recreation; entertainment; and other services. Property expenses include property taxes, repairs and maintenance, rent and insurance.
•Depreciation and amortization. These are non-cash expenses that primarily consist of: (i) amortization of intangible assets that were recorded at their fair value at the time of the 2007 transaction whereby we became a wholly owned subsidiary of affiliates of Blackstone Inc. (the "Merger"), which primarily include values assigned to management and franchise contracts, leases and our Hilton Honors guest loyalty program intangible asset; (ii) amortization of capitalized software costs; and (iii) depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, including our finance lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets, such as buildings and furniture and equipment that are used in corporate operations or at our consolidated owned and leased hotels.
•General and administrative. Consists primarily of compensation costs for our corporate employees, including share-based compensation; professional fees, including consulting, audit and legal fees; travel and entertainment expenses; bad debt expenses for uncollectible management, franchise and other fees; and administrative and related expenses.
•Other expenses. Consists of expenses incurred by our purchasing operations and other ancillary businesses, along with other operating expenses of the business.
•Other expenses from managed and franchised properties. Represents certain costs and expenses that are contractually reimbursed to us by property owners for payroll and related costs for properties that we manage where the property employees are legally our responsibility, or paid from program fees collected from properties for certain other operating costs of the managed and franchised properties' operations, including those related to our brands and shared services programs. We are contractually required to use these fees solely for these programs. We have no legal responsibility for the employees or the liabilities associated with operating franchised properties or certain of our managed hotels. Other expenses from managed and franchised properties also includes expenses for the operation of our Hilton Honors guest loyalty program.
Factors Affecting our Costs and Expenses
The following are principal factors that affect the costs and expenses we incur in the course of our operations:
•Fixed expenses. Many of the expenses associated with owning and leasing hotels are relatively fixed. These expenses include personnel costs, rent, property taxes, insurance and utilities. If we are unable to decrease these costs significantly or rapidly when demand for our hotels decreases, the resulting decline in our revenues can have an adverse effect on our net cash flows, margins and profits. This effect can be especially pronounced during periods of economic contraction or slow economic growth, including that which resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic. Economic downturns generally affect the results of our ownership segment more significantly than the results of our management and franchise segment due to the high fixed costs associated with operating an owned or leased hotel. Employees at some of our owned and leased hotels are parties to collective bargaining agreements that may also limit our ability to make timely staffing or labor changes in response to declining revenues. In addition, any efforts to reduce costs, including the deferral or cancellation of capital improvements, could adversely affect the economic value of our hotels and brands. Additionally, the general and administrative expenses of operating a global business also include fixed personnel costs, rent, property taxes, insurance and utilities. The effectiveness of any cost-cutting efforts related to owning and leasing hotels or corporate operations is limited by the amount of inherent fixed costs. However, we have taken steps to reduce our fixed costs to levels we believe are appropriate to maximize profitability and respond to expected future market conditions, while continuing to optimize value for the experiences of our customers, owners and Hilton employees, supporting the long-term sustainability of our brands and business.
•Changes in depreciation and amortization expenses. We capitalize costs associated with certain software development projects and, as those projects are completed and placed into service, amortization expenses will increase. As the finite-lived intangible assets that were recorded at the Merger become fully amortized, amortization expenses will decrease. Additionally, changes in depreciation expenses may be driven by renovations of existing hotels, acquisition or development of new hotels, the disposition of existing hotels or corporate facilities through sale, closure or lease termination, lease renewals, expenditures related to our corporate facilities or changes in estimates of the useful lives of our assets. As we place new assets into service, we will be required to recognize additional depreciation expenses on those assets. If we are required to recognize impairment losses related to our depreciable assets or finite-lived intangible assets, the related depreciation or amortization expenses, respectively, will decrease.
Other Items
Effect of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations
Significant portions of our operations are conducted in functional currencies other than our reporting currency, which is USD, and we have assets and liabilities, including those that are payable or receivable by consolidated subsidiaries, denominated in a variety of foreign currencies. As a result, we are required to translate the results of those operations, assets and liabilities from their functional currency into USD at market-based foreign currency exchange rates for each reporting period. When comparing our results of operations between periods, there may be material portions of the changes in our revenues or expenses that are derived from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates experienced between those periods. We hedge foreign currency exchange-based cash flow variability of certain of our fees using forward contracts designated as hedging instruments. We also hold short-term forward contracts to offset exposure to fluctuations in certain of our foreign currency denominated cash balances, primarily related to our intercompany financing arrangements, and we have not currently elected to designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments.
Seasonality
The hospitality industry is seasonal in nature. The periods during which our properties experience higher or lower levels of demand vary from property to property, depending principally upon their location, type of property and competitive mix within the specific location. Based on historical results, we generally expect our revenues to be lower in the first quarter of each year than in each of the three subsequent quarters.
Key Business and Financial Metrics Used by Management
Comparable Hotels
We define our comparable hotels as those that: (i) were active and operating in our system for at least one full calendar year as of the end of the current period, and open January 1st of the previous year; (ii) have not undergone a change in brand or ownership type during the current or comparable periods reported; and (iii) have not sustained substantial property damage, business interruption, undergone large-scale capital projects or for which comparable results were not available. Of the 6,777 hotels in our system as of December 31, 2021, 5,524 hotels were classified as comparable hotels. Our 1,253 non-comparable hotels included 70 hotels, or approximately one percent of the total hotels in our system, that were removed from the comparable group during the last twelve months because they sustained substantial property damage, business interruption, underwent large-scale capital projects or comparable results were otherwise not available.
When considering business interruption in the context of our definition of comparable hotels, no hotel that had completely or partially suspended operations on a temporary basis at any time as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic was excluded from the definition of comparable hotels on that basis alone. Despite these temporary suspensions of hotel operations, we believe that including these hotels within our hotel operating statistics of occupancy, average daily rate ("ADR") and revenue per available room ("RevPAR"), if they would have otherwise been included, reflects the underlying results of our business for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Occupancy
Occupancy represents the total number of room nights sold divided by the total number of room nights available at a hotel or group of hotels for a given period. Occupancy measures the utilization of our hotels' available capacity. Management uses occupancy to gauge demand at a specific hotel or group of hotels in a given period. Occupancy levels also help us determine achievable ADR pricing levels as demand for hotel rooms increases or decreases.
ADR
ADR represents hotel room revenue divided by the total number of room nights sold for a given period. ADR measures the average room price attained by a hotel, and ADR trends provide useful information concerning the pricing environment and the nature of the customer base of a hotel or group of hotels. ADR is a commonly used performance measure in the industry, and we use ADR to assess pricing levels that we are able to generate by type of customer, as changes in rates charged to customers have different effects on overall revenues and incremental profitability than changes in occupancy, as described above.
RevPAR
RevPAR is calculated by dividing hotel room revenue by the total number of room nights available to guests for a given period. We consider RevPAR to be a meaningful indicator of our performance as it provides a metric correlated to two primary and key drivers of operations at a hotel or group of hotels, as previously described: occupancy and ADR. RevPAR is also a useful indicator in measuring performance over comparable periods for comparable hotels.
References to occupancy, ADR and RevPAR are presented on a comparable basis, based on the comparable hotels as of December 31, 2021, and references to ADR and RevPAR are presented on a currency neutral basis, unless otherwise noted. As such, comparisons of these hotel operating statistics for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 or 2019, use the foreign currency exchange rates used to translate the results of the Company's foreign operations within its financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA reflects net income (loss), excluding interest expense, a provision for income tax benefit (expense) and depreciation and amortization expenses. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as EBITDA, as previously defined, further adjusted to exclude certain items, including gains, losses, revenues and expenses in connection with: (i) asset dispositions for both consolidated and unconsolidated equity investments; (ii) foreign currency transactions; (iii) debt restructurings and retirements; (iv) furniture, fixtures and equipment ("FF&E") replacement reserves required under certain lease agreements; (v) share-based compensation; (vi) reorganization, severance, relocation and other expenses; (vii) non-cash impairment; (viii) amortization of contract acquisition costs; (ix) the net effect of reimbursable costs included in other revenues and other expenses from managed and franchised properties; and (x) other items.
We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provide useful information to investors about us and our financial condition and results of operations for the following reasons: (i) these measures are among the measures used by our management team to evaluate our operating performance and make day-to-day operating decisions and (ii) these measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties as a common performance measure to compare results or estimate valuations across companies in our industry. Additionally, these measures exclude certain items that can vary widely across different industries and among competitors within our industry. For instance, interest expense and income taxes are dependent on company specifics, including, among other things, capital structure and operating jurisdictions, respectively, and, therefore, could vary significantly across companies. Depreciation and amortization expenses, as well as amortization of contract acquisition costs, are dependent upon company policies, including the method of acquiring and depreciating assets and the useful lives that are used. For Adjusted EBITDA, we also exclude items such as: (i) FF&E replacement reserves for leased hotels to be consistent with the treatment of capital expenditures for property and equipment, where payments for such capitalized assets are depreciated over their useful lives; (ii) share-based compensation, as this could vary widely among companies due to the different plans in place and the usage of them; (iii) the net effect of our cost reimbursement revenues and reimbursed expenses, as we contractually do not operate the related programs to generate a profit over the terms of the respective contracts; and (iv) other items, such as amounts related to debt restructurings and debt retirements and reorganization and related severance costs, that are not core to our operations and are not reflective of our operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not recognized terms under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") and should not be considered as alternatives, either in isolation or as a substitute, for net income (loss) or other measures of financial performance or liquidity, including cash flows, derived in accordance with GAAP. Further, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, including:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our indebtedness;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect income tax expenses or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the effect on earnings or changes resulting from matters that we consider not to be indicative of our future operations;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as discretionary cash available to us to reinvest in the growth of our business or as measures of cash that will be available to us to meet our obligations.
Results of Operations
The hotel operating statistics by region for our system-wide comparable hotels were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, while the COVID-19 pandemic continued to negatively impact our business and our hotel operating statistics, we experienced significant improvement in our results as compared to the prior year, due to an upward trend in travel and tourism with the easing of many COVID-19 restrictions and the distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations. All regions showed improvement in RevPAR during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The U.S. experienced relatively consistent recovery throughout 2021, with occupancy for the year down 13.8 percentage points from 2019. While the recoveries of the Europe and Americas (excluding U.S.) regions were outpaced by other regions early in 2021, the easing of travel restrictions, and, in Europe, a more expansive vaccination program, accelerated their recovery later in the year, resulting in improvement in operating statistics consistent with system-wide results for the full year. Of all regions, MEA recovered the most during the year with regard to RevPAR when compared to 2019. In Asia Pacific, a fluctuating recovery due to prolonged COVID-19 and travel restrictions in certain countries on both domestic and international travel resulted in a more modest increase in RevPAR for the year when compared to the other regions. Our system-wide RevPAR and ADR for the year ended December 31, 2021 were down 30.0 percent and 9.9 percent, respectively, compared to the same period in 2019 on a comparable and currency neutral basis.
Further, as a result of the pandemic, certain hotels suspended operations at various times throughout 2020, but the majority of those hotels were reopened by the beginning of 2021. In line with our recovery, although some hotels did suspend operations during the year ended December 31, 2021, reopenings significantly outpaced suspensions. As such, the operations of only approximately 360 hotels, primarily located in the U.S. and Europe, were suspended for some period of time during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to approximately 1,280 hotels during the year ended December 31, 2020. Nearly all of the hotels that suspended operations at some point since the start of the pandemic had reopened as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, while most hotels, including those that reopened following suspensions of their operations, experienced significantly lower occupancy during 2020 and early 2021 as compared to periods prior to the onset of the pandemic, system-
wide occupancy improved during 2021 and system-wide occupancy during the three months ended December 31, 2021 increased 20.7 percentage points as compared to the same period in 2020.
The table below provides a reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
____________
(1)Amounts for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include costs recognized for certain legal settlements, severance not related to the reorganization activities undertaken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and other items. The amount for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes losses related to the disposal of an investment and the settlement of a debt guarantee for a franchised hotel and a gain related to the reimbursement by a third party for taxes owed resulting from the sale of a hotel in a prior period.
Revenues
____________
(1)Fluctuation in terms of percentage change is not meaningful.
The COVID-19 pandemic began to negatively affect our franchise and licensing fees and total management fees in March 2020. However, during 2021, we experienced increases in fees recognized, as compared to fees recognized during 2020, driven by an upward trend in travel and tourism resulting from increased desire to travel by our customers, as COVID-19 vaccinations were distributed more broadly and COVID-19 restrictions eased in many areas. Additionally, there were decreases in the number of hotels that had suspended operations as a result of the pandemic during the respective periods, with approximately 1,245 managed and franchised hotels with suspended operations for some period of time during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately 345 managed and franchised hotels during the year ended December 31, 2021. Nearly all of the managed and franchised hotels that suspended operations at some point since the start of the pandemic were reopened as of December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, RevPAR increased 62.3 percent at our comparable franchised properties and 55.2 percent at our comparable managed properties as a result of increased occupancy of 18.3 percentage points and 12.7 percentage points, respectively, and increased ADR of 13.4 percent and 12.3 percent, respectively.
Including new development and ownership type transfers, from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021, we added over 730 managed and franchised properties on a net basis, providing an additional 105,000 rooms to our management and franchise segment. As new hotels were part of our system for full periods and were part of the recovery from the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, such hotels increased our franchise and management fees during the periods, and we expect this trend to continue in future periods.
Additionally, licensing and other fees increased $97 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increases in licensing fees from our strategic partnerships and HGV, which were the result of increased co-branded credit cardholder spend and timeshare revenues, respectively, both resulting from the rise in consumer spending and travel and tourism during the period.
Incentive management fees increased during the period as they are based on hotels' operating profits, which have improved significantly from the prior year as a result of increased demand at our properties.
The increase in owned and leased hotel revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting increase in occupancy across our owned and leased hotels. Although the operations of approximately 15 and 35 of our owned and leased hotels were suspended for some period of time during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, all of these hotels were reopened before December 31, 2021.
The increase in owned and leased hotel revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 included a $7 million increase as a result of favorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and, on a currency neutral basis, a $130 million increase and $40 million increase from our comparable and non-comparable owned and leased hotels, respectively. The increase in revenues from our comparable owned and leased hotels was the result of increased RevPAR of 45.3 percent, primarily due to increased occupancy of 9.5 percentage points and ADR of 4.7 percent, as well as a $27 million increase in COVID-19 relief subsidies from international governments that were recognized as revenues. The increase in revenues from our non-comparable owned and leased hotels, which included five leased hotels that exited our system or transferred to our management and franchise segment on December 31, 2021, included a $10 million increase, on a currency neutral basis, in COVID-19 relief subsidies from international governments. Additionally, the overall increase, on a currency neutral basis, of $40 million in revenues from our non-comparable owned and leased hotels was net of an $11 million decrease from properties that were sold or for which the lease agreements were terminated in 2020 and mid-2021, with most of these properties transferring to our management and franchise segment.
The increase in other revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increased revenues from our purchasing operations related to improved hotel demand resulting from the rise in travel and tourism during 2021.
Operating Expenses
The increase in owned and leased hotel expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 included a $19 million increase as a result of unfavorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and, on a currency neutral basis, a $46 million
increase and a $6 million decrease from our comparable and non-comparable owned and leased hotels, respectively. Our owned and leased hotels had increases in certain operating expenses as a result of increased occupancy during 2021, including variable rent costs, which are generally based on a percentage of hotel revenues or profits, partially offset by decreased expenses related to FF&E replacement reserves due to timing of costs and spending on improvement projects incurred at our leased properties. The decrease in expenses from our non-comparable owned and leased hotels, which included five leased hotels that exited our system or transferred to our management and franchise segment on December 31, 2021, also included a $16 million decrease, on a currency neutral basis, from properties that were sold or for which the lease agreements were terminated in 2020 and mid-2021, with most of these properties transferring to our management and franchise segment.
The decrease in depreciation and amortization expenses was due to a decrease in amortization expenses, primarily resulting from the full amortization of: (i) certain management and franchise contract intangible assets that were recorded at the time of the Merger during 2020 and (ii) certain capitalized software costs during both periods.
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased share-based compensation expense as a result of expenses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 for all of the outstanding performance shares, which were probable of achievement as of December 31, 2021. Share-based compensation expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 included the reversal of expense recognized in prior years as a result of the determination that the performance conditions of our then-outstanding performance shares were no longer probable of achievement, partially offset by expense recorded in December 2020 as a result of the modification of our then-outstanding performance shares. See Note 15: "Share-Based Compensation" in our consolidated financial statements for additional information. Also, for the year ended December 31, 2021, payroll expenses for our corporate workforce increased, as furloughs and reduced pay in 2020 yielded lower comparable costs reflected in general and administrative expenses. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in bad debt expense, which was in line with the improvement we experienced with respect to the timing and volume of payments from hotel owners throughout 2021, as compared to 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized reorganization costs related to activities undertaken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily relating to reductions in our workforce and the associated costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $258 million of impairment losses, primarily related to our ownership segment, including $104 million on our ownership reporting unit's goodwill, along with certain assets associated with specific owned and leased hotels. Additionally, $15 million was on management contract acquisition costs as a result of actual and expected early terminations of the related management contracts.
Other expenses decreased primarily as a result of expenses related to the settlement of a dispute with an owner of a managed hotel and expenses related to performance guarantees that were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-operating Income and Expenses
____________
(1)Fluctuation in terms of percentage change is not meaningful.
The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 included the decrease resulting from the issuances of new senior unsecured notes and the use of such proceeds for the redemptions of existing senior unsecured notes in December 2020 and February 2021, which reduced the weighted average interest rates on our outstanding senior unsecured notes. Additionally, we repaid the entire outstanding balance on the senior secured revolving credit facility (the "Revolving Credit Facility") by June 2021, while it was fully drawn for the period from March 2020 to December 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our variable interest expense also decreased due to declines in the variable interest rate on our senior secured term loan facility (the "Term Loan"). These decreases in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 were partially offset by an increase due to the issuances of new senior unsecured notes in April 2020. See Note 9: "Debt" in our consolidated financial statements for additional information on our indebtedness and the associated interest rates.
The loss on foreign currency transactions during both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates related to our operations conducted in functional currencies other than our reported currency, as well as changes in foreign currency exchange rates on certain intercompany financing arrangements, including short-term cross-currency intercompany loans. Additionally, the loss recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, included losses related to the liquidation of investments in foreign entities that were reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Loss on debt extinguishments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 related to the redemptions of senior notes and included redemption premiums of $55 million and $31 million, respectively, and the accelerated recognition of unamortized deferred financing costs of $14 million and $17 million, respectively. See Note 9: "Debt" in our consolidated financial statements for additional information on these redemptions.
Other non-operating income (loss), net consists of interest income, equity in earnings (losses) from unconsolidated affiliates, certain income and costs related to our defined employee benefit plans and other non-operating gains and losses. The change in other non-operating income (loss), net during the year ended December 31, 2021 included an $8 million increase related to our employee benefit plans, primarily as a result of a decrease in interest cost and an increase in the expected investment gains from our plan assets. The year ended December 31, 2020 included other non-operating losses related to a debt guarantee for a franchised hotel and the disposal of an investment, offset by a gain related to the reimbursement by a third party for taxes owed resulting from the sale of a hotel in a prior period.
The increase in income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the increase in income before income taxes, which was partially offset by benefits recognized as a result of tax rate changes. For additional information, see Note 13: "Income Taxes" in our consolidated financial statements.
Segment Results
Refer to Note 18: "Business Segments" in our consolidated financial statements for reconciliations of revenues for our reportable segments to consolidated amounts and of segment operating income to consolidated income (loss) before income taxes.
Refer to "-Revenues" for further discussion of the increase in revenues from our managed and franchised properties, which is correlated to our management and franchise segment revenues and segment operating income. Refer to "-Revenues" and "-Operating Expenses" for further discussion of the increases in revenues and operating expenses at our owned and leased hotels, which are correlated with our ownership segment revenues and segment operating losses. Although, we saw significant
improvement in revenues from our ownership segment during 2021 as compared to 2020, due to the nature of the fixed rent commitments and other fixed operating costs at our leased hotels, our ownership segment continued to experience an operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had total cash and cash equivalents of $1,512 million, including $85 million of restricted cash and cash equivalents. The majority of our restricted cash and cash equivalents is related to cash collateral and cash held for FF&E reserves.
In response to the global crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we took certain proactive measures in 2020 to help our business withstand the negative impact on our business from the crisis. These measures included securing our liquidity position to be able to meet our obligations for the foreseeable future, including issuing senior notes, drawing down the available borrowing capacity of our $1.75 billion Revolving Credit Facility and consummating the April 2020 pre-sale of Hilton Honors points to American Express for $1.0 billion in cash (the "Honors Points Pre-Sale"). Further, in February 2021, we issued the 3.625% Senior Notes due 2032 to continue to extend debt maturities and reduce our cost of debt by repaying the outstanding 5.125% Senior Notes due 2026. Based on our continued recovery and expectations of the foreseeable demands on our available cash and our liquidity in future periods, we had fully repaid the outstanding debt balance on the Revolving Credit Facility by June 2021.
While our accounts receivable balance as of December 31, 2021 is somewhat less than periods prior to the start of the pandemic, we are generally experiencing slower payment of certain fees due to us and we have considered these payment trends in developing our estimates of expected future credit losses. However, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced relative improvement with respect to the timing of customer payments and overall cash flow from operations when compared to 2020.
Our known short-term liquidity requirements primarily consist of funds necessary to pay for operating and other expenditures, including:
•costs associated with the management and franchising of hotels;
•costs, other than compensation and rent as noted separately below, associated with the operations of owned and leased hotels, including, but not limited to, utilities and operating supplies;
•corporate expenses;
•payroll and compensation costs;
•taxes and compliance costs;
•scheduled debt maturities and interest payments on our outstanding indebtedness, which, excluding finance lease liabilities, are estimated to be approximately $316 million in 2022;
•lease payments under our finance and operating leases, which include minimum lease payments that are estimated to be approximately $61 million and $177 million, respectively, in 2022;
•committed contract acquisition costs; and
•capital expenditures for required renovations and maintenance at the hotels within our ownership segment.
Our known long-term liquidity requirements primarily consist of funds necessary to pay for:
•scheduled debt maturities and interest payments on our outstanding indebtedness, which, excluding finance lease liabilities, are estimated to total an aggregate of $10.5 billion after December 31, 2022;
•lease payments under our finance and operating leases, which include minimum lease payments that are estimated to total an aggregate of $194 million and $1,081 million, respectively, after December 31, 2022;
•committed contract acquisition costs;
•capital improvements to the hotels within our ownership segment;
•corporate capital and information technology expenditures; and
•commitments to owners in our management and franchise segment made in the normal course of business for which we are reimbursed by these owners through program fees to operate our marketing, sales and brands programs.
Additionally, in circumstances where we have the opportunity to support our strategic objectives by growing our global footprint, we may provide performance or debt guarantees or loan commitments, as necessary, for hotels that we currently or plan to manage or franchise, as applicable, as well as letters of credit that support hotel financing or other obligations of hotel owners. See Note 19: "Commitments and Contingencies" in our consolidated financial statements for additional information on these commitments that were outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
We formally suspended share repurchases in March 2020, given the economic environment and our efforts to preserve cash, and no share repurchases have been made since then. However, the stock repurchase program remains authorized by our board of directors, with approximately $2.2 billion remaining available for share repurchases under the program, and we may resume share repurchases in the future at any time, depending on market conditions, our capital needs and other factors. Additionally, we suspended dividend payments in 2020, but we expect that both share repurchases and dividend payments will be reinstated in future periods and result in uses of liquidity.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to temporarily change our cash management strategy, we have a long-term investment policy that is focused on the preservation of capital and maximizing the return on new and existing investments and returning available capital to stockholders through dividends and share repurchases, which we expect to reimplement at some time in the future. Within the framework of our investment policy, we currently intend to continue to finance our business activities primarily with cash on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, cash generated from our operations and, as needed, the use of the available capacity of our Revolving Credit Facility. Additionally, we have continued access to debt markets and expect to be able to obtain financing, if necessary.
After considering our approach to liquidity and our available sources of cash, we believe that our cash position and sources of liquidity will meet anticipated requirements for operating and other expenditures, including corporate expenses, payroll and other compensation costs, taxes and compliance costs and other commitments for the foreseeable future based on current conditions. The objectives of our cash management policy are to maintain the availability of liquidity while minimizing operational costs.
We may from time to time issue or incur or increase our capacity to incur new debt and/or purchase our outstanding debt through underwritten offerings, open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Issuances or incurrence of new debt (or an increase in our capacity to incur new debt) and/or purchases or retirements of outstanding debt, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Sources and Uses of Our Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes our net cash flows:
____________
(1)Fluctuation in terms of percentage change is not meaningful; see additional details below.
Operating Activities
As we recover from the negative impacts of the pandemic and our system-wide RevPAR increases, we are returning to a position where cash flows are being generated from our operations.
The decrease in cash flows from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily attributable to the $1.0 billion of cash received in connection with the Honors Points Pre-Sale during 2020. Excluding the impact of this transaction, cash flows from operating activities increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to the increase in cash inflows generated from our management and franchise segment, largely as a result of an increase in managed and franchised RevPAR of 60.8 percent due to the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the decrease in cash paid for interest of $74 million, primarily as a result of the senior notes issuances and redemptions in December 2020 and February 2021; see Note 9: "Debt" in our consolidated financial statements for additional information. This increase was partially offset by a $150 million increase in payments of contract acquisition costs, which reflects our strategic investment in growing our system by adding hotels to our management and franchise segment, as well as an increase in cash paid for income taxes of $102 million, primarily due to an increase in income before income taxes.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities primarily related to capitalized software costs that were related to various systems initiatives for the benefit of both our hotel owners and our overall corporate operations and to capital expenditures for property and equipment related to our corporate facilities and the renovation of certain hotels in our ownership segment. Beginning in March 2020, we took steps to temporarily reduce such expenditures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and continued to limit investment spending throughout 2021; however, we expect such costs to continue to increase in future periods, aligned to our recovery from the pandemic.
Financing Activities
The change in cash flows from financing activities was primarily attributable to our Revolving Credit Facility, which we fully drew down during the year ended December 31, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in net cash inflows of $1.5 billion, while we fully repaid the $1.7 billion outstanding debt balance during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net additional $1.0 billion of senior notes borrowings, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. Further, cash outflows decreased $338 million in 2021 as a result of decreases in share repurchases and dividend payments, as both programs remained suspended after their suspension was initiated in 2020.
Debt and Borrowing Capacity
As of December 31, 2021, our total indebtedness, excluding unamortized deferred financing costs and discount, was approximately $8.9 billion, and we had letters of credit of $60 million outstanding on our Revolving Credit Facility. For additional information on our total indebtedness, including financing transactions executed during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, availability under our Revolving Credit Facility and guarantees on our debt, refer to Note 9: "Debt" in our consolidated financial statements.
If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our debt, we may be required to reduce capital expenditures or issue additional equity securities. Our ability to make scheduled principal payments and to pay interest on our debt depends on our future operating performance, which is subject to general conditions in or affecting the hospitality industry that may be beyond our control. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our cash flows from operations as compared to periods prior to the onset of the pandemic, and is expected to continue to do so for an indeterminate period of time; however, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we returned to a position where we were generating cash flows from our core operations. During 2020, we took precautions to secure our cash position, as discussed above, and, with our business recovering during 2021, we were able to repay outstanding debt borrowings on our Revolving Credit Facility and we expect to be able to meet our current obligations. Furthermore, we do not have any material indebtedness outstanding that matures prior to May 2025.
Summarized Guarantor Financial Information
Hilton Domestic Operating Company Inc. ("HOC") is the issuer of the following senior notes, collectively referred to as the Senior Notes:
•5.375% Senior Notes due 2025;
•4.875% Senior Notes due 2027;
•5.750% Senior Notes due 2028;
•3.750% Senior Notes due 2029;
•4.875% Senior Notes due 2030;
•4.000% Senior Notes due 2031; and
•3.625% Senior Notes due 2032.
HOC is 100 percent owned directly by Hilton Worldwide Parent LLC ("HWP"), which, in turn, is 100 percent owned directly by Hilton Worldwide Holdings Inc. (the "Parent"). The Senior Notes are guaranteed jointly and severally on a senior unsecured basis by the Parent, HWP and substantially all of the Parent's direct and indirect wholly owned domestic restricted subsidiaries, except for HOC (together, the "Guarantors"). The indentures that govern the Senior Notes provide that any subsidiary of the Company that provides a guarantee of our senior secured credit facilities will guarantee the Senior Notes. As of December 31, 2021, none of our foreign subsidiaries or domestic subsidiaries owned by foreign subsidiaries or our non-wholly owned subsidiaries guaranteed the Senior Notes.
The guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to certain customary release provisions. The indentures that govern the Senior Notes provide that any Guarantor may be released from its guarantee so long as: (i) the subsidiary is sold or sells all of its assets; (ii) the subsidiary is released from its guarantee under our senior secured credit facilities; (iii) the subsidiary is declared "unrestricted" for covenant purposes; or (iv) the requirements for legal defeasance or covenant defeasance or to discharge the indenture have been satisfied, in each case in compliance with applicable provisions of the indentures.
Neither HOC nor any of the Guarantors has any reporting obligation under the Exchange Act in respect of the Senior Notes; however, we are supplementally providing the information set forth below. The following tables present summarized financial information for HOC, along with the Parent and all other Guarantors, on a combined basis:
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods and the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments based on historical experiences and various other factors that we believe reflect the current circumstances. While we believe our estimates, assumptions and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates due to changes in judgments, assumptions and conditions as a result of unforeseen events or otherwise, which could have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations.
We believe that the following estimates, which are used in conjunction with our significant accounting policies, are critical because they involve a higher degree of judgment and are based on information that is inherently uncertain; refer to Note 2: "Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in our consolidated financial statements for information on our significant accounting policies. Management has discussed the development and selection of the following critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the board of directors:
Impairment of Goodwill and Brands Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill and brands intangible assets for potential impairment on an annual basis or at other times during the year if indicators of impairment exist. Our reporting units are the same as our operating segments as described in Note 18: "Business Segments" in our consolidated financial statements.
As part of the evaluation of goodwill and brands intangible assets for potential impairment, we exercise judgment to:
•perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or brand intangible asset is less than its carrying value. Factors we consider when making this determination include assessing the overall effect of trends in the hospitality industry and the general economy, regional performance and expectations and historical experience;
•decide whether to bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative assessment. Factors we consider when making this determination include changes in the Company or general economic conditions since the previous quantitative assessment was performed, the amount by which the fair value exceeded the carrying value at that time and the period of time that has passed since such quantitative assessment; and
•perform a quantitative analysis to identify both the existence of impairment and the amount of the impairment loss. The estimated fair value is based on internal projections of expected future cash flows and operating plans, as well as market conditions relative to the operations of our reporting units and brands.
Changes in our estimates and assumptions, or changes in the factors that we consider that would affect them, such as those described above, that were used in our impairment testing could result in impairment losses, which could be material.
Impairment of Certain Finite-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of our specifically identifiable lease intangible assets, operating and finance lease ROU assets and property and equipment for indicators of impairment, and, if such indicators exist, we perform an analysis to determine the recoverability of the determined asset group, by comparing the expected undiscounted future cash flows to the net carrying value of the asset group.
As part of the process, we exercise judgment to:
•determine if there are indicators of impairment present. Factors we consider when making this determination include assessing the overall effect of trends in the hospitality industry and the general economy, regional performance and expectations, historical experience, capital costs and other asset-specific information;
•determine the projected undiscounted future cash flows when indicators of impairment are present. Judgment is required when developing projections of future revenues and expenses based on estimated performance over the expected useful life of the asset group. Forward-looking estimates of future performance are based on historical operating results, as well as various internal projections and external sources; and
•determine the asset group fair value when required. In determining the fair value, we often use internally-developed discounted cash flow models, appraisals, recent similar transactions in the market and, if appropriate and available for a specific asset group, current estimated net sales proceeds from pending offers. Assumptions used in the discounted cash flow models include estimating cash flows, which may require us to adjust for specific market conditions, as well as capitalization rates, which are based on location, property or asset type, market-specific dynamics and overall economic performance. The discount rate applied to forward-looking projections takes into account market-specific considerations.
Changes in our estimates and assumptions, or changes in the factors that we consider that would affect them, such as those described above, that were used in our impairment testing could result in impairment losses, which could be material.
Hilton Honors
We record a point redemption liability for amounts received from properties participating in our Hilton Honors guest loyalty program and strategic partners in an amount equal to the estimated cost per point of the future redemption obligation. We engage third-party actuaries annually to assist in determining the fair value of the future reward redemption obligation using statistical formulas that project future point redemptions based on factors that require judgment, including an estimate of points that will eventually be redeemed, which includes an estimate of breakage (i.e., points that will never be redeemed), and the cost of reimbursing properties and other third parties. The cost of the points expected to be redeemed includes further estimates of available room nights, occupancy rates, room rates and any changes to the program, including devaluation or appreciation of points based on changes in the number of points required to redeem a reward. Any amounts received from strategic partners related to the issuance of points that are in excess of the actuarial determined cost per point are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue upon point redemption. We recognize revenue for point redemptions in the amount we expect to retain in excess of the cost per point, inclusive of estimated breakage, and limit the revenue recognized to an amount that is probable to not result in a significant reversal in the cumulative revenue recognized when breakage occurs.
In addition to the Hilton Honors fees we receive from hotel owners to operate the program, we earn fees from strategic partnerships, including co-branded credit card arrangements, for the use of our IP license and the issuance of Hilton Honors points. The allocation of the overall fees from the strategic partnerships between the IP license and the Hilton Honors points is based on their estimated standalone selling prices. The estimated standalone selling price of the IP license is determined using a relief-from-royalty valuation method incorporating statistical formulas based on factors that require significant judgment, including estimates of credit card usage, an appropriate royalty rate and a discount rate to be applied to the projected cash flows. The estimated standalone selling price of the future reward redemptions of Hilton Honors points under the strategic partnerships is calculated using a discounted cash flow analysis with the same assumptions as the point redemption liability discussed above, adjusted for an appropriate margin.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the extension of our temporary suspension of the expiration of Hilton Honors points through December 31, 2022, we reassessed the expected redemption rate of our Hilton Honors points. As a result, we adjusted our estimates of breakage to include, among other factors, the anticipated point expirations that will occur on December 31, 2022.
Changes in our estimates and assumptions that are used to determine our estimated cost per point could result in material changes in the balances of our liability for guest loyalty program and deferred revenues in our consolidated balance sheets, and changes in estimates and assumptions that are used to determine the allocation of the fees from strategic partnerships between the IP license fee and the Hilton Honors points and revenue recognized on point redemptions could result in material changes to our licensing fees and other revenues from managed and franchised properties recognized during the period in our consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement carrying values and the tax basis of assets and liabilities using currently enacted tax rates. We regularly review our deferred tax assets to assess their potential realization and establish a valuation allowance for portions of such assets that we believe will not be ultimately realized. In performing this review, we make estimates and assumptions regarding projected future taxable income, the expected timing of reversals of existing temporary differences and the implementation of tax planning strategies. A change in these assumptions may increase or decrease our valuation allowance resulting in an increase or decrease in our effective tax rate, which could materially affect our consolidated financial statements. Refer to Note 13: "Income Taxes" for information on the balances of our deferred tax assets and respective valuation allowances as of December 31, 2021.
We use a prescribed more-likely-than-not recognition threshold for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return if there is uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the consolidated financial statements. When determining the amount of tax benefit to be recognized, we assume, among other items, the position will be examined, the examiner will have all relevant information and the evaluation of the position will be based on its technical merits. Further, estimates based on a tax position’s technical merits and amounts we would ultimately accept in a negotiated settlement with the tax authorities are used to measure the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. Changes to these assumptions and estimates can lead to an additional income tax benefit (expense), which could materially affect our consolidated financial statements.
Legal Contingencies
We are subject to various legal proceedings and claims, the outcomes of which are subject to significant uncertainty. An estimated loss from a loss contingency will be accrued as a charge to income if it is probable and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required when we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss in determining whether an accrual of an estimated loss is appropriate. Changes in these factors could materially affect our consolidated financial statements.