Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and assumptions and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section of this Report. Refer to “Cautionary Note on Forward-Looking Statements.” Future results could differ significantly from the historical results presented in this section.
Overview
We are a leading residential mortgage originator and servicer driven by a mission to create financially healthy, happy homeowners. We do this by delivering scale, efficiency and savings to our partners and customers. Our business model is focused on leveraging a nationwide network of partner relationships to drive sustainable origination growth. We support our origination operations through a robust operational infrastructure and a highly responsive customer experience. We then leverage our servicing platform to manage the customer experience. We believe that the complementary relationship between our origination and servicing businesses allows us to provide a best-in-class experience to our customers throughout their homeownership lifecycle.
Our primary focus is our Wholesale channel, which is a business-to-business-to-customer distribution model in which we utilize our relationships with our more than 8,000 Broker Partners to reach our end-borrower customers. Through our Wholesale channel, we propel the success of our Broker Partners through a combination of full service, localized sales coverage and an efficient loan fulfillment process supported by our fully integrated technology platform. In our Correspondent channel, we purchase closed and funded mortgages from a trusted network of more than 600 Correspondent Partners. In our Direct channel, we originate residential mortgages primarily for existing servicing customers who are seeking new financing options.
While we initiate our customer relationships at the time the mortgage is originated, we maintain ongoing connectivity with our nearly 442,000 servicing customers, with the ultimate objective of securing them as a Customer for Life. In February 2022, we announced an agreement with ServiceMac, pursuant to which ServiceMac will subservice all mortgage loans underlying MSRs we hold. ServiceMac is expected to begin subservicing loans for us in the second quarter of 2022. Once ServiceMac begins subservicing loans for us, they will perform servicing functions on our behalf, but we will continue to hold the MSRs. We expect that our relationship with ServiceMac will allow us to maintain a lower, more variable cost structure and provide greater flexibility when strategically selling certain non-core MSRs. As of December 31, 2021, our number of servicing portfolio customers was almost 442,000, as compared to 360,000 at the end of 2020. During this same period, our servicing portfolio UPB increased from $91.6 billion at the end of 2020 to $133.9 billion at the end of 2021.
According to Inside Mortgage Finance, we are the third largest wholesale lender by origination volume for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020 Summary
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $961.5 million of total revenue, net for the Company compared to $1,377.3 million of total revenue, net for the year ended December 31, 2020. We generated $166.3 million of net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $607.0 million of net income for the year ended December 31, 2020. We generated $783.2 million of Adjusted revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,475.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We generated $26.3 million of Adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $667.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding our use of Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income, including limitations related to such non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation of such measures to net income, the nearest comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated $96.2 billion of mortgage loans compared to $62.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $34.2 billion or 55.2%. Our MSR Servicing Portfolio as of December 31, 2021 was $128.4 billion of MSR UPB compared to $88.3 billion of MSR UPB as of December 31, 2020. However, despite our record level of loan origination volume in 2021 and increase in our servicing portfolio volume. due to rising interest rates and increased competition in the industry, our margins declined year-over-year. Our gain on sale margins decreased 142 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association Mortgage Finance Forecast, average 30-year mortgage rates increased by approximately 30 basis points from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. An increase of this nature generally results in our Origination volume declining as refinance opportunities decrease. However, when rates increase, we experience lower prepayment speeds and a subsequent upward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs for the loans that still exist in our portfolio.
Segments
Our operations are organized into two separate reportable segments: Origination and Servicing.
In our Origination segment, we source loans through three distinct production channels: Direct, Wholesale and Correspondent. The Direct channel provides the Company’s existing servicing customers with various financing options. At the same time, it supports the servicing assets in the ecosystem by retaining existing servicing customers who may otherwise refinance their existing mortgage loans with a competitor. The Wholesale channel consists of mortgages originated through a nationwide network of more than 8,000 Broker Partners. The Correspondent channel consists of closed and funded mortgages that we purchase from a trusted network of Correspondent Partners. Once a loan is locked, it becomes channel agnostic. The channels in our Origination segment function in unison through the following activities: hedging, funding, and production. Our Origination segment generated contribution margins of $237.0 million and $1,091.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our Servicing segment consists of servicing loans that were produced in our Originations segment where the Company retained the servicing rights. Servicing consists of collecting loan payments, remitting principal and interest payments to investors, managing escrow funds for the payment of mortgage-related expenses, such as taxes and insurance, performing loss mitigation activities on behalf of investors and otherwise administering our mortgage loan servicing portfolio in compliance with state and federal regulations. We also strategically buy and sell servicing rights in order to maximize the value of our MSR assets. As of December 31, 2021, we serviced about 426,000 loans in our servicing portfolio and our Servicing segment generated contribution margin of $185.8 million and contribution loss of $146.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We believe that maintaining both an Origination segment and a Servicing segment provides us with a more balanced business model in both rising and declining interest rate environments, as compared to other industry participants that predominantly focus on either origination or servicing, instead of both.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations for Periods Presented
Residential Real Estate Market Conditions
Our Origination volume is impacted by broader residential real estate market conditions and the general economy. Housing affordability, availability and general economic conditions influence the demand for our products. Housing affordability and availability are impacted by mortgage interest rates, availability of funds to finance purchases, availability of alternative investment products and the relative relationship of supply and demand. General economic conditions are impacted by unemployment rates, changes in real wages, inflation, consumer confidence, seasonality and the overall economic environment. Recent market conditions, such as low interest rates and limited supply of housing, have led to home price appreciation and a decrease in the affordability index.
Changes in Interest Rates
Origination volume is impacted by changes in interest rates. Decreasing interest rates tend to increase the volume of purchase loan origination and refinancing whereas increasing interest rates tend to decrease the volume of purchase loan origination and refinancing.
Changes in interest rates impact the value of interest rate lock commitments and loans held for sale. Interest rate lock commitments represent an agreement to extend credit to a customer whereby the interest rate is set prior to the loan funding. These commitments bind us to fund the loan at a specified rate. When loans are funded, they are classified as held for sale until they are sold. During the origination and sale process, the value of interest rate lock commitments and loans held for sale inventory rises and falls with changes in interest rates; for example, if we enter into interest rate lock commitments at low interest rates followed by an increase in interest rates in the market, the value of our interest rate lock commitment will decrease.
The fair value of MSRs is also driven primarily by interest rates, which impact the likelihood of loan prepayments. In periods of rising interest rates, the fair value of the MSRs generally increases as prepayments decrease, and therefore the estimated life of the MSRs and related expected cash flows increase. In a declining interest rate environment, the fair value of MSRs generally decreases as prepayments increase and therefore the estimated life of the MSRs, and related cash flows, decrease.
There has been a long-term trend of falling interest rates, with intermittent periods of rate increases. More recently, there was a falling interest rate environment in 2020 which continued into early 2021. In the second half of 2021, interest rates started to rise. Because origination volumes tend to increase in declining interest rate environments and decrease in increasing rate environments, we believe that our two principal sources of revenue, mortgage origination and mortgage loan servicing, create a natural hedge against changes in the interest rate environment. Additionally, to mitigate the interest rate risk impact, we employ economic hedging strategies. Our economic hedging strategies allow us to protect our investment and help us manage our liquidity through forward delivery commitments on mortgage-backed securities or whole loans and options on forward contracts.
Key Performance Indicators
We review several operating metrics, including the following key performance indicators to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe these key metrics are useful to investors both because they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making, and they may be used by investors to help analyze the health of our business.
Our origination metrics enable us to monitor our ability to generate revenue and expand our market share across different channels. In addition, they help us track origination quality and compare our performance against the nationwide originations market and our competitors. Other key performance indicators include the number of Broker Partners and number of Correspondent Partners, which enable us to monitor key inputs of our business model. Our servicing metrics enable us to monitor the size of our customer base, the characteristics and value of our MSR Servicing Portfolio, and help drive retention efforts.
The following summarizes key performance indicators for our business:
Origination Segment KPIs
(a) Includes loan fee income, interest income (expense), net, realized and unrealized gains (losses) on locks and mortgage loans held for sale, net hedging results, the provision for the representation and warranty reserve and differences between modeled and actual pull-through.
(b) Gain on sale margin calculated as gain on sale divided by Fallout Adjusted Lock volume. Gain on sale includes gain on loans, net, loan fee income, interest income (expense), net, and loan servicing fees (expense) for the Origination segment.
(c) Overall share of origination market share data for December 31, 2021 is as of September 30, 2021 obtained from Inside Mortgage Finance, a third party provider of residential mortgage industry news and statistics. The data as of December 31, 2021 is not yet available from Inside Mortgage Finance as of the date of this filing.
(d) Share of wholesale channel for December 31, 2021 is as of September 30, 2021 obtained from Inside Mortgage Finance, a third party provider of residential mortgage industry news and statistics. The data as of December 31, 2021 is not yet available from Inside Mortgage Finance as of the date of this filing.
(a) Number of Broker Partners with whom the Company sources loans from.
(b) Number of Correspondent Partners from whom the Company purchases loans.
Servicing Segment KPIs
(a) The unpaid principal balance of loans we service on behalf of Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mae and others, at period end.
(b) Number of loans in our serving portfolio at period end.
(c) Total balances of outstanding loan principals for which installment payments are at least 60 days past due as a percentage of the outstanding loan principal as of a specified date.
(d) Calculated as the MSR fair market value as of a specified date divided by the related UPB divided by the weighted average service fee.
(e) Weighted average interest rate of our MSR portfolio at period end.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that certain non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Report, including Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results. These measures are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, or any other operating performance measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to a similarly titled measure reported by other companies.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations because each measure assists both investors and management in analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income provide indicators of performance that are not affected by fluctuations in certain costs or other items. Accordingly, management believes that these measurements are useful for comparing general operating performance from period to period, and management relies on these measures for planning and forecasting of future periods. The Company measures the performance of the segments primarily on a contribution margin basis. Additionally, these measures allow management to compare our results with those of other companies that have different financing and capital structures. However, other companies may define Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income differently, and as a result, our measures of Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income may not be directly comparable to those of other companies.
Adjusted revenue. We define Adjusted revenue as Total net revenue exclusive of the impact of the change in fair value of MSRs related to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions, net of MSRs hedge and adjusted for Income from equity method investment.
Adjusted net income. We define Adjusted net income as Net income exclusive of the impact of the change in fair value of MSRs related to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions, net of MSRs economic hedging results.
The non-GAAP information presented below should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes.
The following is a reconciliation of Adjusted revenue and Adjusted net income to the nearest GAAP financial measures of Total revenue, net and Net income, as applicable:
Reconciliation of Adjusted Revenue to Total Revenue, Net
Reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to Total Net Income
(a) MSR fair value changes due to valuation inputs and assumptions are measured using a stochastic discounted cash flow model that includes assumptions such as prepayment speeds, delinquencies, discount rates, and effects of changes in market interest rates. Refer to “Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 4 - Mortgage Servicing Rights” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The change in the value of the MSR hedge is measured based on third party market values and cash settlement. Refer to “Note 16 - Fair Value Measurements” in the consolidated financial statements. We exclude changes in fair value of MSRs, net of hedge from Adjusted revenue as they add volatility and we believe that they are not indicative of the Company’s operating performance or results of operations. This adjustment does not include changes in fair value of MSRs due to realization of cash flows. Realization of cash flows occurs when cash is collected as customers make scheduled payments, partial prepayments of principal, or pay their mortgage in full.
(b) The income tax effect of change in fair value of MSR (due to inputs and assumptions), net of hedge is calculated as the MSR valuation change, net of hedge multiplied by the quotient of Income tax expense (benefit) divided by Income before income tax.
Description of Certain Components of our Results of Operations
Components of Revenue
Gain on loans, net includes the realized and unrealized gains and losses on mortgage loans, as well as the changes in fair value of all loan-related derivatives, including but not limited to, forward mortgage-backed securities sales commitments, interest rate lock commitments, freestanding loan-related derivative instruments and the representation and warranty reserve.
Loan fee income consists of fee income earned on all loan originations, including amounts earned related to application and underwriting fees. Fees associated with the origination and acquisition of mortgage loans are recognized when earned, which is the date the loan is originated or acquired.
Interest income (expense), net consists of interest income recognized on loans held for sale for the period from loan funding to sale, which is typically less than 30 days. Loans are placed on non-accrual status and the related accrued interests is reserved when any portion of the principal or interest is 90 days past due or earlier if factors indicate that the ultimate collectability of the principal or interest is not probable. Interest received for loans on non-accrual status is recorded as income when collected. Loans return to accrual status when the principal and interest become current and it is probable that the amounts are fully collectible. Interest income (expense), net is presented net of interest expense related to our loan funding warehouse and other facilities as well as expenses related to amortization of capitalized debt expense, original issue discount, gains or losses upon extinguishment of debt, and commitment fees paid on certain debt agreements.
Loan servicing fees consist of fees received from loan servicing. Loan servicing involves the servicing of residential mortgage loans on behalf of an investor. Total Loan servicing fees include servicing and other ancillary servicing revenue earned for servicing mortgage loans owned by investors. Servicing fees received for servicing mortgage loans owned by investors are based on a stipulated percentage of the outstanding monthly principal balance on such loans, or the difference between the weighted-average yield received on the mortgage loans and the amount paid to the investor, less guaranty fees and interest on curtailments (reduction of principal balance). Loan servicing fees are receivable only out of interest collected from mortgagors and are recorded as income when earned, which is generally upon collection. Late charges and other miscellaneous fees collected from mortgagors are also recorded as income when collected.
Change in fair value of mortgage servicing rights. MSRs represent the fair value assigned to contracts that obligate us to service the mortgage loans on behalf of the owners of the mortgage loans in exchange for service fees and the right to collect certain ancillary income from the borrower. We recognize MSRs at our estimate of the fair value of the contract to service loans. Changes in the fair value of MSRs are recognized as current period income as a component of Change in fair value of MSRs. To hedge against interest rate exposure on these assets, we enter into various derivative instruments, which may include but are not limited to swaps and forward loan purchase commitments. Changes in the value of derivatives designed to protect against MSR value fluctuations, or MSR hedging gains and losses, are also included as a component of Change in fair value of MSRs.
Other income consists of income that is dissimilar in nature to revenues the Company earns from its ongoing central operations. Other income includes gain from the sale of assets such as MSR assets.
Components of Operating Expenses
Compensation and benefits expense includes all salaries, commissions, bonuses and benefit-related expenses for our associates.
Loan expense primarily includes loan origination costs, loan processing costs, and fees related to loan funding. As a result of adoption of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, certain passthrough fees such as flood certification, credit report, and appraisal fees, among others, are presented net within Loan expense. A reclassification of these passthrough fees from Loan fee income to Loan expense is presented for periods subsequent to adoption.
Loan servicing expense primarily includes non-performing servicing expenses, and general servicing expenses, such as printing expenses, recording fees, and title search fees.
Production technology includes origination and servicing system technology expenses.
General and administrative primarily includes occupancy and equipment, marketing and advertising costs, travel and entertainment, legal reserves, and professional services, such as audit and consulting fees.
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of Property and equipment and amortization of Intangible assets.
Other expenses primarily consist of insurance, dues and subscriptions, and other employee-related expenses such as recruitment fees and training expenses.
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity-based compensation consists of equity awards and is measured and expensed accordingly under ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain consolidated financial data for the periods indicated:
Consolidated results are further analyzed in our segment disclosure below.
Origination Segment
The following table sets forth certain origination segment financial data for each of the periods indicated:
Origination Revenue, Net
Gains on loans, net
The components of Gain on loans, net for the periods presented were as follows:
(a) Includes loan fee income, interest income (expense), net, realized and unrealized gains (losses) on locks and mortgage loans held for sale, net hedging results, the provision for the representation and warranty reserve and differences between modeled and actual pull-through.
(b) Gain on sale margin calculated as gain on sale divided by Fallout Adjusted Lock volume. Gain on sale includes gain on loans, net, loan fee income, interest income (expense), net, and loan servicing fees (expense) for the Origination segment.
The table below provides details of the characteristics of our mortgage loan production for each of the periods presented:
(a) Includes loan fee income, interest income (expense), net, realized and unrealized gains (losses) on locks and mortgage loans held for sale, net hedging results, the provision for the representation and warranty reserve and differences between modeled and actual pull-through.
(b) Represents the percentage of our loan sales UPBs for which we retained the underlying servicing UPB during the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in Gain on loans, net was primarily due to a decrease of $728.6 million, or 49.3% in gain on sale margin.
Although we experienced increases in FOA lock volume and Origination volume across all of our origination channels primarily due to an increase in our overall share of the origination market, which increased to 2.1% from 1.5% and our share of the wholesale channel which increased to 9.8% from 7.0%, we saw a significant decrease in gain on sale margins due to competitive environment during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Loan fee income
Loan fee income increased by $54.8 million, or 57% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was consistent with our increase in Origination volume.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $12.3 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in expense was driven by an increase in warehouse borrowing and related fees during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in origination volume. Interest income increased due to an increase in interest earned on loans held for sale for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 which was driven by our increase in origination volume.
Expenses
Total expenses increased by $126.0 million, or 33%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in Compensation and benefits expense, loan expense, production technology expense, general and administrative expense.
Compensation and benefits expense increased by $81.9 million, or 28.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $86.3 million in salary and benefits largely driven by an increase in employee headcount to support our growth in Origination volume during the year. As a percentage of volume, Compensation and benefits expense was 0.4% and 0.5% of Origination volume for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loan expense increased by $28.8 million, or 85%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven increases in loan costs due to an increase in Origination volume of $34.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as increases in our third party vendor costs for various loan closing processes for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Production technology expense increased by $8.4 million, or 39%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by investment the Company made in improving and upgrading the Company’s origination and loan set up production technologies to meet increase in volume and achieve better efficiencies during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expense increased $14.1 million, or 55%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in professional services fees and outsourced loan review services due to increase in origination volume.
Servicing Segment
The following table sets forth certain servicing segment financial data for the periods indicated:
Servicing Revenue, Net
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net decreased by $5.5 million, or 74%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Decrease in interest expense, net is primarily due to a decrease in interest income earned for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 which was driven by a decrease in interest rates.
Loan servicing fees
The table below provides details of the characteristics of our mortgage loan servicing portfolio as of the periods presented:
Loan servicing fees increased by $139.7 million, or 73%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Servicing fees of $119.1 million due to an increase in the Average MSR Servicing Portfolio of $37.9 billion, or 53.8% as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020, which was primarily driven by an increase in origination volume over the period.
Change in fair value of MSRs
Change in fair value of MSRs presented losses for both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Fair value losses decreased by $171.4 million, or 60.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by the changes in Valuation inputs and assumptions gain that was driven by an increase in interest rates during the period. The gain was partially offset by an increase in loss from Realization of cash flows due to an increase in actual prepayments, combined with higher scheduled payments collected on loans in our MSR portfolio in line with a 53.8% increase in our average servicing portfolio. Valuation inputs and assumption gains are offset by our economic hedging activities designed to offset the effects of changes in interest rates on valuation inputs and assumptions.
Other income
Other income increased by $36.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by HPF completing the sale of MSRs relating to certain single family mortgage loans serviced for Ginnie Mae in 2021 resulting in a total gain of $37.0 million.
Expenses
Total expenses increased by $9.9 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in Compensation and benefits expense, production technology, and general and administrative expense, with a decrease in loan servicing expense.
Compensation and benefits expense increased by $9.1 million, or 43%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase $8.7 million in salary and benefits largely driven by an increase in employee headcount to support our growth in servicing due to increased Origination volume.
Loan servicing expense decreased by $2.7 million, or 9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $8.5 million reduction in the provision for servicing advance reserves resulting from the sale of mortgage servicing rights, offset by an increase of $5.8 million in loan servicing operations costs due to a 21.8% increase in mortgage servicing portfolio units as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
Production technology expense increased by $1.3 million, or 183%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in servicing system expense driven by the increase in mortgage servicing portfolio or the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expense increased $1.7 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in professional services fees of $1.4 million related to the professional services to support our increase in volume.
Corporate Segment
The following table sets forth certain corporate segment financial data for the periods indicated:
Total Corporate Revenue
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $30.3 million, or 165%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in expense was driven by an increase in corporate debt interest due to issuance of the Senior Notes (as defined below) in January 2021.
Other income
Other income primarily consists of income from an equity method investment.
Expenses
Total expenses increased by $28.0 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in general and administrative expense, depreciation and amortization and other expenses.
General and administrative expense increased $12.5 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in professional services fees of $9.7 million related to the professional and consulting services to meet additional compliance and corporate requirements.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $5.4 million, or 114%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in equipment and software depreciation and amortization to support our growth for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other expense increased $10.2 million, or 95%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $6.5 million in insurance expense for the additional D&O insurance obtained in 2021, increased employee recognition expense of $2.4 million due to additional employee headcount in 2021 and an increase of $1.6 million of asset disposal expense incurred due to early lease termination the Company incurred during 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense is recognized for the entire company rather than on a segment basis. Income tax expense decreased by $140.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in pre-tax income. Our overall effective tax rate of 27.8% and 25.2% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due the impact of state incomes taxes, adjustments to the partial valuation allowance on state net operating losses, offset by certain non-deductible expenses, including IPO transaction costs, and the impact of state rate changes on the beginning deferred tax balances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have included:
•Borrowings, including under our warehouse funding facilities and other secured and unsecured financing facilities
•Cash flow from our operations, including:
•Sale of mortgage loans held for sale
•Loan origination fees
•Servicing fee income
•Interest income on loans held for sale, and
•Cash and marketable securities on hand
Historically, our primary uses of funds have included:
•Origination of loans
•Payment of interest expense
•Repayment of debt
•Payment of operating expenses, and
•Changes in margin requirements for derivative contracts
We are also subject to contingencies which may have a significant impact on the use of our cash.
Summary of Certain Indebtedness
To originate and aggregate loans for sale into the secondary market, we use our own working capital and borrow on a short-term basis primarily through committed and uncommitted mortgage warehouse lines of credit that we have established with different large global and regional banks and financial institutions. Our loan funding facilities are primarily in the form of master repurchase agreements and participation agreements. New loan originations that are financed under these facilities are generally financed at approximately 95% to 100% of the principal balance of the loan (although certain types of loans are financed at lower percentages of the principal balance of the loan).
At the time of either the funding or purchase, mortgage loans are pledged as collateral for borrowings on mortgage warehouse lines of credit. In most cases, loans will remain on one of the warehouse lines of credit facilities for only a short time, generally less than one month, until the loans are pooled and sold. During the time the loans are held for sale, we earn Interest income from the borrower on the underlying mortgage loan. This income is partially offset by the interest and fees we have to pay under the mortgage warehouse lines of credit.
When we sell a pool of loans in the secondary market, the proceeds received from the sale of the loans are used to pay back the amounts we owe on the mortgage warehouse lines of credit. We rely on the cash generated from the sale of loans to fund future loans and repay borrowings under our mortgage warehouse lines of credit. Delays or failures to sell loans in the secondary market could have an adverse effect on our liquidity position.
As of December 31, 2021, we held mortgage warehouse lines of credit arrangements with eleven separate financial institutions with a total maximum borrowing capacity of $7.5 billion and we had an unused borrowing capacity of $2.8 billion. Refer to “Note 10 - Warehouse Lines of Credit” of our consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2021, we maintained a servicing advance financing facility, MSR financing facility and an operating line of credit with total combined maximum borrowing capacity of $1,073.4 million and an unused borrowing capacity of $384.1 million. Refer to “Note 11 - Term Debt and Other Borrowings, net” of our consolidated financial statements.
The amount owed and outstanding on our mortgage warehouse lines of credit fluctuates significantly based on our origination volume and the amount of time it takes us to sell the loans we originate.
Our debt financing agreements also contain margin call provisions that, upon notice from the applicable lender at its option, require us to transfer cash or, in some instances, additional assets in an amount sufficient to eliminate any margin deficit. A margin deficit generally will result from any decline in the market value (as determined by the applicable lender) of the assets subject to the related financing agreement relative to the available financing and offsetting hedges. Upon notice from the applicable lender, we generally will be required to satisfy the margin call on the day of such notice or the following business day.
The warehouse facilities and other lines of credit require maintenance of certain operating and financial covenants, and the availability of funds under these facilities is subject to, among other conditions, our continued compliance with these covenants. These financial covenants include, but are not limited to, maintaining a certain minimum tangible net worth, minimum liquidity, minimum profitability levels, and ratio of indebtedness to tangible net worth, among others. A breach of these covenants can result in an event of default under these facilities following which the lenders would be able to pursue certain remedies against us. In addition, each of these facilities includes cross-default or cross- acceleration provisions that could result in all facilities terminating if an event of default or acceleration of maturity occurs under any facility.
On January 19, 2021, the Company issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.0% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”) in a private placement transaction. The Senior Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of the Company’s wholly owned subsidiaries existing on the date of issuance, other than HPAM and HPMAC. The Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.0% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears. The Senior Notes will mature on February 1, 2026.
The Indenture governing the Senior Notes (the “Indenture”) contains covenants and restrictions that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to (i) incur certain additional debt or issue certain preferred shares; (ii) incur liens; (iii) make certain distributions, investments, and other restricted payments; (iv) engage in certain transactions with affiliates; and (v) merge or consolidate or sell, transfer, lease, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of their assets. The Indenture governing the Senior Notes does not include any financial maintenance covenants. Refer to “Note 11 - Term Debt and Other Borrowings, net” of our consolidated financial statements.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the Indenture as of December 31, 2021, and our warehouse facilities and other lines of credit as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Summary of Mortgage Loan Participation Agreement
On November 2, 2021, we entered into a Mortgage Loan Participation Sale Agreement (the “Gestation Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association, as purchaser (the “Gestation Purchaser”). Subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of the Gestation Agreement, including the affirmative and negative covenants contained therein, the Gestation Agreement permits the Gestation Purchaser to purchase from us from time to time during the term of the Gestation Agreement participation certificates evidencing a 100% undivided beneficial ownership interest in designated pools of fully amortizing first lien residential mortgage loans that are intended to ultimately be included in MBS issued or guaranteed, as applicable, by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae.
The aggregate purchase price of participation certificates owned by the Gestation Purchaser at any given time for which the Gestation Purchaser has not been paid the purchase price for the related MBS by the applicable takeout investor as specified in the applicable takeout commitment cannot exceed $1.5 billion. Unless terminated earlier in accordance with its terms, the Gestation Agreement expires on November 2, 2022.
The Gestation Agreement and certain ancillary agreements thereto contain various financial and non-financial covenants, including, among other covenants, financial covenants relating to the maintenance of tangible net worth, liquidity, and a ratio of total indebtedness to tangible net worth.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized below.
Our Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash increased by $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities
Our Cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of our inventory of loans held for sale as shown below:
Cash used in operating activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in Mortgage loans held for sale and decrease in Gain on loans, net were the result of an increase in origination volume at lower margins compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Increases were partially offset by a decrease in cash used in Change in fair value of derivative assets, which was primarily due to a decrease in our interest rate lock commitment revenue and margin call assets as a result of a decrease in outstanding locks as of December 31, 2021, and Other operating sources primarily due to a decrease in Net income and decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities increased by $223.0 million primarily due to proceeds from sale of mortgage servicing rights of $262.0 million, offset by purchase of mortgage servicing rights of $43 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
Our Cash flows from financing activities are primarily influenced by changes in warehouse borrowings as shown below:
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in proceeds from warehouse borrowings net of payments on warehouse borrowings to be utilized for funding our increased loan origination volume, and proceeds from term debt borrowings that were made in 2021, partially offset by distributions paid to Holdings, and an increase in other financing uses, primarily due to dividends paid to shareholders in 2021.
Shareholder’s Equity
Total shareholder’s equity decreased by $150.8 million, or 16.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a distribution paid to Holdings, and dividends to shareholders, partially offset by Net income of $166.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Cash Requirements from Contractual and Other Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations include interest and principal payments under the Senior Notes, payments under the MSR Facility, and payments under our warehouse facilities. Annual cash payments for interest under the Senior Notes totaled approximately $26.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $550.0 million of the Senior Notes’ principal is due in 2026. Annual cash payments for interest under the MSR Facility totaled approximately $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and approximately $456.7 million outstanding under the MSR Facility matures in 2024 and $228.3 million matures in 2025. Approximately $4.7 billion of outstanding borrowings under the warehouse facilities matures in 2022 as of December 31, 2021, which are typically repaid using the proceeds from the sale of mortgage loans to investors, usually within 30 days. We do not have material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2021 given the nature of our business.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid quarterly cash dividends of approximately $26.5 million to its common stockholders, representing $0.15 per share of common stock for the second quarter of 2021 and $0.04 per share of common stock for the third quarter of 2021. In February 2022, our board of directors declared a cash dividend of $0.04 per share of common stock for the fourth quarter of 2021, payable on March 24, 2022. In addition, on January 12, 2021, our board of directors declared a cash dividend in the amount of approximately $25.7 million, which was paid to Holdings on January 14, 2021, and $269.3 million of the proceeds of the issuance of the Senior Notes was used to fund a distribution to Holdings.
The sources of funds needed to satisfy these cash requirements include cash flows from operations and financing activities, including cash flows from sales of MSRs, sale of loans into the secondary market, loan origination fees, servicing fee income, and interest income on mortgage loans. Refer to “Note 10 - Warehouse Lines of Credit,” “Note 11 - Term Debt and Other Borrowings, net,” and “Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of contractual obligations, commercial commitments, and other contingencies, including legal contingencies.
Repurchase and Indemnification Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to liability with respect to certain representations and warranties that we make to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to repurchase mortgage loans, or indemnify the purchaser of such loans for losses incurred, if there has been a breach of these representations and warranties, or in the case of early payment defaults. In addition, in the event of an early payment default, we are contractually obligated to refund certain premiums paid to us by the investors who purchased the related loan.
Interest Rate Lock Commitments, Loan Sale and Forward Commitments
In the normal course of business, we are party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit to borrowers at either fixed or floating interest rates. IRLCs are binding agreements to lend to a borrower at a specified interest rate within a specified period of time as long as there is no violation of conditions established in the contract. Forward commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses which may require payment of a fee. As many of the commitments expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. In addition, we have forward commitments to sell MBS at specified future dates and interest rates.
Following is a summary of the notional amounts of commitments as of dates indicated:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We have identified certain accounting policies as being critical because they require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are uncertain. We believe that the judgment, estimates, and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. However, actual results could differ, and the use of other assumptions or estimates could result in material differences in our results of operations or financial condition. Our
critical accounting policies and estimates are discussed below and relate to fair value measurements, particularly those determined to be Level 2 and Level 3. Refer to “Note 16 - Fair Value Measurements” to our consolidated financial statements.
Mortgage loans held for sale. We have elected to record Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value. The majority of our Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value are saleable into the secondary mortgage markets, and their fair values are estimated using observable quoted market or contracted prices or market price equivalents, which would be used by other market participants. These saleable loans are considered Level 2. A smaller portion of our Mortgage loans held for sale consist of loans repurchased from the GSEs and Ginnie Mae that have subsequently been deemed to be non-saleable to GSEs and Ginnie Mae when certain representations and warranties are breached. These repurchased loans are considered Level 3 at collateral value less estimated costs to sell the properties.
Changes in economic or other relevant conditions could cause our assumptions with respect to market prices of securities backed by similar mortgage loans to be different than our estimates. Increases in the market yields of similar mortgage loans result in a lower Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value.
Derivative financial instruments. Our derivative financial instruments are accounted for as free-standing derivatives and are included in the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. These derivative financial instruments include, but are not limited to, forward mortgage-backed securities sales and purchase commitments, interest rate lock commitments, and other derivative instruments used to economically hedge fluctuations in MSRs’ fair value.
Interest rate lock commitments The Company estimates the fair value of IRLCs based on the value of the underlying mortgage loan, quoted MBS prices and estimates of the fair value of the MSRs and the probability that the mortgage loan will fund within the terms of the interest rate lock commitment. The Company estimates the fair value of forward sales commitments based on quoted MBS prices. The weighted average pull-through rate for IRLCs was 86% and 73% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Given the significant and unobservable nature of the pull-through factor, IRLCs are classified as Level 3.
MSRs. We have elected to record MSRs at fair value. MSRs are recognized as a component of Gain on loans, net when loans are sold, and the associated servicing rights are retained. Subsequent changes in fair value of MSRs due to the collection and realization of cash flows and changes in model inputs and assumptions are recognized in current period earnings and included as a separate line item in the consolidated statements of operations.
We use a discounted cash flow approach to estimate the fair value of MSRs. This approach consists of projecting servicing cash flows discounted at a rate that management believes market participants would use in their determinations of value.
Changes in economic and other relevant conditions could cause our assumptions, such as with respect to the prepayment speeds, to be different than our estimates. The key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of MSRs are prepayment speeds and the discount rate. Increases in prepayment speeds generally have an adverse effect on the value of MSRs as the underlying loans prepay faster, which causes accelerated MSR amortization. Increases in the discount rate result in a lower MSR value and decreases in the discount rate result in a higher MSR value. Refer to “Note 4 - Mortgage Servicing Rights” to our consolidated financial statements.
Forward sales and purchase commitments. The Company treats forward mortgage-backed securities purchase and sale commitments that have not settled as derivatives and recognizes them at fair value. These forward commitments will be fulfilled with loans not yet sold or securitized and new originations and purchases. The forward commitments allow the Company to reduce the risk related to market price volatility. The Company estimates the fair value of forward commitments based on quoted MBS prices.
MSR derivatives: interest rate swap and Treasury futures purchase contracts. These derivatives represent a combination of derivatives used to offset possible adverse changes in the fair value of MSRs and include options on swap contracts, interest rate swap contracts, and other instruments. Fair value is determined by using quoted prices for similar instruments.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective
Refer to “Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting developments and the expected effect on the Company.