Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, the information described under the caption “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report and our Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements at the outset of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
We are a developer, manufacturer and supplier of premium diagnostics products, medical imaging systems and surgical products focused on women's health and well-being through early detection and treatment. We sell and service our products through a combination of direct sales and service personnel and a network of independent distributors and sales representatives. We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical and Skeletal Health.
Through our Diagnostics segment, we offer a wide range of diagnostic products, which are used primarily to aid in the screening and diagnosis of human diseases. Our primary Diagnostics products include our molecular diagnostic assays, which run on our advanced instrumentation systems (Panther, Panther Fusion and Tigris), our ThinPrep cytology system, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test. Our Aptima family of molecular diagnostic assays is used to detect, among other things, the infectious microorganisms that cause common sexually transmitted diseases, or STDs, such as chlamydia and gonorrhea, or GTGC; certain high-risk strains of human papillomavirus, or HPV; Trichomonas vaginalis, the parasite that causes trichomoniasis; Mycoplasma genitalium; and Herpes Simplex viruses 1 and 2. We also offer viral load tests for the quantitation of Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, and human cytomegalo virus for use on our Panther instrument system. In addition, we offer bacterial vaginosis and candida vaginitis assays for the diagnosis of vaginitis, a common and complex ailment affecting millions of women a year. Our assay portfolio also includes diagnostic tests for a range of acute respiratory infections, including SARS-CoV-2, various strains of influenza and parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial virus that are run on the Panther Fusion system, a field upgradeable instrument addition to the base Panther system. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we developed and launched the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay and the Aptima SARS-CoV-2/Flu assay (each of which runs on our standard Panther system) and the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay (which runs on our Panther Fusion system). In May 2022, we CE-marked two new molecular assays, Panther Fusion EBV Quant assay for quantitation of Epstein-Barr virus, and the Panther Fusion BKV Quant assay for quantitation of the BK virus. These two new assays are the first quantitative real-time PCR assays on the Panther Fusion system. These assays, along with the Aptima CMV Quant assay already available in Europe, expand our Panther Fusion menu of transplant monitoring assays. The ThinPrep System is primarily used in cytology applications, such as cervical cancer screening, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test assists physicians in assessing the risk of pre-term birth. We also generate service revenues from our CLIA-certified laboratory for testing related to breast cancer and all metastatic cancers.
Our Breast Health segment offers a broad portfolio of solutions for breast cancer care primarily in the areas of radiology, breast surgery, pathology and treatment. These solutions include 3D digital mammography systems, image analytics software utilizing artificial intelligence, reading workstations, ultrasound imaging, minimally invasive breast biopsy guidance systems, breast biopsy site markers, localization, specimen radiology, connectivity solutions and breast conserving surgery products. Our most advanced breast imaging platforms, Selenia Dimensions and 3Dimensions, utilize tomosynthesis to produce 3D images that show multiple contiguous slice images of the breast, which we refer to as the Genius 3D Mammography exam.
Our GYN Surgical products include our NovaSure Endometrial Ablation System, or NovaSure, our MyoSure Hysteroscopic Tissue Removal System, or MyoSure, our Fluent Fluid Management system, or Fluent, our Acessa ProVu laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation system, or Acessa, as well as our CoolSeal vessel sealing portfolio and our JustRight surgical stapler. The NovaSure portfolio is comprised of the NovaSure CLASSIC and NovaSure ADVANCED devices and most recently, the NovaSure portfolio V5 device for the treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding. The MyoSure suite of devices offers four options to provide incision-less removal of fibroids, polyps, and other pathology within the uterus. The Fluent system is a fluid management system that provides liquid distention during diagnostic and operative hysteroscopic procedures. The Acessa system is a fully integrated system that uses laparoscopic ultrasound, guidance mapping and radio frequency ablation to treat nearly all types of fibroids. The CoolSeal portfolio includes the Trinity, Reveal, and Mini advanced bipolar vessel sealing devices. The JustRight 5 mm stapler features a smaller instrument profile and is used for laparoscopic general and pediatric surgery.
Our Skeletal Health segment's products includes the Horizon DXA, a dual energy x-ray system, which evaluates bone density and performs body composition assessments, and the Fluoroscan Insight FD mini C-arm, which assists in performing minimally invasive orthopedic surgical procedures on a patient's extremities, such as the hand, wrist, knee, foot, and ankle.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to we, us, Hologic or our company refer to Hologic, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Supply Chain Considerations
The current worldwide supply chain shortages and constraints are impacting our ability to obtain certain critical raw materials and components used primarily in our Breast Health capital equipment products. The supply chain shortages and disruptions primarily affecting our Breast Health manufacturing lines are related to electronic components, primarily semiconductor chips. We are dependent on a small number of semiconductor manufacturers and their allocation of chips to us. Based on our current understanding of their allocation of chips to us we expect we will be able to increase production on a sequential quarterly basis throughout fiscal 2023. If such allocation does not meet our expectations or we are not able to obtain alternative sources of chips, we believe we will not be able to manufacture sufficient quantities of our capital equipment products, primarily 3D Dimension systems, Trident specimen radiography systems, Affirm Prone biopsy systems and Brevera systems to meet customer demand. As a result, if we are unable to obtain sufficient quantities of chips, sales of these products may decline or will not increase in fiscal 2023 compared to fiscal 2022 levels. In addition, the prices of raw materials and components, as well as freight, have been rising and continued supply chain shortages could increase the costs further. These factors may result in a lower gross margin for Breast Health in fiscal 2023 for our affected products. Our procurement team has and will continue to expend significant time and resources to try to secure sufficient quantities to meet demand.
Acquisitions
The following sets forth a description of certain of our acquisitions we have completed in our last two fiscal years:
Bolder Surgical
On November 29, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Bolder Surgical Holdings, Inc., or Bolder, for a purchase price of $160.1 million. Bolder, located in Louisville, Colorado, is a developer and manufacturer of energy vessel sealing surgical devices used in both laparoscopic and open procedures. Based on our preliminary valuation, we allocated $96.7 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $68.8 million to goodwill. The allocation of the purchase price is preliminary as we continue to gather information supporting the valuation of the acquired assets and liabilities. Bolder's results of operations are reported in our GYN Surgical segment.
Mobidiag
On June 17, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Mobidiag Oy, or Mobidiag, for a purchase price of $729.6 million. Mobidiag, located in Finland, manufactures molecular diagnostic solutions for gastrointestinal infections, antimicrobial resistance management and other infections. We also acquired $66.1 million of debt, which was paid off in fiscal 2022. Based on our valuation, we allocated $399.9 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $427.7 million to goodwill. This acquisition expands our molecular diagnostics portfolio into the near-patient testing market. Mobidiag's results of operations are reported in our Diagnostics segment.
Biotheranostics
On February 22, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Biotheranostics, Inc., or Biotheranostics, for a purchase price of $231.3 million. Biotheranostics, located in San Diego, California, manufactures molecular diagnostic tests that support physicians in the treatment of breast cancer and all metastatic cancers and performs lab testing procedures at its CLIA-certified laboratory. Based on our valuation, we allocated $162.4 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $80.9 million to goodwill. Biotheranostics' results of operations are included in our Diagnostics segment, and its revenues are reported within Service and Other Revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Diagenode
On March 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Diagenode SA, or Diagenode, for a purchase price of $155.1 million. Diagenode, located in Belgium, is a developer and manufacturer of molecular diagnostic assays based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology to detect infectious diseases of bacterial, viral or parasite origin. Based on our valuation, we allocated $79.0 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $83.5 million to goodwill. Diagenode's results of operations are included in our Diagnostics segment.
Somatex Medical Technologies
On December 30, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Somatex Medical Technologies GmbH, or Somatex, for a purchase price of $62.9 million. Somatex, located in Germany, is a manufacturer of biopsy site markers, including the Tumark product line of tissue markers, which we distributed in the U.S. prior to the acquisition. Somatex' results of operations are included in our Breast Health segment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year Ended September 24, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 25, 2021
Product Revenues
We had a decrease in product revenue of 15.6% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. This decrease was primarily due to the decline in revenues in the Diagnostics business as a result of lower COVID-19 assay sales, a decrease in Breast Health revenue, which we primarily attribute to supply chain constraints, and to a lesser extent the negative effect from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies. The decrease in product revenues in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was partially offset by an increase in GYN Surgical product revenue due to an increase in sales volume of these products which we attribute to a recovery of elective procedures as COVID-19 restrictions eased, as well as an increase from our recent acquisitions.
Diagnostics product revenues decreased 18.7% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to decreases in Molecular Diagnostics of $656.4 million and a decrease in blood-screening of $15.8 million, partially offset by an increase in Cytology and Perinatal revenue of $0.7 million. While we divested our blood screening business in the second quarter of fiscal 2017, we continue to provide long-term access to Panther instrumentation and certain supplies to the purchaser of that business. Molecular Diagnostics product revenue was $2,427.5 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $3,083.9 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to a reduction of $729.0 million in sales our two SARS-CoV-2 assays (primarily the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay and to a lesser extent the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay) to $1,430.5 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $2,159.5 million in fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower demand from an improvement in the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, the impact of at-home testing alternatives and lower average selling prices on a worldwide basis . We also had a decrease in Panther and Panther Fusion instrument sales in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 as sales in fiscal 2021 were higher primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic as customers expanded their Covid assay testing capacity. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $53.6 million in our Aptima assays and STD collection kits (exclusive of our SARS-CoV-2 assay), which primarily consist of our CTGC, Bacterial Vaginosis, and CV Candida assays, on a worldwide basis as volumes increased, partially offset by lower HPV assay volumes and a decrease in average selling prices. In addition, we had an increase of $32.6 million in worldwide sales of our Quant Viral assays and Fusion respiratory products in the current fiscal year. The inclusion of Diagenode and Mobidiag products contributed $13.3 million of incremental product revenue in the current fiscal year. We also experienced a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies. We expect that sales of our COVID-19 assays will continue to decline in fiscal 2023 compared to the current fiscal year as the pandemic recedes and given the continued distribution of vaccines and boosters.
Breast Health product revenues decreased 16.5% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in volumes of our digital mammography systems, primarily 3D Dimensions systems, related software and workflow products, Affirm biopsy systems and Brevera biopsy systems. The decrease in volume was primarily driven by supply chain constraints related to electronic components, primarily semiconductor chips, that impacted our ability to manufacture sufficient quantities to meet customer demand. We continue to have strong back orders for our capital equipment. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in average selling prices, as well as an increase in sales of our interventional breast solutions products, primarily driven by ATEC and Brevera disposables. We also experienced a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.
GYN Surgical product revenues increased 7.1% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to increases in the sales volume of our Fluent Fluid Management products, Bolder products (comprised of CoolSeal vessel sealing devices and JustRight surgical staplers), MyoSure system sales and Acessa ProVu systems. These increases were partially offset by decreases in NovaSure system sales. We also experienced a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.
Skeletal Health product revenues decreased 6.6% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in sales volume of our Horizon DXA systems and Insight FD Fluoroscan systems. We attribute this sales volume decrease largely to supply chain constraints. We also experienced a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.
Product revenues by geography as a percentage of total revenues were as follows:
The percentage of product revenue derived from the U.S. and Asia-Pacific increased while Europe decreased, which we primarily attribute to a steeper decline in SARS-CoV-2 assay sales in Europe compared to the U.S., partially offset by an increase in HIV assay sales in Africa, and an increase in SARS-CoV-2 assay sales in Australia and New Zealand. The percentage of product revenue increased in Asia-Pacific is primarily due to an increase in volume of ThinPrep and HPV assays in China. In addition, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against a number of currencies contributed to the increase in the percentage of revenue derived from the U.S. compared to revenue derived from the other geographic regions.
Service and Other Revenues
Service and other revenues are primarily comprised of revenue generated from our field service organization to provide ongoing service, installation and repair of our products. The majority of these revenues are generated within our Breast Health segment. Service and other revenues increased 1.0% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in Breast Health service contract revenue as the Breast Health business continued to convert a high percentage of our installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period, as well as additions from our distributor acquisitions. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in installation and training services that are provided with capital product sales as a result of lower unit sales in the current fiscal year. In our Diagnostics business, lab testing revenue from the inclusion of our Biotheranostics acquisition in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, increased $35.9 million in the current year. This was offset by a decrease in royalty revenue of $46.2 million from Grifols, S.A., or Grifols, related to licensing our intellectual property to our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain, as the contract expired in December 2021.
Cost of Product Revenues
** Percentage not meaningful
Product gross margin was 64.7% in fiscal 2022 compared to 70.2% in fiscal 2021.
Cost of Product Revenues. The cost of product revenues as a percentage of product revenues was 27.8% in the current year compared to 24.3% in the prior year. Cost of product revenues as a percentage of revenue increased in fiscal 2022 primarily due to a decrease in sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, which have higher gross margins compared to our other Diagnostic products, and comprised 34.1% and 43.5% of total product revenue in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
Diagnostics' product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, a slight decline in average selling prices of certain assays, an increase in inventory reserves, higher field service costs for our expanded instrument installed base and higher freight charges internationally, partially offset by lower sales of instruments, which carry low margins, and an increase in sales of our Aptima and Quant Viral assays.
Breast Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the supply chain resulting in lower sales volumes of our higher margin products, reduced manufacturing utilization and higher prices of raw materials and components, partially offset by a slight increase in average selling prices of our 3Dimensions systems and related workflow products.
GYN Surgical’s product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to product mix of higher volumes of lower margin products, mostly attributable to sales of our Fluent Fluid Management systems, Bolder products (comprised of CoolSeal vessel sealing devices and JustRight surgical staplers) and Acessa ProVu systems.
Skeletal Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased costs for our Horizon DXA systems workstation upgrades and lower sales volumes of our Horizon DXA and Insight FD systems primarily due to supply chain constraints, partially offset by a slight increase in average selling prices of our Horizon DXA and Insight FD systems.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets included in cost of product revenues relates to acquired developed technology, which is generally amortized over its estimated useful life of between 5 and 15 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed. Amortization expense increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to intangible assets acquired in the Mobidiag, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Bolder acquisitions as well as accelerated amortization related to shortening the life of certain intangible assets acquired in the acquisitions of SuperSonic Imagine SA, or SSI and Faxitron. This was partially offset by lower amortization of intangible assets acquired in the Cytyc acquisition which reduces over time.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Equipment. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, we determined that certain developed technology assets acquired in the Focal and Faxitron acquisitions were impaired as a result of decisions to no longer sell certain low-volume products. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $17.4 million to write-off these developed technology assets in fiscal 2022.
Cost of Service and Other Revenues
Service and other revenues gross margin was 42.5% in fiscal 2022 compared to 46.7% in fiscal 2021. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to a decrease in royalty revenue from Grifols related to licensing our intellectual property related to our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain, which had a high margin. This decrease is partially offset by the inclusion of lab testing revenue from Biotheranostics, which has higher margins than our legacy service business and an increase in Breast Health service contract revenue which benefited gross margin as service contract revenue has higher margins compared to revenue from spare parts, installation and training.
Operating Expenses
** Percentage not meaningful
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased 2.6% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the inclusion of incremental expenses from the Mobidiag, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Bolder acquisitions aggregating $26.7 million. Partially offsetting this increase was the prior year period inclusion of a $7.0 million charge related to the purchase of intellectual property in Breast Health that has no future alternative use, the reversal of a $5.2 million research and development tax credit reserve related to the SSI acquisition in fiscal 2022, a higher credit of $3.2 million recorded to research and development expenses in fiscal 2022 from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) in connection with a grant to obtain FDA approval of our SARS-CoV-2 assays and develop sampling pooling capability and other enhancements to our SARS-CoV-2 assays, a reduction in spend to implement the European Medical Device Regulation (MDR) and In Vitro Diagnostic Regulation (IVDR) requirements, and lower bonus and expense under our deferred compensation plan. At any point in time, we have a number of different research projects and clinical trials being conducted and the timing of these projects and related costs can vary from period to period.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses increased 12.3% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased spend on marketing initiatives including our sponsorship of the Women's Tennis Association and our Super Bowl commercial, the inclusion of expenses from the Mobidiag, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Bolder acquisitions aggregating $28.9 million and an increase in travel, meetings and trade shows that were lower in the prior year primarily due to canceled or curtailed events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Partially offsetting these increases in the current year is a decrease in Breast Health commissions due to lower revenue, a decrease in consulting spend and lower bonus.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased 5.9% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in acquisition transactions costs of $19.7 million, lower bonus and expense from our deferred compensation plan, a decrease in bad debt expense of $10.1 million, lower litigation and settlement costs, lower
integration costs and a reduction in consulting spend. Partially offsetting these decreases was the inclusion of incremental expenses from the Mobidiag, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Bolder acquisitions aggregating $13.1 million, an increase in charitable donations of $9.0 million, an increase in non-income tax charges, higher information systems infrastructure project spend, an increase in tax and accounting projects and increased travel. In addition, in fiscal 2021 we recorded a $3.5 million credit related to services provided under the transition services agreement for the Cynosure medical aesthetics business we sold in fiscal 2020.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets results from customer relationships, trade names and distributor relationships related to our acquisitions. These intangible assets are generally amortized over their estimated useful lives of between 5 and 30 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed utilizing expected undiscounted future cash flows. Amortization expense increased 7.1% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increases from recent acquisitions, partially offset by assets from older acquisitions becoming fully amortized.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Equipment. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, we recorded an impairment charge of $27.7 million during fiscal 2022 to record our only IPR&D asset to fair value. The reduction in fair value was due to an increase in the discount rate from higher interest rates, a reduction in forecasted revenues and timing of completing the project.
Contingent Consideration Fair Value Adjustments. In connection with the acquisition of Acessa, we are obligated to make contingent earn-out payments. The payments are based on achieving incremental revenue growth over a three-year period ending annually in December of each 2021, 2022, and 2023. As of the acquisition date for Acessa, we recorded a contingent consideration liability for the estimated fair value of the amount we expected to pay to the former shareholders of the acquired business. This liability is not contingent on future employment, and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of Acessa, comparable company revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities can result from the passage of time, changes in discount rates, and changes in the timing, probabilities and amount of revenue estimates. In the current year, we recorded a gain of $39.5 million to decrease the liability to its fair value. The reduction in fair value was primarily due to a decrease in forecasted revenues over the measurement period and to a lesser extent an increase in interest rates. In 2021, we recorded a gain of $6.7 million primarily due to a decrease in forecasted revenues over the measurement period.
Restructuring and Divestiture Charges. We have implemented various cost reduction initiatives to align our cost structure with our operations and related to integration activities. These actions have primarily resulted in the termination of employees. As a result, we recorded charges of $2.4 million in fiscal 2022 and $9.3 million in fiscal 2021, primarily related to severance benefits. For additional information, please refer to Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest Expense
Interest expense in fiscal 2022 and 2021 consists primarily of the cash interest costs and the related amortization of the debt discount and deferred issuance costs on our outstanding debt. Interest expense in fiscal 2022 increased compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in the variable interest rate under our 2021 Credit Agreement partially offset by lower interest rate swap expense as our hedged benchmark interest rate increased throughout the year, lower debt refinancing costs of $4.0 million, and lower interest on our Senior Notes due to issuing our 2029 Senior Notes and paying off our 2025 Senior Notes in the prior year, which had a higher fixed rate.
Debt Extinguishment Loss
In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we entered into a Refinancing Amendment No. 2 to the 2021 Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A. The proceeds were used to pay off the term loan outstanding under the 2018 Credit Agreement. In connection with this transaction we recorded a debt extinguishment charge of $0.7 million. In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we completed a private placement of $950 million aggregate principal amount of our 2029 Senior Notes. The proceeds under the 2029 Senior Notes offering, together with available cash, were used to redeem our 2025 Senior Notes in the same principal amount. In connection with this transaction, we recorded a debt extinguishment loss of $21.6 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net
In fiscal 2022, this account primarily consisted of net foreign currency exchange gains of $48.5 million, primarily from settling forward foreign currency hedging transactions and mark-to-market of outstanding foreign currency contracts, and a $2.4 million gain on life insurance proceeds as a result of the death of a former employee, partially offset by a loss of $12.2 million from the change in cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan primarily driven by stock market losses, a $4.0 million impairment charge of an equity investment and a charge of $4.3 million to write-off an equity method investment acquired in the Mobidiag acquisition.
In fiscal 2021, this account primarily consisted of a net foreign currency exchange loss of $17.1 million, partially driven by the mark-to-market and settling of outstanding foreign currency contracts, and a charge of $1.8 million for the write-off of an equity investment, partially offset by a gain of $13.4 million on the cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by prior year stock market gains.
Provision for Income Taxes.
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 was a provision of 18.0%. The effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income, reserve releases resulting from statute of limitations expirations and favorable audit settlements (net of reserve additions for uncertain tax positions), the geographic mix of income earned by the Company's international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate and a tax benefit related to an internal restructuring, partially offset by state income taxes and the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion.
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was a provision of 20.8%. The effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income and the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, partially offset by state income taxes and the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion.
Segment Results of Operations
We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical, and Skeletal Health. The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in the footnotes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Item 15 of this Annual Report. We measure segment performance based on total revenues and operating income (loss). Revenues from product sales of each of these segments are described in further detail above. The discussion that follows is a summary analysis of total revenues and the primary changes in operating income or loss by segment.
Diagnostics
Diagnostics revenues, as discussed above, decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays and a decrease in royalty revenue from Grifols related to licensing our intellectual property of our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain, partially offset by revenue from recent acquisitions and an increase in sales of our Aptima and Quant Viral assays.
Operating income for this business segment decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in gross profit from lower revenues and an increase in operating expenses. Gross margin was 67.1% in the current year compared to 73.2% in the prior year. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to decreased sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays which have a higher margin, an increase in intangible asset amortization expense from recent acquisitions, lower Grifols license revenue, an increase in inventory reserves, higher field service costs for our expanded install bases and an increase in freight internationally, partially offset by the inclusion of Biotheranostics lab testing revenue which has a higher gross margin than our legacy businesses.
Operating expenses increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the IPR&D charge of $27.7 million, the inclusion of operating expenses from the Biotheranostics, Mobidiag, and Diagenode acquisitions in the amount of $67.6 million, an increase in allocated advertising and charitable contributions, an increase in marketing initiatives, trade shows, meetings and travel expenses. These increases were partially offset by lower acquisition transaction costs, lower bonus and expense from our deferred compensation plan, lower integration costs, lower bad debt expense, lower MDR/IVDR implementation costs, and a higher BARDA credit of $3.2 million in the current year.
Breast Health
Breast Health revenues decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease of $134.6 million in product revenue as discussed above, partially offset by an increase of $10.1 million in service and other revenue. The increase in service revenue is primarily due to an increase in service contract revenue as the Breast Health business continued to convert a high percentage of our installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period.
Operating income for this business segment decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in product sales and service gross profit, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin was 51.9% in the current year compared to 56.4% in the prior year. The decrease in gross margin is primarily due to lower volumes of capital equipment sales, the reduced manufacturing utilization from supply chain shortages, higher costs for raw materials and components, an intangible asset charge of $17.4 million related to certain developed technology assets our Faxitron and Focal acquisitions and an increase in intangible asset amortization expense.
Operating expenses decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the reversal of a research and development credit reserve related to the SSI acquisition, a decrease in compensation and commissions from lower sales and sales force headcount, lower bad debt expense, lower bonus and expense from our deferred compensation plan, lower MDR/IVDR implementation costs, lower legal expenses, and a reduction of restructuring charges. These decreases are partially offset by an increase in allocated advertising and charitable contributions, higher marketing initiatives, an increase in travel and higher trade shows and seminars.
GYN Surgical
GYN Surgical revenues increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 due to the increase in product revenues discussed above.
Operating income for this business segment increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in gross profit from higher revenues and a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin was 59.2% in the current year, compared to 61.0% in the prior year. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to product mix as we sold more lower margin products, including our Fluent Fluid Management systems, Bolder products (comprised of CoolSeal vessel sealing devices and JustRight surgical staplers) and Acessa ProVu systems in the current fiscal year.
Operating expenses decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a gain of $39.5 million related to the fair value adjustments to the contingent consideration liability related to the Acessa acquisitions compared to a gain of $6.7 million in the prior year. There was also a decrease in research and development project spend, marketing initiatives, legal expenses and bad debt, and lower bonus and expense from our deferred compensation plan partially offset by the inclusion of operating expenses from Bolder of $12.5 million, an increase in commissions from higher sales, an increase in allocated marketing and charitable contributions, and an increase in travel expenses.
Skeletal Health
Skeletal Health revenues decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the decrease in product revenues discussed above, partially offset by an increase in service revenue.
Operating loss increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in gross profit from lower revenues and an increase in product cost. Gross margin decreased to 28.2% in the current year compared to 31.4% in the prior year primarily due to increased costs for our Horizon DXA systems workstation upgrades and lower sales volume of our Horizon DXA and Insight FD systems primarily due to supply chain constraints, partially offset by a slight increase in average selling prices of our Horizon DXA and Insight FD systems.
Operating expenses were consistent in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Fiscal Year Ended September 25, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 26, 2020
Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 25, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At September 24, 2022, we had working capital of $2,924.3 million, and our cash and cash equivalents totaled $2,339.5 million. Our cash and cash equivalents balance increased by $1,169.2 million during fiscal 2022 principally due to cash generated from operating activities partially offset by cash used in financing and investing activities related to a business acquisition, repurchases of our common stock and the pay-off of amounts outstanding under the accounts receivable securitization program (the "Securitization Program").
In fiscal 2022, our operating activities provided cash of $2,125.7 million, primarily due to net income of $1,302.0 million, non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization aggregating $430.1 million, stock-based compensation expense of $66.7 million and acquired intangible asset impairment charges of $45.1 million. These adjustments to net income were partially
offset by a decrease in net deferred taxes of $166.2 million primarily due to recording a deferred tax asset in connection with an internal restructuring and intangible asset impairments, and a $39.5 million non-cash adjustment to decrease the contingent consideration liability to the former shareholder of Acessa. Cash provided by operations included a net cash inflow of $454.2 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflow was primarily driven by a $384.3 million dollar decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets primarily due to tax refunds received in the second quarter related to federal and state loss carryback claims partially offset by a payment for our Women's Tennis Association sponsorship, and a decrease in accounts receivable of $272.3 million due to strong collections in the current year and lower revenues in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. These cash inflows were partially offset by an increase in inventory of $136.6 million primarily due to a strategic buildup of emergency sourced components for our Breast Health business to hedge against the continuing worldwide supply constraints, a $15.8 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities related to a decrease in accrued compensation and benefits and payments of value-add taxes partially offset by accrued federal and state income taxes due to timing of payments, a $23.3 million increase in prepaid income taxes, and a $14.4 million decrease in accounts payable due to the timing of payments.
In fiscal 2022, our investing activities used cash of $206.3 million primarily due to net cash paid for our acquisitions (primarily Bolder) of $158.6 million and capital expenditures of $127.2 million, which consisted of the purchases of property and equipment of $70.6 million and $56.6 million for the placement of equipment under customer usage agreements. These uses of cash in investing activities were partially offset by $75.0 million of proceeds received from the Department of Defense under a grant to increase production capacity of our two SARS-CoV-2 assays.
In fiscal 2022, our financing activities used cash of $756.0 million, primarily due to $542.1 million for repurchases of our common stock, $248.5 million for the repayment under the Securitization Program, $63.7 million for the repayment of debt acquired in the Mobidiag acquisition, $22.9 million for the payment of employee taxes withheld for the net share settlement of vested stock units, and a $12.2 million contingent consideration payment as a result of the completion of the first annual earn-out period related to the Acessa acquisition. Partially offsetting these uses of cash were net proceeds of $103.7 million from the refinancing of the 2021 Credit Agreement and $33.5 million from our equity plans, primarily from the exercise of stock options.
Debt
We had total recorded debt outstanding of $2.82 billion at September 24, 2022, which was comprised of our term loan under our 2021 Credit Agreement of $1.49 billion (principal of $1.50 billion), 2029 Senior Notes of $936.6 million (principal of $950.0 million), and 2028 Senior Notes of $396.1 million (principal of $400.0 million).
2021 Credit Agreement
On September 27, 2021, we refinanced our existing term loan and revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. in its capacity as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer, and certain other lenders from time to time party thereto (the "2018 Credit Agreement") by entering into Refinancing Amendment No. 2 dated as of September 27, 2021, to the Amended and Restated Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of October 3, 2017, as amended (the "2021 Credit Agreement"). Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement are secured by first-priority liens on, and a first priority security interest in, substantially all of our U.S. assets and the assets of the Subsidiary Guarantors. These liens are subject to release during the term of the facilities if we are able to achieve certain corporate or corporate family ratings and other conditions are met. The credit facilities under the 2021 Credit Agreement (the "2021 Credit Facilities") consist of:
•A $1.5 billion secured term loan ("2021 Term Loan") with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026; and
•A secured revolving credit facility (the "2021 Revolver") under which the Borrowers may borrow up to $2.0 billion, subject to certain sublimits, with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026.
As of the date of this Annual Report, there have been no borrowings under the 2021 Revolver.
On August 22, 2022, the Company and its subsidiaries amended the 2021 Credit Agreement by entering into an amendment (the "Third Amendment") related to the planned phase out of LIBOR by the UK Financial Conduct Authority. The interest rate applicable to the loans under the 2021 Credit Agreement, after giving effect to the Third Amendment, denominated in U.S. Dollars were converted to a variant of the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”), as established from time to time by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, plus a corresponding spread. The Third Amendment converted the Eurocurrency Rate to Term SOFR plus the SOFR Adjustment of 0.10% and the LIBOR Daily Floating Rate to Daily SOFR Rate plus the SOFR Adjustment of 0.10%, effective September 23, 2022.
Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement, other than Swing Line Loans, bear interest, at our option, at the Base Rate, at the Term SOFR Rate, at the Alternative Currency Daily Rate, or at the Daily SOFR Rate, in each case plus the Applicable Rate.
The Applicable Rate in regards to the Base Rate, the Term SOFR Rate, the Alternative Currency Daily Rate, the Alternative Currency Term Rate and the Daily SOFR Rate is subject to change depending on the Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement). The borrowings of the Term Loan under the 2021 Credit Facilities, after giving effect to the Third Amendment, initially bear interest at an annual rate equal to the Term SOFR Rate plus the SOFR Adjustment of 0.10% for a one month interest period plus an Applicable Rate equal to 1.00%. As of September 24, 2022, the interest rate under the 2021 Term Loan was 4.18% per annum.
We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee calculated on a daily basis equal to the Applicable Rate as of such day multiplied by the undrawn committed amount available under the Revolver. As of September 24, 2022, this commitment fee was 0.15% per annum for the 2021 Revolver.
We are required to make scheduled principal payments under the 2021 Term Loan in increasing amounts ranging from $3.75 million per three-month period commencing with the three-month period ending on December 29, 2022 to $18.75 million per three-month period commencing with the three month period ending on December 26, 2025. The remaining scheduled balance of $1.335 billion (or such lesser aggregate principal amount of the Term Loans then outstanding) on the 2021 Term Loan and any amounts outstanding under the 2021 Revolver are due at maturity. In addition, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the 2021 Credit Agreement, we may be required to make certain mandatory prepayments from the net proceeds of specified types of asset sales (subject to certain reinvestment rights), debt issuances (excluding permitted debt) and insurance recoveries (subject to certain reinvestment rights). Certain of the mandatory prepayments are subject to reduction or elimination if certain financial covenants are met. These mandatory prepayments are required to be applied first to the 2021 Term Loan, second to any outstanding amount under any Swing Line Loans, third to the 2021 Revolver, fourth to prepay any outstanding reimbursement obligations with respect to letters of credit and fifth to cash collateralize any letters of credit. Subject to certain limitations, we may voluntarily prepay any of the 2021 Credit Facilities without premium or penalty. As of September 24, 2022, the outstanding principal balance of the 2021 Term Loan was $1.5 billion, and there were no amounts outstanding under the 2021 Revolver.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants customarily applicable to senior secured credit facilities, including covenants restricting our ability subject to negotiated exceptions, to incur additional indebtedness and grant additional liens on our assets, engage in mergers or acquisitions or dispose of assets, enter into sale-leaseback transactions, pay dividends or make other distributions, voluntarily prepay other indebtedness, enter into transactions with affiliated persons, make investments, and change the nature of our business. In addition, the 2021 Credit Agreement requires the Borrowers to maintain certain financial ratios. The 2021 Credit Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties and events of default, including payments defaults, breach of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross defaults and an event of default upon a change of control of the company.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains two financial covenants (a total net leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio) measured as of the last day of each quarter for the previous twelve month period. As of September 24, 2022, we were in compliance with these covenants.
2028 Senior Notes
The total aggregate principal balance of the 2028 Senior Notes is $400.0 million. The 2028 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of our domestic subsidiaries. The 2028 Senior Notes mature on February 1, 2028 and bear interest at the rate of 4.625% per year, payable semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year. We may redeem the 2028 Senior Notes at any time prior to February 1, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and a make-whole premium set forth in the indenture. We also have the option to redeem the 2028 Senior Notes on or after: February 1, 2023 through February 1, 2024 at 102.312% of par; February 1, 2024 through February 1, 2025 at 101.541% of par; February 1, 2025 through February 1, 2026 at 100.770% of par; and February 1, 2026 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2028 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
2029 Senior Notes
The total aggregate principal balance of the 2029 Senior Notes is $950.0 million. The 2029 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain domestic subsidiaries. The 2029 Senior Notes mature on February 15, 2029 and bear interest at the rate of 3.250% per year, payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15 of each year. We may redeem the 2029 Senior Notes at any time prior to September 28, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and a make-whole premium set forth in the indenture. We may also redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Senior Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at any time and from time to time before September 28, 2023, at a redemption price equal to 103.250% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. We have the option to redeem the 2029 Senior Notes on or after: September 28, 2023 through September 27, 2024 at 101.625% of par; September 28, 2024 through September 27, 2025 at 100.813% of par; and September 28, 2025 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2029 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Program
On June 11, 2021, we amended and restated the Credit and Security agreement to restart the Securitization Program (the "Securitization Program") and increased the maximum borrowing amount to $320.0 million. Under the terms of the Securitization Program, we and certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries sell our customer receivables to a bankruptcy remote special purpose entity, which is wholly-owned by us. The amount that the special purpose entity may borrow at a given point in time is determined based on the amount of qualifying receivables that are present in the special purpose entity at such point in time. The assets of the special purpose entity secure the amounts borrowed and cannot be used to pay our other debts or liabilities. The Securitization Program provides for annual renewals.
During fiscal 2022, we repaid the outstanding balance of $248.5 million under the Securitization Program. On June 10, 2022, we amended the Credit and Security agreement and temporarily suspended the ability to borrow and the need to comply with covenants for up to a year. As of September 24, 2022, we did not have any borrowings under this program.
Contingent Consideration Earn-Out Payments
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we have incurred the obligation to make contingent earn-out payments tied to performance criteria, principally revenue growth of the acquired business over a specified period. In addition, contractual provisions relating to these contingent earn-out obligations may result in the risk of litigation relating to the calculation of the amount due or our operation of the acquired business. Such litigation could be expensive and divert management attention and resources. Our obligation to make contingent payments may also result in significant operating expenses.
Contingent consideration arrangements are recorded as either additional purchase price or compensation expense if continuing employment is required to receive such payments. Pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations, contingent consideration that is deemed to be part of the purchase price is recorded as a liability based on the estimated fair value of the consideration we expect to pay to the former shareholders of the acquired business as of the acquisition date. This liability is re-measured each reporting period with the change in fair value recorded through a separate line item within our Consolidated Statements of Income. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities can result from changes in discount rates, changes in the timing, probabilities and amount of revenue estimates, and accretion of the liability for the passage of time.
Currently, our only contingent consideration liability is from our Acessa acquisition. We have an obligation to the former Acessa shareholders to make contingent payments based on a multiple of annual incremental revenue growth over a three year period ending annually in December. There is no maximum earnout. Pursuant to ASC 805, the contingent consideration was deemed to be part of the purchase price, and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of the business, comparable companies revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. The first earn-out period was completed in December 2021, and we paid $12.2 million to the former shareholders in the second quarter of fiscal 2022. As of September 24, 2022 this liability was recorded at its fair value of $23.4 million.
Stock Repurchase Program
On December 9, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a new five-year share repurchase program, to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock. During fiscal 2022, we repurchased 7.7 million shares of our common stock for a total consideration of $542.1 million. On September 22, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a new stock repurchase program, with a five-year term, to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock, effective as of the close of trading on September 23, 2022. This new stock repurchase authorization replaced the previous $1.0 billion authorization, which had $149.7 million remaining as of September 22, 2022. Subsequent to September 24, 2022, we repurchased 1.5 million shares of our common stock for total consideration of $100.0 million. The timing of any future share repurchases will be based upon our continuing analysis of market, financial, and other factors. Repurchases under the authorized share repurchase program may be made using a variety of methods, which may include, but are not limited to, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase agreements, or purchases pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan under the Exchange Act. The authorized share repurchase program may be suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.
Future Liquidity Considerations
We expect to continue to review and evaluate potential strategic transactions that we believe will complement our current or future business. Subject to the "Risk Factors" set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report and the general disclaimers set forth in our Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements at the outset of this Annual Report, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, the cash available under our 2021 Revolver will provide us with sufficient funds in order to fund our expected normal operations and debt payments over the next twelve months. Our longer-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund capital expenditures, repayment of debt, acquisitions, strategic transactions or other investments. As described above, we have significant indebtedness outstanding under our 2021 Credit Agreement, 2028 Senior Notes, and 2029 Senior Notes. These capital requirements could be substantial. Our operating performance may also be affected by matters discussed under the above-referenced Risk Factors set forth elsewhere in this report. These risks, trends and uncertainties may also adversely affect our long-term liquidity.
Legal Contingencies
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings and claims. In connection with these legal proceedings and claims, management periodically reviews estimates of potential costs to be incurred by us in connection with the adjudication or settlement, if any, of these proceedings. These estimates are developed, as applicable in consultation with outside counsel, and are based on an analysis of potential litigation outcomes and settlement strategies. In accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, loss contingencies are accrued if, in the opinion of management, an adverse outcome is probable and such financial outcome can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that future results for any particular quarter or annual period may be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies relating to these proceedings.
Guarantees and Other Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, of a magnitude that we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition for multiple element arrangements, allowance for doubtful accounts, reserves for excess and obsolete inventories, valuations, purchase price allocations and contingent consideration related to business combinations, expected future cash flows including growth rates, discount rates, terminal values and other assumptions used to evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets and goodwill, estimated fair values of intangible assets and goodwill, amortization methods and periods, warranty reserves, certain accrued expenses, restructuring and other related charges, stock-based compensation, contingent liabilities, tax reserves and recoverability of our net deferred tax assets and related valuation allowances. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate. Any differences may have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
The following is a discussion of what we believe to be the more significant critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventory
Our inventories include material, labor and overhead, and are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market. As a developer and manufacturer of high technology medical equipment and diagnostic test kits, we may be exposed to a number of economic and industry factors that could result in portions of our inventory becoming either obsolete or in excess of anticipated usage. Our policy is to establish inventory reserves when conditions exist that suggest that our inventory may be in excess of anticipated demand or is obsolete based upon our assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions. Although considerable effort is made to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or expected usage could have a significant negative impact on the value of our inventory and our operating results.
Business Combinations
We record tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations under the purchase method of accounting. Amounts paid for each acquisition are allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. Contingent consideration, which is not deemed to be linked to continuing employment, is recorded at fair value measured on the date of acquisition using an appropriate valuation model, such as the Monte Carlo simulation model. The value recorded is based on estimates of future financial projections under various potential scenarios, in which the model runs many simulations based on comparable companies' growth rates and their implied volatility. These cash flow projections are discounted with a risk adjusted rate. Each quarter until such contingent amounts are earned, the fair value of the liability is remeasured at each reporting period and adjusted as a component of operating expenses based on changes to the underlying assumptions. The estimates used to determine the fair value of the contingent consideration liability are subject to significant judgment, specifically projected revenues, and given the inherent uncertainties in making these estimates, actual results are likely to differ from the amounts originally recorded and could be materially different.
The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions provided by management, which consider management’s best estimate of inputs and assumptions that a market participant would use. We allocate any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to goodwill.
We generally use the income approach in which cash flow projections on an after-tax basis are discounted using a risk adjusted rate to determine the estimated fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including developed technology, in-process research and development projects, customer relationships, and trade names. The significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of intangible assets include discount rates and certain assumptions that form the basis of the forecasted results specifically revenue growth rates. These significant assumptions are forward looking and could be affected by future economic and market conditions.
With respect to property, plant and equipment, we estimate the fair value of these assets using a combination of the cost and market approaches, depending on the component. Generally, we apply the cost or income approach as the primary methods in estimating the fair value of land and buildings as the market approach is less reliable based on potential significant differences between the property being valued and the potentially comparable sales of similar properties.
Goodwill
We test goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if events and circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Events that could indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to current economic and market conditions, including a decline in market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors, business climate, operational performance of the business or key personnel, and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Our annual impairment test date is the first day of our fiscal fourth quarter.
In performing the test, we either use the qualitative assessment permitted by ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, or the single step quantitative approach prescribed under ASC 350 including amendments under ASU 2017-04. Under the qualitative approach we consider a number of factors, including the amount by which the previous quantitative test's fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting units, the forecasts in our then-current strategic plan compared to the forecasts in the previous quantitative test, an evaluation of discount rates, long-term growth rates including the terminal year rate, if tax rates would have significantly changed, an evaluation of current economic factors for both the worldwide economy and specifically the medical device industry, and any significant changes in customer and supplier relationships. We weigh these factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. If after performing a qualitative assessment, indicators are present, or we identify factors that cause us to believe it is appropriate to perform a more precise calculation of fair value, we would move beyond the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative impairment test.
Under the quantitative impairment test, we perform a comparison of the reporting unit’s carrying value to its fair value. We consider a number of factors to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, including an independent valuation to conduct this test. The valuation is based upon expected future discounted operating cash flows of the reporting unit as well as analysis of recent sales and ratio comparisons of similar companies. We base the discount rate on the weighted average cost of capital, or WACC, of market participants. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, we apply the single step approach under ASU 2017-04. As a result of this simplified approach the goodwill impairment is calculated as the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value to the extent of the goodwill balance.
We conducted our fiscal 2022 annual impairment test on the first day of the fourth quarter and utilized the quantitative approach. We used discounted cash flows, or DCF, and market approaches to estimate the fair value of our reporting units as of June 26, 2022 and ultimately used the fair value determined by the DCF in making our impairment test conclusions. We believe we used reasonable estimates and assumptions about future revenue, cost projections, cash flows, market multiples and discount rates as of the measurement date. As a result of completing this analysis, all of our reporting units had fair values exceeding their carrying values.
At September 24, 2022, we believe that our reporting units, with goodwill aggregating $3.2 billion, were not at risk of failing the goodwill impairment test based on our current forecasts and qualitative assessment.
Since the fair value of our reporting units was determined by use of the DCF, and the key assumptions that drive the fair value in this model are the WACC, terminal values, growth rates, and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, significant judgment is applied in determining fair value. If the current economic environment were to deteriorate, this would likely result in a higher WACC because market participants would require a higher rate of return. In the DCF as the WACC increases, the fair value decreases. The other significant factor in the DCF is our projected financial information (i.e., amount and timing of expected future cash flows and growth rates) and if these assumptions were to be adversely impacted, this could result in a reduction of the fair value of a reporting unit.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and stated net of accumulated amortization and impairments. We amortize intangible assets that have finite lives using either the straight-line method, or if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefit of the asset is expected to be utilized. We evaluate the recoverability of our definite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances or business conditions indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable based on expectations of future undiscounted cash flows for each asset group. If the carrying value of an asset or asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, we estimate the fair value of the assets, generally utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis based on the present value of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the assets using a risk-adjusted discount rate. To estimate the fair value of the assets, the Company uses market participant assumptions pursuant to ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements.
Indefinite lived intangible assets, such as IPR&D assets, are initially recorded at fair value and are required to be tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. The Company’s annual impairment test date is as of the first day of its fourth quarter. We estimate the fair value of IPR&D assets utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis and key assumptions are revenue growth rates, timing of completion of the project, costs to complete the project and discount rates. These estimates require significant judgment and adverse changes in assumptions could result in a lower fair value.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of our products, primarily medical imaging systems and diagnostic and surgical disposable products, and related services, which are primarily support and maintenance services on our medical imaging systems. See Note 3 for further discussion of revenue recognition.
We consider revenue to be earned when all of the following criteria are met: we have a contract with a customer that creates enforceable rights and obligations; promised products or services are identified; the transaction price, or the amount that we expect to receive, including an estimate of uncertain amounts subject to a constraint to ensure revenue is not recognized in an amount that would result in a significant reversal upon resolution of the uncertainty, is determinable; and we have transferred control of the promised items to the customer. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in the contract. The transaction price for the contract is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the goods and services expected to be transferred. A contract's transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, control of the distinct good or service is transferred. Transfer of control for our products is generally at shipment or delivery, depending on contractual terms, but occurs when title and risk of loss transfers to the customer which represents the point in time when the
customer obtains the use of and substantially all of the remaining benefit of the product. As such, the performance obligation related to product sales is satisfied at a point in time. Revenue from support and maintenance contracts and extended warranties are recognized over time based on the contract term, which represents a faithful depiction of the transfer of goods and services given the stand-ready nature of the performance obligations. Service revenue related to professional services for installation, training and repairs is recognized as the services are performed based on the specific nature of the service.
We recognize receivables when we have an unconditional right to payment, which represents the amount we expect to collect in a transaction and is most often equal to the transaction price in the contract. Payment terms are typically 30 days in the U.S. but may be longer in international markets. We treat shipping and handling costs performed after a customer obtains control of the good as a fulfillment cost and record these costs within costs of product revenue when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
Some of our contracts have multiple performance obligations. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we are required to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. We determine the best estimate of standalone selling price using average selling prices over 3- to 12-month periods of data depending on the products or nature of the services coupled with current market considerations. If the product or service does not have a history of sales or if sales volume is not sufficient, we rely on prices set by our pricing committees or applicable marketing department adjusted for expected discounts.
We exercise judgement in estimating variable consideration, which includes volume discounts, sales rebates, product returns and other adjustments. These amounts are recorded as a reduction to revenue and classified as a current liability. We base our estimates for volume discounts and sales rebates on historical information to the extent it is reasonable to be used as a predictive tool of expected future rebates. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we apply judgment in constraining the estimated variable consideration due to factors that may cause reversal of revenue recognized. We evaluate constraints based on our historical and projected experience with similar customer contracts. Our contracts for the sale of capital equipment and related components, and assays and tests typically do not provide the right to return product, however, our contracts for the sale of our interventional breast and surgical handpieces provide for a right of return for a limited period of time. In general, estimates of variable consideration and constraints are not material to our financial statements.
We also place instruments (or equipment) at customer sites but retain title to the instrument (for example, the ThinPrep Processor, ThinPrep Imaging System, and the Panther system). The customer has the right to use the instrument for a period of time, and then we recover the cost of providing the instrument through the sales of disposables, namely tests and assays in Diagnostics and handpieces in GYN Surgical. These types of agreements include an embedded operating lease for the right to use an instrument and no instrument revenue is recognized at the time of instrument delivery. We recognize a portion of the revenue allocated to the embedded lease concurrent with the sale of disposables over the term of the agreement.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method for accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, we recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying amount of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and also for operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards at each reporting period. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates and laws applicable to the period and jurisdiction in which we expect the differences to affect taxable income. We evaluate both the positive and negative evidence that affects the realizability of net deferred tax assets and assess the need for a valuation allowance. The future benefit to be derived from our deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in each jurisdiction of the right type to realize the assets. We establish a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. To the extent we establish or release a valuation allowance, a tax charge or benefit will be recorded as a component of the income tax provision on the statement of operations in the reporting period that such determination is made.
We have recognized $74.6 million in net deferred tax liabilities at September 24, 2022 and $228.6 million at September 25, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to recording a deferred tax asset in connection with an internal restructuring and intangible asset impairments in fiscal 2022. The liabilities primarily relate to deferred taxes associated with our acquisitions. The tax assets primarily relate to net operating and capital loss carryforwards, accruals and reserves, stock-based compensation, and research credits.
Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolutions of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to,
changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. Any change in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
As of September 24, 2022, we had $247.6 million in gross unrecognized tax benefits excluding interest, of which $231.6 million, if recognized, would reduce our effective tax rate. As of September 25, 2021, we had $212.8 million in gross unrecognized tax benefits excluding interest, of which $197.0 million, if recognized, would have reduced our effective tax rate.
In the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Judgment is required in determining our worldwide income tax provision. In our opinion, we have made adequate provisions for income taxes for all years subject to audit. While we consider our estimates reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be different than amounts reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. If our assumptions are incorrect, the differences could have a material impact on our income tax provision and operating results in the period in which such determination is made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 15 of this Annual Report.