ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. References herein to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Hour Loop, Inc.
Overview
Our Business
We are an online retailer engaged in e-commerce retailing in the U.S. market. We have operated as a third-party seller on www.amazon.com since 2013. We have also sold merchandise on our website at www.hourloop.com since 2013. We expanded our operations to www.walmart.com in October 2020. To date, we have generated practically all of our revenue as a third-party seller on www.amazon.com and only a negligible amount of revenue from our operations on our website at www.hourloop.com and as a third-party seller on www.walmart.com. We manage more than 100,000 stock-keeping units (“SKUs”). Product categories include home/garden décor, toys, kitchenware, apparels, and electronics. Our primary strategy is to bring most of our vendors product selections to the customers. We have advanced software that assists us in identifying product gaps so we can keep such products in stock year-round including the entirety of the last quarter (holiday season) of the calendar year (“Q4”). In upcoming years, we plan to expand our business rapidly by increasing the number of business managers, vendors and SKUs.
Business Model
There are three main types of business models on Amazon: wholesale, private label and retail arbitrage. Our business model is wholesale, also known as reselling, which refers to buying products in bulk directly from the brand or manufacturer at a wholesale price and making a profit by selling the product on Amazon. We sell merchandise on Amazon and the sales are fulfilled by Amazon. We pay Amazon fees for allowing us to sell on their platform. Our relationship with Walmart is also similar. We pay Walmart fees for allowing us to sell our merchandise on their platform. As stated above, to date, we have generated only a negligible amount of revenues as a third-party seller on www.walmart.com.
The advantages of selling via a wholesale model:
● Purchase lower unit quantities with wholesale orders than private label products.
● Selling wholesale is less time intensive and easier to scale than sourcing products via retail arbitrage.
● More brands will want to work with us because we can provide broader Amazon presence.
The challenges of selling via a wholesale model:
● Fierce competition on listing for Buy Box on amazon.com (as described below).
● Developing and maintaining relationships with brand manufacturers.
Market description/opportunities
Total retail sales in the U.S. increased 6.9% to $4.04 trillion in 2020 from $3.78 trillion in 2019. Consumers spent $861.12 billion online with U.S. merchants in 2020, which is around 21.3% of total retail sales for 2020, compared to 15.8% for 2019.
Amazon accounted for nearly a third of all e-commerce in the United States. With a more than 5% gain in e-commerce penetration for U.S. retail sales in 2020, we anticipate a larger market in the upcoming years.
Formation and Management
We were originally incorporated under the laws of the State of Washington on January 13, 2015. However, we converted from a Washington corporation to a Delaware corporation on April 7, 2021. The company was founded in 2013 by Sam Lai and Maggie Yu. With their vision, leadership, and software development skills, the company grew rapidly. From 2013 to 2021, sales grew from $0 to $62.7 million .
Competitive advantage
Among 9.7 million sellers on Amazon, we believe we have two main competitive advantages. First, we have strong operations and sales teams experienced in listing, shipment, advertising, reconciliation and sales. By delivering high quality results and enhancing procedures through the process, our teams are competitive. Second, we believe our proprietary software system gives us an advantage over our competition. The system is highly customized to our business model; it collects and processes large amounts of data every day to optimize our operation and sales. Through advanced software, we can identify product gaps and keep them in stock all year round.
With respect to our advertising strategy, we advertise those products that we estimate will have greater demand based on our experience. This lets us allocate our advertising budget in a fashion that delivers positive value. We advertise our products on Amazon. We allocate our advertising dollars prudently. This is accomplished by advertising items that deliver the most return for our advertising spending. We monitor the items being advertised by our competitors. On the operations side, we constantly refine our processes based on learnings from historical data. The combination of managing the business operations effectively along with allocating our advertising budget to high value items allows us to grow profitably. In cases, where the advertising is fierce, we allocate the spending appropriately. Our strategy for competing with larger competitors is to monitor their pricing and not compete with them when their pricing is low or at a loss. Competitors sell at low prices or at a loss due to a variety of reasons, including, but not limited to, their desire to liquidate inventory or achieve short term increase in revenue. During these times, we avoid matching their prices. This strategy allows us to stay profitable.
Our Financial Position
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenues of $62,792,981 and $38,655,264, respectively, and reported net income of $4,783,773 and $3,825,389, respectively, and cash flow from operating activities of $7,764,057 and $3,824,729, respectively. As noted in our consolidated financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had retained earnings of $2,654,695.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table shows a comparison of our 2021 and 2020 income statements.
Revenue
We generated $62,792,981 in 2021 as compared to $38,655,264 in revenue in 2020. The growth in revenue was 24,137,717 or 62.4%. We attribute this growth to our continued growth and maturity in our operating model which was enhanced by a favorable e-commerce environment. Our total orders in 2021 were approximately 2,289,467 as compared to 1,364,557 orders in 2020. This represented an increase of 67%.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $27,984,335 as compared to $16,485,770 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of goods sold include the cost of the merchandise sold, shipping costs as well as estimated losses due to damage to goods. The increase in cost of goods sold is due to a greater number of items sold as a result of greater number of orders in 2021.
Operating Expense
Operating Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $29,334,497, a $11,005,572 increase from the $18,328,925 of operating expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was caused by an increase in platform fees paid to Amazon, higher employee compensation and IPO related costs. The Amazon fees are proportional to the revenue. The increase in revenue in 2021 over 2020 drove this increase in platform fees.
Other (Expense) Income
Other income (expenses) is mainly due to the local government grant received by Flywheel in 2021, other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $18,829, and the other expenses for the year ended December 31,2020 totaled $15,180.
Total Comprehensive Income
Total Comprehensive Income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4,779,083 as compared with $3,820,698 Total Comprehensive Income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in Total Comprehensive Income was $958,385. This change was driven by an improvement in our revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 over the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impacts to Results of Operations from COVID-19
The Company’s business operations were negatively impacted by disruptions in our supply chain, which limited our ability to source merchandise, and limits on products fulfillment placed by Amazon. More specifically, COVID-19 limited our ability to stock items because there was not enough inventory available. Additionally, the cost of these items increased.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. We had cash of $10,592,572 and $4,968,064 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31,2020, respectively.
Our primary uses of cash have been for inventory, payments to Amazon related to sales and shipping of products, for services provided, payments for marketing and advertising and salaries paid to our employees. We have received funds from the sales of products that we sell online. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in changes in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance the rapid growth in our current business,
● An increase in fees paid to Amazon and other partners as our sales grows
● The cost of being a public company;
● Marketing and advertising expenses for attracting new customers; and
● Capital requirements for the development of additional infrastructure
Since inception, we have generated liquidity from the profitability of our ongoing business and from debt to fund our operations.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Net Cash From Operating Activities:
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, cash generated by operating activities amounted to 7,764,057 as compared to $3,824,729 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was driven by our net income of $4,783,773 as compared to $3,825,389 in 2020. The increase in net income was driven by an increase in revenue from $62,792,981 in 2021 as compared to $38,655,264 in 2020. This increase in revenue was offset by a corresponding increase in cost of goods sold and an increase in operating expenses of $11,005,572.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities:
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, $16,115 cash was used in investing activities. For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, no cash was generated by or used in investing activities.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities:
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities amounted to $2,126,177 as compared to cash generated from financing activities of $299,261 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used by financing activities in 2021 was mainly due to a distribution to stockholders of $6,302,418, offset by $4,170,418 in long term debt obtained from related parties.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
COVID-19
Our business, results of operations, and financial condition may be materially adversely impacted if a public health outbreak, including the recent COVID-19 pandemic, interferes with our ability, or the ability of our employees, contractors, suppliers, and other business partners to perform our and their respective responsibilities and obligations relative to the conduct of our business.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected and may continue to adversely affect the economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations. As a result, our ability to fund through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, and through other means at acceptable terms, if at all, may be disrupted, in the event our financing needs for the foreseeable future are not able to be met by our balances of cash, cash equivalents and cash generated from operations.
In addition, the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic and various governmental responses in the United States has adversely affected and may continue to adversely affect our business operations, including our ability to carry on business development activities, restrictions in business-related travel, delays or disruptions in our on-going projects, and unavailability of the employees of the Company or third parties with whom we conduct business, due to illness or quarantines, among others. Our business was negatively impacted by disruptions in our supply chain, which limited our ability to source merchandise, and limits on products fulfillment placed by Amazon. For example, we may be unable to launch new products, replenish inventory for existing products, ship into or receive inventory in our third-party warehouses in each case on a timely basis or at all. The extent to which COVID-19 could impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, and will depend on many factors, including the duration of the outbreak, the effect of travel restrictions and social distancing efforts in the United States and other countries, the scope and length of business closures or business disruptions, and the actions taken by governments to contain and treat the disease. As such, we cannot presently predict the scope and extent of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. Possible effects may include, but are not limited to, disruption to our customers and revenue, absenteeism in our labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in our operations, shutdowns that may be mandated or requested by governmental authorities, and a decline in the value of our assets, including various long-lived assets.
Contractual Obligations
Except as set forth below, we do not have any long-term capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Bank of America Loan
On June 18, 2019, the Company issued a Promissory Note (the “BofA Note”) in the amount of $785,000 to Bank of America (the “Lender”) for a loan in the amount of $785,000. The BofA Note matures on June 18, 2024 and bears interest at a rate of 8.11% per annum. The monthly payment is $15,963, consisting of $11,398 of principal and $4,565 of interest. As of July 23, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of the BofA Note outstanding is $0. As of January 3, 2022, there is an outstanding balance of deferred interest of $27,996.
PPP Loan
On April 7, 2020, the Company issued a Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $27,012 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) to JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. (the “Lender”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which was enacted March 27, 2020, provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The Note matures on April 7, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 0.98% per annum, payable monthly commencing October 5, 2020, following an initial deferral period as specified under the PPP loan. The Note may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (the “Flexibility Act”), signed on June 5, 2020, amended certain provisions of the PPP, including the deferral period and repayment terms. The Flexibility Act extends the deferral period of payments of PPP loan principal, interest, and fees to the date when the U.S. Small Business Administration makes a final decision on the borrower’s application for forgiveness, or 10 months after the last day of the covered period if a borrower has not applied for forgiveness (whichever is earlier). This extension applies regardless of the terms of the PPP and does not require an amendment of the PPP. As such, the Company did not make any payments on the Note during 2020.
Under the terms of the PPP loan, up to the entire amount of principal and accrued interest may be forgiven to the extent PPP loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and applicable implementing guidance issued by the U.S. Small Business Administration under the PPP loan. On May 6, 2021, the entire amount of principal and accrued interest on the Note was forgiven.
Conversion of S Corporation to C Corporation
On June 30, 2021, the Company completed a corporate reorganization to convert its status from a S corporation to a C corporation with an effective date of July 27, 2021. Retained earnings in the amount of $4,170,418 were distributed by the Company to the S corporation stockholders ($2,085,209 to each of Mr. Lai and Ms. Yu) on July 27, 2021.
Affiliated Loans
December 2020 Loan
On December 31, 2020, Sam Lai, our Chief Executive Officer, and Maggie Yu, our Senior Vice President, made a loan (“December 2020 Loan”) to us of $1,041,353 in a single payment ($520,676 attributable to each of Mr. Lai and Mrs. Yu). The loan is memorialized in a Loan Agreement dated December 31, 2020. Pursuant to the terms of the Loan Agreement, the loan bore no interest and was payable on demand.
On September 16, 2021, Sam Lai, our Chief Executive Officer, and Maggie Yu, our Senior Vice President, and the Company amended and restated the Loan Agreement to modify the terms of the December 2020 Loan, whereby the interest rate became 2% per annum (applied retroactively) rather than non-interest bearing and maturity date became December 31, 2021 rather than payable on demand.
On December 31, 2021, Sam Lai, our Chief Executive Officer, and Maggie Yu, our Senior Vice President, and the Company amended and restated the Loan Agreement to modify the term of the December 2020 Loan, whereby the maturity date was extended from December 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022.
On February 8, 2022, the outstanding principal balance and accrued interest on the December 2020 Loan was paid in full.
July 2021 Loan
On July 27, 2021, Sam Lai, our Chief Executive Officer, and Maggie Yu, our Senior Vice President, made a loan (“July 2021 Loan”) to us of the outstanding retained earnings of approximately $4,170,418 in a single payment ($2,085,209 attributable to each of Mr. Lai and Mrs. Yu). The loan is memorialized in a Loan Agreement dated October 15, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the Loan Agreement, the loan bears interest of 2% per annum and the principal of the loan ($4,170,418) and accrued interest becomes due and payable on December 31, 2022.
As of January 3, 2022, the outstanding principal balance was approximately $4,170,418 and accrued interest was $36,325 on the July 2021 Loan.
Leases
The Company has three operating leases (Hour Loop has an Xiamen warehouse lease and a Seattle warehouse lease, and Flywheel has an office lease in Taiwan). The Company has signed leases through 2022. We make lease payments in advance. The table below outlines payments for non-cancelable operating leases.
Sales Taxes
We make an assessment of sales tax payable including any related interest and penalties and accrues these estimates on the financial statements. Pursuant to the Wayfair decision, each state enforced sales tax collection at different dates. We collect and remit sales tax in accordance with the state regulations. We estimate that as of December 31, 2021, we owed $620,963 in sales taxes, along with penalties and interest. However, we are currently engaged in the process of negotiating and remediating the amount of sales tax with the states in which we owe sales tax and anticipate becoming compliant in tax payments in such states by June 30, 2022 .
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid financial instruments purchased with original maturities of three months or less to be cash and cash equivalents. The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value.
Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is principally determined on a first-in first-out basis. The Company’s costs include the amounts it pays manufacturers for product, tariffs and duties associated with transporting product across national borders, and freight costs associated with transporting the product from its manufacturers to its warehouses.
Cost of goods sold is comprised of the book value of inventory sold to customers during the reporting period.
Property and Equipment
Property, plant, and equipment are recorded at cost and depreciated or amortized over the estimated useful life of the asset using the straight-line method.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The carrying amounts reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheets for cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and other current liabilities approximate fair value because of the immediate or short-term maturity of these financial instruments.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC Topic 606”). The Company adopted ASC Topic 606 as of January 1, 2019. The standard did not affect the Company’s consolidated financial position, or cash flows. There were no changes to the timing of revenue recognition as a result of the adoption.
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which provided a five-step model for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers as follows:
● Identify the contract with a customer.
● Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
● Determine the transaction price.
● Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
● Recognize revenue when or as performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company derives its revenue from the sale of consumer products. The Company sells its products directly to consumers through online retail channels. The Company considers customer order confirmations to be a contract with the customer. Customer confirmations are executed at the time an order is placed through third-party online channels. For all of the Company’s sales and distribution channels, revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when the Company’s performance obligation is satisfied), which typically occurs at shipment date. As a result, the Company has a present and unconditional right to payment and record the amount due from the customer in accounts receivable.
The Company evaluated principal versus agent considerations to determine whether it is appropriate to record platform fees paid to Amazon as an expense or as a reduction of revenue. Platform fees are recorded as sales and distribution expenses and are not recorded as a reduction of revenue because the Company owns and controls all the goods before they are transferred to the customer. The Company can, at any time, direct Amazon, similarly, other third-party logistics providers (“Logistics Providers”), to return the Company’s inventories to any location specified by the Company. It is the Company’s responsibility to make any returns made by customers directly to Logistic Providers and the Company retains the back-end inventory risk. Further, the Company is subject to credit risk (i.e., credit card chargebacks), establishes prices of its products, can determine who fulfills the goods to the customer (Amazon or the Company) and can limit quantities or stop selling the goods at any time. The customer can return the products within 30 days after the products are delivered and estimated sales returns are calculated based on the expected returns. Based on these considerations, the Company is the principal in this arrangement.
Performance Obligations. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC Topic 606. A contract’s transaction price is recognized as revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied. Each of the Company’s contracts have a single distinct performance obligation, which is the promise to transfer individual goods. For consumer product sales, the Company has elected to treat shipping and handling as fulfillment activities, and not a separate performance obligation. The Company bills customers for charges for shipping and handling on certain sales and such charges are recorded as part of net revenue.
For each contract, the Company considers the promise to transfer products to be the only identified performance obligation. In determining the transaction price, the Company evaluates whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are stated at historical cost less allowance for doubtful accounts. On a periodic basis, management evaluates its accounts receivable and determines whether to provide an allowance or if any accounts should be written off based on a past history of write-offs, collections and current credit conditions. A receivable is considered past due if the Company has not received payments based on agreed-upon terms. The Company performs on-going evaluations of its customers and maintains an allowance for bad and doubtful receivables.
Leases
The Company has elected the adoption under ASC Topic 842, Leases, which allows the Company to apply the transition provision at the Company’s adoption date instead of at the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements. The Company elected the optional practical expedient permitted under the transition guidance which allows the Company to carry forward the historical accounting treatment for existing leases upon adoption.
Sales Taxes
Company makes an assessment of sales tax payable including any related interest and penalties. The Company’s accounting policy is to exclude the tax collected and remitted from revenues and cost of revenues. Pursuant to the Wayfair decision, each state enforced sales tax collection at different dates. The company makes sales collects and remits sales tax in accordance with the state regulations. In the past, where the company has not collected these taxes, the company has made estimates of amounts owed and accrued these on the financial statements.
Income Taxes
Prior to 2021, the Company, with the stockholders’ consent, has elected to be taxed as an “S corporation” under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and comparable state income tax law. As an S corporation, the Company is generally not subject to corporate income taxes, and the Company’s net income or loss is reported on the individual tax return of the stockholder of the Company. Therefore, no provision or liability for income taxes is reflected in the financial statements.
Commitments and Contingencies
Liabilities for loss contingencies arising from claims, assessments, litigation, fines, penalties, and other sources are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Legal costs incurred in connection with loss contingencies are expensed as incurred.
Related Parties
The Company accounts for related party transactions in accordance with ASC Topic 850 (Related Party Disclosures). A party is considered to be related to the Company if the party directly or indirectly or through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with the Company. Related parties also include principal owners of the Company, its management, members of the immediate families of principal owners of the Company and its management and other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests. A party which can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or if it has an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests is also a related party.
Earnings per Share
The Company computes basic earnings per common share using the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. For period in which the Company reports net losses, diluted net loss per share attributable to stockholders is the same as basic net loss per share attributable to stockholders, because potentially dilutive common shares are not assumed to have been issued if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Foreign Currency and Currency Translation
In case of a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar, the functional currency amounts are translated into U.S. dollars at exchange rates in effect at year-end, with resulting translation gains or losses included within other comprehensive income or loss.