Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere herein. Unless otherwise noted, all dollar amounts in tables are in millions. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A.-Risk Factors" for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Senior Notes Offering and Redemption of 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes
We took steps in 2021 and the first quarter of 2022 to extend our debt maturity profile, reduce interest expense, and improve the mix of secured and unsecured debt, resulting in multiple credit rating upgrades.
On January 10, 2022, the Company issued $1,000 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2030. On February 4, 2022, we used the net proceeds from the issuance, together with cash on hand, to redeem in full both the $550 million of 9.375% Senior Notes and the $550 million of 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes, each at a redemption price of 100% plus the applicable "make whole" premium, together with accrued interest to the redemption date on both such notes.
See the pro forma debt table as of December 31, 2021 after giving effect to the foregoing refinancing transactions under the header "Financial Obligations" below. See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", and Note 19, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
CURRENT BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY TRENDS
The residential real estate market has seen robust growth since 2019. According to NAR, since 2019, homesale transaction volume increased 37% due to a 19% increase in the average homesale price and a 15% increase in homesale transactions. A strong recovery in the residential real estate market began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions that started in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 crisis.
During 2021, we believe sustained high levels of demand in the residential real estate market have been supported by the continuation of certain beneficial consumer trends such as home buyer preferences for certain geographies (including attractive tax and weather destinations) and demand in the high-end market as well as a favorable mortgage rate environment, an increase in the prevalence of remote work arrangements, and home buying trends among millennials. Both our company owned and franchised businesses have benefited from increased volume in the high-end markets, in particular our Sotheby's International Realty, Corcoran and Coldwell Banker brands. Continued high demand and low inventory levels have driven increases in average homesale prices throughout the recovery and, starting in the third quarter of 2021, we believe limited inventory contributed to the decline in existing homesale transactions.
On a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups, homesale transaction volume increased 29% during 2021 compared to 2020-exceeding the 20% increase in homesale transaction volume reported by NAR over the same period.
•Homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group increased 32% during such period, primarily as a result of a 19% increase in average homesale price and an 11% increase in existing homesale transactions.
•Homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group increased 27% during such period, primarily as a result of a 19% increase in average homesale price and a 7% increase in existing homesale transactions.
The 20% increase in homesale transaction volume reported by NAR was attributed to an 11% increase in average homesale price and a 9% increase in existing homesale transactions.
The exceptional recovery from the COVID-19 crisis that we experienced starting in the third quarter of 2020 makes year-over-year comparisons of homesale transaction volume in the second half of 2021 challenging. However, the strength of homesale transaction volume during 2021 can also be demonstrated by comparison to 2019, as shown in the following charts.
NAR(a) Existing Homesale Transaction Volume
_______________
(a) Historical existing homesale data is as of the most recent NAR press release, which is subject to sampling error.
Existing Homesales
For the year ended December 31, 2021, NAR existing homesale transactions increased to 6.1 million homes or up 9% compared to 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, homesale transactions on a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups increased 8% compared to 2020 due primarily to continued strong demand, particularly at the high-end of the market. Realogy Brokerage Group also benefited from its concentrated geographic footprint in certain major metropolitan markets, including New York City. We believe that constrained inventory contributed to the year-over-year decline in homesale transactions in the second half of 2021. The annual and quarterly year-over-year trends in homesale transactions are as follows:
_______________
(a) Historical existing homesale data is as of the most recent NAR press release, which is subject to sampling error.
(b) Existing homesale data, on a seasonally adjusted basis, is as of the most recent Fannie Mae press release.
As of their most recent releases, NAR is forecasting existing homesale transactions to decrease 3% in 2022 and to increase 2% in 2023 while Fannie Mae is forecasting existing homesale transactions to decrease 5% in 2022 and 4% in 2023.
Existing Homesale Price
In 2021, NAR existing homesale average price increased 11% compared to 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, average homesale price on a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups increased 20% compared to 2020 with approximately equal contribution from each. Strong demand in the overall housing market benefited both Realogy Franchise Group and Realogy Brokerage Group. Low inventory also contributed to higher average homesale price, with both Realogy Franchise Group and Realogy Brokerage Group also benefiting from strength at the high-end of the housing market. Realogy Brokerage Group also benefited from its concentrated geographic footprint in certain major metropolitan markets, including New York City. The annual and quarterly year-over-year trends in the price of homes are as follows:
_______________
(a) Historical homesale price data is for existing homesale average price and is as of the most recent NAR press release.
(b) Existing homesale price data is for median price and is as of the most recent Fannie Mae press release.
As of their most recent releases, NAR is forecasting median existing homesale price to increase 5% in 2022 and 4% in 2023 while Fannie Mae is forecasting median existing homesale price to increase 11% in 2022 and 4% in 2023.
Given the cyclical nature of the industry, there remain significant uncertainties regarding whether the strong demand and other beneficial consumer trends discussed above will be maintained at the same strength or at all, and whether such trends will continue to have a positive effect on our financial results, as well as significant uncertainties related to the COVID-19 crisis, including the impact of vaccines and virus mutations on the severity, duration and extent of the pandemic.
2020 Temporary Cost-Saving Measures. Quarterly earnings comparisons were challenged in 2021 by the absence of the temporary cost-saving measures we took in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis. Those temporary cost saving measures resulted in approximately $150 million of aggregate savings in the second and third quarter of 2020, with approximately two-thirds of such amount recognized in the second quarter of 2020. Substantially all of these measures were reversed during the third quarter of 2020 and we do not expect to realize comparable cost-savings from these prior temporary measures in future periods.
Realogy Title Group, including Mortgage Origination Joint Venture. We have been in an unusually prolonged period of low interest rates. Our financial results are typically favorably impacted by a low interest rate environment as a decline in mortgage rates generally drives increased refinancing activity as well as homesale transactions that in turn drives increased title services and mortgage origination activity. If the pace of existing homesale transactions slows (due to increases in mortgage rates, declines in affordability, or otherwise), we would also expect decreased title services and mortgage origination activity. For example, the number of purchase title and closing units declined 2% in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the prior period, as the number of homesale transactions declined.
However, while refinancing volumes are highly correlated with (and particularly sensitive to) increases in mortgage rates, they are also inherently cyclical. Refinancing volumes were exceptionally strong throughout 2020 and into the first quarter of 2021, but began to soften during the second and third quarters of 2021. In the fourth quarter of 2021, refinancing title and closing units at Realogy Title Group declined 44% compared to the prior period. Given the strength of refinancing volumes in the first quarter of 2021, we expect year-over-year comparisons to continue to be challenging in the first quarter of 2022.
Equity in earnings at Guaranteed Rate Affinity declined from $126 million in 2020 to $49 million in 2021, primarily driven by the impact of mark-to-market adjustments on the mortgage loan pipeline and gain-on-sale margin compression, partially offset by strong purchase volume growth. Operating margins and mark-to-market adjustments may continue to be compressed due to competitive factors related to decreased demand as well as any mortgage rate increases.
Mortgage Rates. As noted above, mortgage rate increases generally have a negative impact on multiple aspects of our business. A wide variety of factors can contribute to mortgage rates, including Treasury note yields, federal interest rates, inflation, demand, consumer income, unemployment levels and foreclosure rates. Yields on the 10-year Treasury note hit all-time lows during the COVID-19 crisis, but as of December 31, 2021 were 1.52% as compared to 0.93% as of December 31, 2020.
Fiscal and monetary policies of the federal government and its agencies can also adversely impact rates, including reductions in the level of its purchases of mortgage-backed securities. In December 2021, the Federal Reserve Board announced its intention to accelerate the reduction of its purchases of mortgage-backed securities (which could result in this stimulus program concluding in March 2022) and released economic projections that showed officials expect to raise interest rates three times in 2022.
Although mortgage rates began to increase during 2021 from the lows seen in late 2020, they continued during the year to be at low levels compared to the 10-year average of 3.79% on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, according to Freddie Mac. On December 31, 2021, mortgage rates on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage were 3.10%, or approximately 40 basis points higher than on December 31, 2020 and approximately 70 basis points lower than the 10-year average, according to Freddie Mac. For the week ending February 24, 2022, mortgage rates on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage averaged 3.89%, according to Freddie Mac.
Banks may tighten mortgage standards, even if rates remain at low levels or decline, which could limit the availability of mortgage financing. In addition, many federal and/or state monetary or fiscal programs meant to assist individuals and businesses in the navigation of COVID-related financial challenges (including mortgage forbearance programs) have ended or are expected to end in the near term, which could have a negative impact on consumer financial health.
Inventory. Insufficient inventory levels generally have a negative impact on homesale transaction growth and we believe this factor contributed to the decline in homesale transactions in the second half of 2021. We have also seen an intensified pace of inventory supply turnover since the second half of 2020. For example, at our company owned Coldwell
Banker brokerages, the speed at which a home that was listed for sale went under contract reduced to a median of 19 days on the market in the fourth quarter of 2021 from a median of 21 days on the market in the fourth quarter of 2020 and a median of 37 days on the market in the fourth quarter of 2019. Continued or accelerated declines in inventory have and may continue to result in insufficient supply to meet any increased demand driven by the lower interest rate environment and beneficial consumer trends. Additional inventory pressure arises from periods of slow or decelerated new housing construction, real estate models that purchase homes for rental or corporate use (rather than immediate resale), and alternative competitors, such as traditional iBuying models.
Low housing inventory levels have been a persistent industry-wide concern for years, in particular in certain highly sought-after geographies and at lower price points. According to NAR, the inventory of existing homes for sale in the U.S. decreased approximately 17% from 1.0 million as of January 2021 to 0.9 million as of January 2022, representing a record-setting low since 1999, when NAR started tracking the data. As a result, inventory has decreased from 1.9 months of supply in January 2021 to 1.6 months as of January 2022. These levels continue to be significantly below the 10-year average of 4.2 months, the 15-year average of 5.8 months and the 25-year average of 5.5 months.
Affordability. The fixed housing affordability index, as reported by NAR, decreased from 173 for December 2020 to 147 for December 2021 which is the lowest it has been since 2018. A housing affordability index above 100 signifies that a family earning the median income has sufficient income to purchase a median-priced home, assuming a 20 percent down payment and ability to qualify for a mortgage. Housing affordability may be impacted in future periods by inflationary pressures, increases in mortgage rates and average homesale price, further or accelerated declines in inventory, or a rise in unemployment or other economic challenges.
Recruitment and Retention of Independent Sales Agents; Commission Income. Recruitment and retention of independent sales agents and independent sales agent teams are critical to the business and financial results of a brokerage, including our company owned brokerages and those operated by our affiliated franchisees. In 2021, agents affiliated with our company owned brokerages grew 6% and, based on information from such franchisees, agents affiliated with our U.S. franchisees increased 2%, in each case as compared to 2020.
Aggressive competition for the affiliation of independent sales agents in this industry continues to make recruitment and retention efforts at both Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups challenging, in particular with respect to more productive sales agents, and has had in the past and may again in the future have a negative impact on our market share. These competitive market factors along with other trends (such as changes in the spending patterns of independent sales agents, as more agents purchase services from third parties outside of their affiliated broker) are expected to continue to put upward pressure on the average share of commissions earned by independent sales agents. If independent sales agents affiliated with our company owned brokerages are paid a higher proportion of the commissions earned on a homesale transaction or the level of commission income we receive from a homesale transaction is otherwise reduced, the operating margins of our company owned residential brokerages could continue to be adversely affected. Similarly, franchisees have and may continue to seek reduced royalty fee arrangements or other incentives from us to offset the continued business pressures on such franchisees, which would result in a reduction in royalty fees paid to us. For additional information, see "Item 1.-Business-Competition."
Non-Traditional Competition and Industry Disruption. The significant size of the U.S. real estate market has continued to attract outside capital investment in disruptive and traditional competitors that seek to access a portion of this market. These competitors and their investors may pursue increases in market share over profitability, further complicating the competitive landscape.
A growing number of companies are competing in non-traditional ways for a portion of the gross commission income generated by homesale transactions. For example, virtual brokerages and other brokerages that offer the sales agent fewer services, but a higher percentage of commission income (or other compensation, such as sign-on or equity awards), directly compete with traditional brokerage models and may dilute the relationship between the brokerage and the agent and add additional competitive pressure for independent sales agent talent.
We believe that certain alternative transaction models, such as iBuying and home swap models (and related models that help buyers compete as cash buyers), charge significant fees to purchase homes and are less reliant on brokerages and sales agents, which could have a negative impact on such brokerages and agents as well as on the average homesale broker commission rate. These models also look to capture ancillary real estate services such as title and mortgage services and referral fees. RealSure offers consumers alternatives to such models through products and services designed to offer home buyers and sellers options that give them a competitive edge when buying or selling a home, while also keeping the
expertise of an independent sales agent at the center of the transaction. RealSure® Sell is available in 24 U.S. cities as of December 31, 2021. We are investing to expand the scale of RealSure. In the fourth quarter of 2021, RealSure® Buy was launched in three pilot cities in the U.S.
In addition, the concentration and market power of the top listing aggregators allow them to monetize their platforms by a variety of actions, including but not limited to, setting up competing brokerages and/or expanding their offerings to include products (including agent tools) and services ancillary to the real estate transaction, such as title, escrow and mortgage origination services, that compete with services offered by us, charging significant referral, listing and display fees, diluting the relationship between agents and brokers and between agents and the consumer, tying referrals to use of their products, consolidating and leveraging data, and engaging in preferential or exclusionary practices to favor or disfavor other industry participants. These actions divert and reduce the earnings of other industry participants, including our company owned and franchised brokerages. Aggregators could intensify their current business tactics or introduce new programs that could be materially disadvantageous to our business and other brokerage participants in the industry and such tactics could further increase pressures on the profitability of our company owned and franchised brokerages and affiliated independent sales agents, reduce our franchisor service revenue and dilute our relationships with affiliated franchisees and such franchisees' relationships with affiliated independent sales agents and buyers and sellers of homes.
New Development. Realogy Brokerage Group has relationships with developers, primarily in major cities, in particular New York City, to provide marketing and brokerage services in new developments. New development closings can vary significantly from year to year due to timing matters that are outside of our control, including long cycle times and irregular project completion timing. In addition, the new development industry has also experienced significant disruption due to COVID-19. Accordingly, earnings attributable to this business can fluctuate meaningfully from year to year, impacting both homesale transaction volume and the share of gross commission income we realize on such transactions.
Relocation Spending. Global corporate spending on relocation services has continued to shift to lower cost relocation benefits as corporate clients engage in cost reduction initiatives and/or restructuring programs, as well as changes in employment relocation trends. As a result of a shift in the mix of services and number of services being delivered per move, as well as lower volume growth, our relocation operations have been increasingly subject to a competitive pricing environment and lower average revenue per relocation. The COVID-19 crisis, along with related ongoing travel restrictions in the U.S. and elsewhere, has exacerbated these trends and is expected to continue to put pressure on the financial results of Cartus Relocation Services (part of the Realogy Franchise Group segment). We are unable to determine when, or if, relocation volumes will return to levels consistent with those prior to the onset of the COVID-19 crisis. In addition, the greater acceptance of remote work arrangements during the COVID-19 crisis has the potential to have a negative impact on relocation volumes in the long-term.
Leads Generation. Through Realogy Leads Group, a part of Realogy Franchise Group, we seek to provide high-quality leads to affiliated agents, including through real estate benefit programs that provide home-buying and selling assistance to members of organizations such as credit unions and interest groups that have established members who are buying or selling a home as well as to consumers and corporations who have expressed interest in a certain brand, product or service (such as relocation services). We operate several real estate benefit programs, including a program with a large long-term client as well as other programs we have launched in the past two years, including AARP® Real Estate Benefits. There can be no assurance that we will be able to maintain or expand these programs, and even if we are successful in these efforts, such programs may not generate a meaningful number of high-quality leads.
Legal & Regulatory Environment. See Part I., "Item 1.-Business-Government and Other Regulations" of this Annual Report for a discussion of the current legal and regulatory environment and how such environment could potentially impact us.
KEY DRIVERS OF OUR BUSINESSES
Within Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups, we measure operating performance using the following key operating metrics: (i) closed homesale sides, which represents either the "buy" side or the "sell" side of a homesale transaction, (ii) average homesale price, which represents the average selling price of closed homesale transactions, and (iii) average homesale broker commission rate, which represents the average commission rate earned on either the "buy" side or "sell" side of a homesale transaction.
For Realogy Franchise Group, we also use net royalty per side, which represents the royalty payment to Realogy Franchise Group for each homesale transaction side taking into account royalty rates, homesale price, average broker commission rates, volume incentives achieved and other incentives. We utilize net royalty per side as it includes the impact of changes in average homesale price as well as all incentives and represents the royalty revenue impact of each incremental side.
For Realogy Brokerage Group, we also use gross commission income per side, which represents gross commission income divided by closed homesale sides. Gross commission income includes commissions earned in homesale transactions and certain other activities, primarily leasing transactions. Realogy Brokerage Group, as a franchisee of Realogy Franchise Group, pays a royalty fee of approximately 6% per transaction to Realogy Franchise Group from the commission earned on a real estate transaction. The remainder of gross commission income is split between the broker (Realogy Brokerage Group) and the independent sales agent in accordance with their applicable independent contractor agreement (which specifies the portion of the broker commission to be paid to the agent), which varies by agent agreement.
For Realogy Title Group, operating performance is evaluated using the following key metrics: (i) purchase title and closing units, which represent the number of title and closing units we process as a result of home purchases, (ii) refinance title and closing units, which represent the number of title and closing units we process as a result of homeowners refinancing their home loans, and (iii) average fee per closing unit, which represents the average fee we earn on purchase title and refinancing title sides.
The following table presents our drivers for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. See "Results of Operations" below for a discussion as to how these drivers affected our business for the periods presented.
_______________
(a)Includes all franchisees except for Realogy Brokerage Group.
(b)Purchase title and closing units for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were revised to reflect a decrease of 4,855 and 3,284 units, respectively. The change was for the number of units only and did not impact revenue.
(c)Refinance title and closing units for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were revised to reflect a decrease of 2,437 and 1,206 units, respectively. The change was for the number of units only and did not impact revenue.
(d)With the change in units noted above, Average fee per closing unit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was updated to reflect an increase of $78 and $61, respectively.
A decline in the number of homesale transactions and/or decline in homesale prices could adversely affect our results of operations by: (i) reducing the royalties we receive from our franchisees, (ii) reducing the commissions our company owned brokerage operations earn, (iii) reducing the demand for services offered through Realogy Title Group, including title, escrow and settlement services or the services of our mortgage origination or other joint ventures, and (iv) increasing the risk of franchisee default due to lower homesale volume. Our results could also be negatively affected by a decline in commission rates charged by brokers, greater commission payments to independent sales agents, lower royalty rates from franchisees or an increase in other incentives paid to franchisees, among other factors.
Over the past 10 years, we have experienced an average of approximately one basis point decline in the average homesale broker commission rate each year, which we believe has been largely attributable to increases in average homesale prices (as higher priced homes tend to have a lower broker commission) and, to a lesser extent, competitors providing fewer or similar services for a reduced fee.
Royalty fees are charged to all franchisees pursuant to the terms of the relevant franchise agreements and are included in each of the real estate brands' franchise disclosure documents. Other incentives may also be used as consideration to attract new franchisees, grow franchisees (including through independent sales agent recruitment) or extend existing franchise agreements, although in contrast to volume incentives, the majority of other incentives are not homesale transaction based. See "Item 1.-Business-Realogy Franchise Group-Operations-Franchising" for additional information.
Transaction volume growth has generally exceeded royalty revenue growth due primarily to the growth in gross commission income generated by our top 250 franchisees and our increased use of other sales incentives, both of which directly impact royalty revenue. Over the past several years, our top 250 franchisees have grown faster than our other franchisees through organic growth and market consolidation. If the amount of gross commission income generated by our top 250 franchisees continues to grow at a quicker pace relative to our other franchisees, we would expect our royalty revenue to continue to increase, but at a slower pace than homesale transaction volume. Likewise, our royalty revenue would continue to increase, but at a slower pace than homesale transaction volume, if the gross commission income generated by all of our franchisees grows faster than the applicable annual volume incentive table increase or if we increase our use of standard volume or other incentives. However, in the event that the gross commission income generated by our franchisees increases as a result of increased transaction volume, we would expect to recognize an increase in overall royalty payments to us.
We face significant competition from other national real estate brokerage brand franchisors for franchisees and we expect that the trend of increasing incentives will continue in the future in order to attract, retain, and help grow certain franchisees. Taking into account competitive factors, we may, from time to time, introduce pilot programs or restructure or revise the model used at one or more franchised brands, including with respect to fee structures, minimum production requirements or other terms.
We expect to experience pressures on net royalty per side, largely due to the impact of competitive market factors noted above, continued concentration among our top 250 franchisees, and the impact of affiliated franchisees of our Better Homes and Gardens® Real Estate brand moving to the "capped fee model" we adopted in 2019; however, these pressures were more than offset by increases in homesale prices in the three and twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021.
Realogy Brokerage Group has a significant concentration of real estate brokerage offices and transactions in geographic regions where home prices are at the higher end of the U.S. real estate market, particularly the east and west coasts, while Realogy Franchise Group has franchised offices that are more widely dispersed across the United States. Accordingly, operating results and homesale statistics may differ between Realogy Brokerage Group and Realogy Franchise Group based upon geographic presence and the corresponding homesale activity in each geographic region. In addition, the share of commissions earned by independent sales agents directly impacts the margin earned by Realogy Brokerage Group. Such share of commissions earned by independent sales agents varies by region and commission schedules are generally progressive to incentivize sales agents to achieve higher levels of production.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Discussed below are our consolidated results of operations and the results of operations for each of our reportable segments. The reportable segments presented below represent our segments for which separate financial information is available and which is utilized on a regular basis by our chief operating decision maker to assess performance and to allocate resources. In identifying our reportable segments, we also consider the nature of services provided by our segments. Management evaluates the operating results of each of our reportable segments based upon revenue and Operating EBITDA. Operating EBITDA is defined by us as net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net (other than relocation services interest for securitization assets and securitization obligations), income taxes, and other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, former parent legacy items, gains or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or losses on the sale of investments or other assets. Our presentation of Operating EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2020
Our consolidated results comprised the following:
Net revenues increased $1,762 million or 28% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by higher homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups and an increase in volume at Realogy Title Group, in each case due primarily to continued strong demand and higher prices in the residential real estate market, which we attribute to certain beneficial consumer trends supported by other factors, including a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price. Year-over-year comparisons, on a Company-wide and individual segment basis, also benefited from comparison against the sharp decline in homesale transactions that occurred in the second quarter of 2020 due to factors related to the COVID-19 crisis.
Total expenses increased $736 million or 11% compared to 2020 primarily due to:
•a $1,226 million increase in commission and other sales agent-related costs primarily due to an increase in homesale transaction volume as well as a result of higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruitment and retention efforts, and business and geographic mix;
•a $225 million increase in operating and general and administrative expenses, largely the result of the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis and due to higher employee incentive accruals;
•a $48 million increase in marketing expense primarily due to higher advertising costs as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, during which such expenses were reduced due to the COVID-19 crisis, and
•a $21 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt primarily as a result of the refinancing transactions in the first quarter of 2021 compared to an $8 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt as a result of the refinancing transactions in June 2020;
partially offset by:
•non-cash impairments of $4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $682 million during the year ended December 31, 2020;
•a $56 million net decrease in interest expense primarily due to a $65 million decrease in expense related to mark-to-market adjustments for interest rate swaps that resulted in $14 million of gains for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $51 million of losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in interest expense associated with the amortization of the debt discount on the Exchangeable Senior Notes since issuance in the second quarter of 2021;
•a $50 million decrease in restructuring costs; and
•an $11 million net gain on the sale of business.
Equity in earnings were $48 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to earnings of $131 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Equity in earnings primarily related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity which was $49 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreasing by $77 million from $126 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the impact of mark-to-market adjustments on the mortgage loan pipeline and gain-on-sale margin compression, partially offset by strong purchase volume growth.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $17 million of restructuring costs compared to $67 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the Company's restructuring program focused on office consolidation and instituting operational efficiencies to drive profitability. The Company expects the estimated total cost of the program to be approximately $170 million, with $129 million incurred to date and $41 million remaining primarily related to future expenses as a result of reducing the leased-office footprints. See Note 12, "Restructuring Costs", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The provision for income taxes was an expense of $133 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a benefit of $104 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective tax rate was 28% and 23% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 11, "Income Taxes", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and a reconciliation of the Company’s effective income tax rate.
The following table reflects the results of each of our reportable segments during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
_______________
(a)Revenues include the elimination of transactions between segments, which consists of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group of $407 million and $316 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and are eliminated through the Corporate and Other line.
(b)Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2021 include $5 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $7 million at Realogy Brokerage Group and $5 million at Corporate and Other. Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 include $15 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $37 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $4 million at Realogy Title Group and $11 million at Corporate and Other.
(c)Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily relate to software and lease asset impairments. Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
•a goodwill impairment charge of $413 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group;
•an impairment charge of $30 million related to Realogy Franchise Group's trademarks;
•$133 million of impairment charges during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds;
•a goodwill impairment charge of $22 million related to Cartus Relocation Services;
•an impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services' trademarks; and
•other asset impairments of $50 million primarily related to lease asset impairments.
(d)Former parent legacy items and Loss on the early extinguishment of debt are recorded in Corporate and Other.
(e)Gain on the sale of business, net is primarily recorded in Realogy Brokerage Group.
As described in the aforementioned table, Operating EBITDA margin for "Total Company" expressed as a percentage of revenues decreased 1 percentage point to 11% from 12% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Operating EBITDA margin for "Total Company", as well as on a segment basis, was negatively impacted by the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis. Realogy Franchise Group's margin increased 4 percentage points to 60% from 56% primarily due to an increase in royalty revenue as a result of an increase in homesale transaction volume, partially offset by the result of the absence of the cost savings measures discussed above. Realogy Brokerage Group's margin increased 1 percentage point to 2% from 1% primarily due to higher transaction volume, partially offset by the result of the absence of the cost savings measures discussed above and higher agent commission costs driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix. Realogy Title Group's margin decreased 10 percentage points to 21% from 31% due to a decrease in equity in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity, mostly the result of the impact of mark to market adjustments on the mortgage loan pipeline, as well as gain-on-sale margin compression. Realogy Title Group's margin, excluding equity in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity, increased 2 percentage points to 16% from 14% largely the result of an increase in resale and underwriter revenue, partially offset by the absence of the cost savings measures discussed above, higher variable costs as a result of higher volume and higher employee incentive accruals.
Corporate and Other Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 declined $16 million to negative $158 million, largely the result of the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis as well as higher employee incentive accruals.
Realogy Franchise Group
Revenues increased $190 million to $1,249 million and Operating EBITDA increased $157 million to $751 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 2020.
Revenues increased $190 million primarily as a result of:
•a $90 million increase in third-party domestic franchisee royalty revenue primarily due to a 27% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group which consisted of a 19% increase in average homesale price and a 7% increase in existing homesale transactions;
•an $87 million increase in intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group; and
•a $24 million increase in brand marketing fund revenue and related expense primarily due to higher advertising costs in 2021 as compared to 2020, when such expenses were reduced due to the COVID-19 crisis,
partially offset by:
•a $6 million decrease in revenue related to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements during 2020; and
•a $5 million decrease in service and other revenue as a result of a $16 million net decrease in revenue from our relocation and lead generation operations primarily in the first quarter of 2021, driven by lower volume largely related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in international royalty revenue.
Realogy Franchise Group revenue includes intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group of $393 million and $306 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are eliminated in consolidation against the expense reflected in Realogy Brokerage Group's results.
The $157 million increase in Operating EBITDA was primarily due to the $190 million increase in revenues discussed above and $14 million of lower expense for bad debt and notes reserves. These Operating EBITDA increases were partially offset by the $24 million increase in marketing expense discussed above and a $23 million increase in employee and other operating costs, largely the result of the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis and due to higher employee incentive accruals.
Realogy Brokerage Group
Revenues increased $1,447 million to $6,189 million and Operating EBITDA increased $61 million to $109 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 2020.
The revenue increase of $1,447 million was primarily driven by a 32% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group which consisted of a 19% increase in average homesale price and an 11% increase in existing homesale transactions. Realogy Brokerage Group's revenue results during the year ended December 31, 2021 benefited from continued strong demand and higher prices in the residential real estate market which we attribute to certain beneficial consumer trends supported by other factors, including a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price.
Operating EBITDA increased $61 million primarily due to the $1,447 million increase in revenues discussed above, partially offset by:
•a $1,226 million increase in commission expenses paid to independent sales agents from $3,527 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4,753 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Commission expense increased primarily as a result of the impact of higher homesale transaction volume as discussed above, as well as higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix;
•an $87 million increase in royalties paid to Realogy Franchise Group from $306 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $393 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 associated with the homesale transaction volume increase as described above;
•a $42 million increase in employee-related and other costs, largely the result of the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in the second and third quarters of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis and due to higher employee incentive accruals;
•a $24 million increase in marketing expense primarily due to higher advertising costs as compared to 2020, when such expenses were reduced due to the COVID-19 crisis; and
•$7 million of losses in equity in earnings related to the RealSure joint venture.
Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups on a Combined Basis
The following table reflects Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups' results before intercompany royalties and marketing fees as well as on a combined basis to show the Operating EBITDA contribution of these business segments to the overall Operating EBITDA of the Company. The Operating EBITDA margin for the combined segments remained flat at 12% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher homesale transaction volume, offset by the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in 2020 in response to COVID-19 crisis and higher agent commission costs driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix:_______________
(a)The segment numbers noted above do not reflect the impact of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group to Realogy Franchise Group of $407 million and $316 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Realogy Title Group
Revenues increased $216 million to $952 million and Operating EBITDA decreased $26 million to $200 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 2020.
Revenues increased $216 million primarily as a result of a $104 million increase in resale revenue due to increased purchase unit activity and increased homesale prices that benefited from continued strong demand in the residential real estate market, which we attribute to certain beneficial consumer trends supported by other factors, including a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price. In addition, there was a $103 million increase in underwriter revenue (including a $101 million increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents, which had a $22 million net positive impact on Operating EBITDA due to the related expense increase of $79 million) and an $9 million increase in refinance and other revenue. Equity earnings or losses related to our minority interest in Guaranteed Rate Affinity are included in the financial results of Realogy Title Group, but are not reported as revenue to Realogy Title Group.
Operating EBITDA decreased $26 million primarily as a result of a $93 million increase in employee and other operating costs largely the result of the absence in 2021 of the benefit of the temporary cost savings measures that were taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 crisis and due to higher variable costs as a result of higher volume and higher employee incentive accruals, and a $79 million increase in variable operating costs related to the increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents discussed above where the revenue and expense are recorded on a gross basis. In addition, equity in earnings decreased $76 million from $131 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $55 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity, mostly driven by the impact of mark-to-market adjustments on the mortgage loan pipeline and gain-on-sale margin compression, partially offset by strong purchase volume growth. These decreases were partially offset by the $216 million increase in revenues discussed above and a $6 million unrealized gain on an investment.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our consolidated results comprised the following:
Net revenues increased $351 million or 6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by higher homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group and Realogy Franchise Group and an increase in volume at Realogy Title Group due to a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We attribute the recovery in 2020 to increased demand driven by a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price. In addition, we have observed continued strength in certain trends that we believe are largely driven by behavioral changes related to the COVID-19 crisis, including home buyer preferences for certain geographies, including suburban locations and attractive tax and weather destinations and second home purchases.
Total expenses increased $753 million or 12% compared to 2019 primarily due to:
•non-cash impairments of $682 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $271 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash impairments during the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
◦a goodwill impairment charge of $413 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group during the first quarter of 2020;
◦an impairment charge of $30 million related to Realogy Franchise Group's trademarks during the first quarter of 2020;
◦$133 million of reserves recorded during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds which were included in Impairments in connection with the reclassification of Cartus Relocation Services as continuing operations during the fourth quarter of 2020;
◦a goodwill impairment charge of $22 million related to Cartus Relocation Services during the fourth quarter of 2020;
◦an impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services' trademarks during the fourth quarter of 2020; and
◦other asset impairments of $50 million primarily related to lease asset impairments,
compared to a non-cash impairments during the year ended December 31, 2019, which includes a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group, a $22 million reduction to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments.
•a $371 million increase in commission and other sales agent-related costs primarily due to an increase in homesale transaction volume as well as a result of higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruitment and retention efforts, and business and geographic mix;
•a $15 million increase in restructuring costs;
•an $8 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the refinancing transactions in June 2020 compared to a $5 million net gain on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the repurchase of Senior Notes during the third quarter of 2019; and
•a $10 million increase in operating and general and administrative expenses primarily due to higher employee incentive accruals, partially offset by lower employee-related, occupancy and other operating costs as a result of temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives in the second and third quarter of 2020,
partially offset by:
•a $49 million decrease in marketing expense primarily due to the absence of in person meetings and conferences and lower advertising costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020; and
•a $4 million net decrease in interest expense primarily due to LIBOR rate decreases and lower revolver borrowings, partially offset by a $12 million increase in expense related to mark-to-market adjustments for interest rate swaps that resulted in losses of $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to losses of $39 million during the same period of 2019.
Equity in earnings were $131 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to earnings of $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an improvement in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity at Realogy Title Group. Equity in earnings for Guaranteed Rate Affinity was $126 million, representing approximately 17% of the Company's Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020, increasing by $111 million from $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This improvement was the result of the low mortgage rate environment, an increase in refinancing transactions and improved margins in the venture. Equity in earnings for Realogy Title Group's other equity method investments was $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which increased by $2 million from $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $67 million of restructuring costs primarily related to the Company's restructuring program focused on office consolidation and instituting operational efficiencies to drive profitability. The two most significant lease impairments recognized by the Company during 2020 were the corporate headquarters in Madison, New Jersey which has a lease term expiring in December 2029 for which approximately 44% of the space (approximately 120,000 square feet) was impaired and the relocation service's main corporate operations in Danbury, Connecticut which has a lease term expiring in November 2030 with an early termination date in November 2025.
The provision for income taxes was a benefit of $104 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an expense of $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rate was 23% and negative 8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table reflects the results of each of our reportable segments during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
_______________
(a)Revenues includes the elimination of transactions between segments, which consists of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group of $316 million and $293 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are eliminated through the Corporate and Other line.
(b)Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 include $15 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $37 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $4 million at Realogy Title Group and $11 million at Corporate and Other. Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2019 include $14 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $25 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $3 million at Realogy Title Group and $10 million at Corporate and Other.
(c)Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
•a goodwill impairment charge of $413 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group during the first quarter of 2020;
•an impairment charge of $30 million related to Realogy Franchise Group's trademarks during the first quarter of 2020;
•$133 million of reserves recorded during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds which were included in Impairments in connection with the reclassification of Cartus Relocation Services as continuing operations during the fourth quarter of 2020;
•a goodwill impairment charge of $22 million related to Cartus Relocation Services during the fourth quarter of 2020;
•an impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services' trademarks during the fourth quarter of 2020; and
•other asset impairments of $50 million primarily related to lease asset impairments.
Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2019 include a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group, a $22 million reduction to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments.
(d)Former parent legacy items are recorded in Corporate and Other.
(e)Loss (gain) on the early extinguishment of debt is recorded in Corporate and Other. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a net gain on the early extinguishment of debt of $5 million which consisted of a $10 million gain as a result of the repurchase of Senior Notes completed in the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by a $5 million loss as a result of the refinancing transactions in the first quarter of 2019.
As described in the aforementioned table, Operating EBITDA margin for "Total Company" expressed as a percentage of revenues increased 2 percentage points to 12% from 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. On a segment basis, Realogy Franchise Group's margin increased 3 percentage points to 56% from 53% primarily due to an increase in royalty revenue as a result of an increase in homesale transaction volume, partially offset by a decrease in revenue related to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements. Realogy Brokerage Group's margin increased
1 percentage point to 1% from zero primarily due to lower operating expenses principally driven by temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives, partially offset by higher agent commission costs driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix. Realogy Title Group's margin increased 20 percentage points to 31% from 11% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $111 million increase in equity in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity as a result of the low mortgage rate environment, an increase in refinancing transactions and improved margins in the venture, as well as an increase in underwriter, refinance and resale activity at Realogy Title Group.
Corporate and Other Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined $44 million to negative $142 million primarily due to higher employee incentive accruals.
Realogy Franchise Group
Revenues decreased $99 million to $1,059 million and Operating EBITDA decreased $22 million to $594 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
Third-party domestic franchisee royalty revenue increased $35 million primarily due to a 16% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group, which consisted of a 13% increase in average homesale price and a 3% increase in existing homesale transactions, and a $24 million increase in intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group.
Realogy Franchise Group revenue includes intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group of $306 million and $282 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are eliminated in consolidation against the expense reflected in Realogy Brokerage Group's results.
Royalty revenue increases were offset by:
•a $113 million decrease in service and other revenue primarily related to a $110 million decrease in relocation service revenue, driven by lower volume largely related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease in revenues from our lead generation and relocation operations, driven by lower volume and lead transactions primarily due to discontinuation of the USAA real estate benefit program that ceased new enrollments in the third quarter of 2019, which at the time was our largest real estate benefit program;
•a $28 million decrease in registration revenue and brand marketing fund revenue (associated with the waiver of marketing fees from affiliates in the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic), which had a related expense decrease of $37 million resulting in a net $9 million net positive impact on Operating EBITDA, due to the absence of in person meetings and conferences and lower advertising costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $17 million decrease in revenue related to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements.
The $22 million decrease in Operating EBITDA was primarily due to the $99 million decrease in revenues discussed above and $7 million of higher expense for bad debt primarily due to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements. These Operating EBITDA decreases were partially offset by a $47 million decrease in employee and other operating costs principally due to cost savings initiatives, including temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives during the second and third quarters of 2020, partially offset by higher employee incentive accruals, and the $37 million decrease in marketing expense discussed above.
Realogy Brokerage Group
Revenues increased $333 million to $4,742 million and Operating EBITDA increased $44 million to $48 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
The revenue increase of $333 million was primarily driven by a 9% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group which primarily consisted of a 6% increase in average homesale price and a 2% increase in existing homesale transactions. There was a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began in the late second quarter of 2020 following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020.
Operating EBITDA increased $44 million primarily due to:
•the $333 million increase in revenues discussed above;
•a $76 million decrease in employee-related, occupancy and other operating costs due primarily to temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives, partially offset by higher employee incentive accruals;
•a $27 million decrease in marketing expense due to lower advertising costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $3 million gain on the sale of assets,
partially offset by:
•a $371 million increase in commission expenses paid to independent sales agents from $3,156 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3,527 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Commission expense increased primarily as a result of the impact of higher homesale transaction volume as discussed above, as well as higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix; and
•a $24 million increase in royalties paid to Realogy Franchise Group from $282 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $306 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with the homesale transaction volume increase as described above.
Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups on a Combined Basis
The following table reflects Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups' results before the intercompany royalties and marketing fees as well as on a combined basis to show the Operating EBITDA contribution of these business segments to the overall Operating EBITDA of the Company. The Operating EBITDA margin for the combined segments remained flat at 12% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019:
_______________
(a)The segment numbers noted above do not reflect the impact of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group to Realogy Franchise Group of $316 million and $293 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Realogy Title Group
Revenues increased $140 million to $736 million and Operating EBITDA increased $158 million to $226 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
Revenues increased $140 million primarily as a result of a $68 million increase in underwriter revenue (including a $61 million increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents, which had a $10 million net positive impact on Operating EBITDA due to the related expense increase of $51 million) and a $50 million increase in refinance revenue due to an increase in activity in the refinance market driven by the favorable interest rate environment. In addition there was a $21 million increase in resale revenue attributable to increased purchase unit activity due to a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began in the late second quarter of 2020 following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020.
Operating EBITDA increased $158 million primarily as a result of the $140 million increase in revenues discussed above and a $113 million increase in equity in earnings mostly related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity due to the favorable mortgage rate environment and improved margins in the venture. These increases were partially offset by a $51 million increase in variable operating costs related to the increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents discussed above where the revenue and expense are recorded on a gross basis and a $44 million increase in employee and other operating costs due to higher variable costs as a result of higher volume and higher employee incentive accruals, partially offset by temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Financial Condition
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total assets increased $276 million primarily due to:
•a $215 million increase in cash and cash equivalents due to cash flows from operations, partially offset by debt repayments;
•a $134 million increase in other current and non-current assets primarily due to technology and agent incentives, as well as equity method investments;
•a $13 million increase in goodwill primarily due to acquisitions at Realogy Brokerage Group in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by the sale of a business at Realogy Brokerage Group in the second quarter of 2021; and
•a $7 million increase in indefinite life intangible assets,
partially offset by:
•an $89 million net decrease in franchise agreements and other amortizable intangible assets primarily due to amortization; and
•a $7 million decrease in property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total liabilities decreased $149 million primarily due to:
•a $257 million net decrease in corporate debt primarily related to repayment of debt partially offset by the issuance of the 5.75% Senior Notes and Exchangeable Senior Notes;
•a $35 million decrease in other non-current liabilities primarily due to mark-to-market adjustments on the Company's interest rate swaps; and
•a $14 million decrease in operating lease liabilities,
partially offset by:
•a $77 million increase in deferred tax liabilities;
•a $66 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities primarily due to higher employee-related accruals and an increase in accrued interest due to timing, partially offset by a decline in advances from clients; and
•a $12 million increase in securitization obligations.
Total equity increased $425 million primarily due to net income of $343 million and a $71 million increase in additional paid in capital primarily related to the issuance of the Exchangeable Senior Notes in the second quarter of 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flows from operations and distributions from our unconsolidated joint ventures, supplemented by funds available under our Revolving Credit Facility and securitization facilities, are our primary sources of liquidity. We did not borrow under our Revolving Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our primary uses of liquidity include working capital, business investment and capital expenditures, as well as debt service.
Business investments may include investments in strategic initiatives, including our existing or future joint ventures, products and services that are designed to simplify the home sale and purchase transaction, independent sales agent recruitment and retention, franchisee system growth and acquisitions.
Debt service includes contractual amortization and interest payments on our long-term debt. As described below, we took steps in 2021 and the first quarter of 2022 to extend our debt maturity profile, reduce interest expense, and improve the mix of secured and unsecured debt, resulting in multiple credit rating upgrades. We intend to repay or refinance our 4.875% Senior Notes due 2023 at or prior to maturity. In addition, we may, from time to time, seek to repay or refinance certain of our other debt.
In the first quarter of 2021, we issued $900 million of 5.75% Senior Notes due in 2029 and in the second quarter of 2021, we issued $403 million of 0.25% Exchangeable Senior Notes due in 2026, which contributed to the debt reduction described in the table below. In the first quarter of 2022, we issued $1,000 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in 2030. Since the beginning of 2021, we have repaid or redeemed the following debt, including all of our Non-extended Term Loan A, Term Loan B Facility, 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes:
_______________
* includes "make whole" premium, but excludes accrued interest paid.
On February 16, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $300 million of the Company's common stock. Repurchases under the program may be made at management's discretion from time to time on the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The actual timing, number and value of shares repurchased will be determined by us and may fluctuate based on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, our priorities for the use of cash, price, market and economic conditions, and legal and contractual requirements (including compliance with the terms of our debt agreements). The repurchase program has no time limit and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. In addition, we may seek to repurchase our outstanding debt from time to time through, as applicable, tender offers, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on similar factors, including prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, and contractual restrictions, among other factors.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021, were as follows:
Debt Obligations (including Interest Payments). As of December 31, 2021, on a pro forma basis, the principal amount of our total short-term and long-term debt was $2,942 million, after giving effect to the refinancing transactions that took place in the first quarter of 2022 (see below under the header "Financial Obligations-Pro Forma Indebtedness Table" for our borrowing arrangements as of December 31, 2021 on a pro forma basis). Taking into consideration the refinancing transactions in the first quarter of 2022, we expect to pay approximately $165 million in cash interest payments in 2022 to service our corporate indebtedness, assuming a constant interest rate of 1.85% for variable rate debt, including payments on our interest rate swaps and excluding the make-whole premium paid in connection with the redemption in full of the 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes.
After giving effect to the refinancing transactions that took place in the first quarter of 2022, we had $2,710 million of fixed rate debt with a weighted average interest rate of 4.6%.
At December 31, 2021, our variable interest rate debt includes amounts outstanding under our Term Loan A Facility of $232 million. The interest rate on the outstanding amounts under our Term Loan A Facility at December 31, 2021 was 1.85% which is based on adjusted LIBOR plus an additional margin subject to adjustment based on our current senior secured leverage ratio.
No principal payments, with the exception of amortization payments on the Extended Term Loan A of $10 million, are due in 2022. The next debt maturity relates to our $407 million 4.875% Senior Notes which are due in June 2023. See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", and Note 19, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Taxes. While we have historically utilized net operating losses to offset the majority of our federal and state income tax payments, we utilized substantially all of our remaining net operating losses during 2021 and therefore expect to be a full cash taxpayer in 2022 and future years.
Leases. As of December 31, 2021, we approximate $642 million of future lease payments with $157 million due in 2022. See Note 3, "Leases", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our lease obligations.
Purchase Commitments. As of December 31, 2021, we had $82 million related to purchase commitments due in 2022 and $298 million thereafter, approximately 75% of which relates to the minimum licensing fees we are required to pay to the owners of the two brands we do not own under 50 year license agreements. See Note 14, "Commitments and Contingencies", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our purchase obligations.
Joint Ventures. We have multiple unconsolidated joint ventures, including Guaranteed Rate Affinity (our mortgage origination joint venture) as well as our RealSure and Real Estate Auction joint ventures. Equity in earnings or losses related to the financial results of unconsolidated joint ventures are recorded on the equity in earnings line (and, accordingly impact Operating EBITDA), but are not reported as revenue. We have undertaken various commitments as a result of those arrangements, including the investment or advancement of additional funds in certain instances, if required. We also may, from time to time, elect to make additional investments in existing and future unconsolidated joint ventures. See Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Investments", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our unconsolidated joint ventures.
Upon the close of the title insurance underwriter transactions described herein, we will receive proceeds of $210 million (prior to tax and closing adjustments) and will have a 30% non-controlling equity interest in the resulting joint venture (which will indirectly own Title Resources). Accordingly, we will no longer consolidate the results of the title insurance underwriter in our financial statements and our share of earnings from the title insurance underwriter will be correspondingly reduced. Moreover, cash held as statutory reserves by the title insurance underwriter (approximately $150 million at December 31, 2021) will no longer be included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as cash and cash equivalents.
Historically, operating results and revenues for all of our businesses have been strongest in the second and third quarters of the calendar year. Although industry seasonality experienced volatility in 2020 and 2021, we believe that the industry will begin to realign with historical seasonality patterns in 2022. A significant portion of the expenses we incur in our real estate brokerage operations are related to marketing activities and commissions and therefore, are variable. However, many of our other expenses, such as interest payments, facilities costs and certain personnel-related costs, are fixed and cannot be reduced during the seasonal fluctuations in the business. Consequently, our need to borrow under the Revolving Credit Facility and corresponding debt balances are generally at their highest levels at or around the end of the first quarter of every year.
If the recovery of the residential real estate market were to materially slow or reverse itself, if the economy as a whole does not improve or if the broader real estate industry were to experience a significant downturn, our business, financial condition and liquidity may be materially adversely affected, including our ability to access capital, grow our business and return capital to stockholders.
We believe that we will continue to meet our cash flow needs during the next twelve months, through the sources outlined above. Additionally, we may seek additional financing to fund future growth or refinance our existing indebtedness through the debt capital markets, but we cannot be assured that such financing will be available on favorable terms, or at all. Over the longer-term, to the extent these sources of liquidity are insufficient to meet our needs, we may also conduct additional private or public offerings of debt or our common stock or dispose of certain assets.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2021 vs. Year ended December 31, 2020
At December 31, 2021, we had $743 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, an increase of $220 million compared to the balance of $523 million at December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, $105 million less cash was provided by operating activities compared to the same period in 2020 principally due to:
•$203 million more cash used for accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities;
•$56 million less cash provided by the net change in relocation and trade receivables;
•$50 million less cash from dividends received primarily from Guaranteed Rate Affinity;
•$39 million more cash used for other assets primarily due to payments to agents and other receivables, as well as sales incentives to franchisees; and
•$8 million more cash used for other operating activities,
partially offset by $251 million more cash provided by operating results.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $57 million more cash for investing activities compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to:
•$34 million more cash used for investments in unconsolidated entities;
•$25 million more cash used for acquisition related payments;
•$8 million less of cash proceeds from the sale of business; and
•$6 million more cash used for property and equipment additions,
partially offset by $16 million less cash used for other investing activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, $275 million of cash was used in financing activities compared to $402 million of cash used during the same period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, $275 million of cash was used as follows:
•$234 million of net cash paid as a result of the pay downs of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan B Facility and Non-extended Term Loan A in the second and third quarters of 2021 and the purchase of exchangeable note hedges in the second quarter of 2021 in connection with the issuance of the Exchangeable Senior Notes;
•$34 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases and contracts;
•$10 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities; and
•$9 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation,
partially offset by $12 million net increase in securitization borrowings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $402 million of cash was used in financing activities as follows:
•$190 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$99 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$43 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$43 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$22 million of cash paid primarily as a result of the refinancing transactions in the second quarter of 2020; and
•$5 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation.
Year ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year ended December 31, 2019
At December 31, 2020, we had $523 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, an increase of $257 million compared to the balance of $266 million at December 31, 2019. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $377 million more cash was provided by operating activities compared to the same period in 2019 principally due to:
•$242 million less cash used for accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities;
•$98 million more cash from dividends received primarily from Guaranteed Rate Affinity;
•$35 million more cash provided by operating results;
•$25 million less cash used for other assets; and
•$9 million more cash provided by the net change in relocation and trade receivables,
partially offset by $32 million more cash used for other operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $38 million less cash for investing activities compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to:
•$24 million less cash used for property and equipment additions;
•$23 million more cash provided from the sale of business; and
•$7 million less cash used for investments in unconsolidated entities,
partially offset by $16 million more cash used for other investing activities primarily due to the reinvestment of certificates of deposit.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $402 million of cash was used in financing activities compared to $215 million of cash used during the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $402 million of cash was used as follows:
•$190 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$99 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$43 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$43 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$22 million of cash paid primarily as a result of the refinancing transactions in the second quarter of 2020; and
•$5 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, $215 million of cash was used as follows:
•$80 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$31 million of dividend payments;
•$30 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$26 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$25 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$20 million for the repurchase of our common stock; and
•$6 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation,
partially offset by $3 million of net cash received as a result of the refinancing transactions in 2019.
Financial Obligations
Pro Forma Indebtedness Table
The following table sets forth the Company's borrowing arrangements as of December 31, 2021 on a pro forma basis giving effect to the refinancing transactions that took place in the first quarter of 2022, including the issuance in the aggregate of $1,000 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2030 and the net proceeds of which, together with cash on hand, were used to pay down in full both the outstanding $550 million of 9.375% Senior Notes due 2027 and $550 million of 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2025:
_______________
(1)See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information related to the Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term Loan A Facility. These facilities were not impacted by the refinancing transactions that took place in the first quarter of 2022.
(2)On January 10, 2022, the Company issued $1,000 million aggregate principal amount of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2030. The 5.25% Senior Notes are unsecured senior obligations of Realogy Group that mature on April 15, 2030. Interest is payable semiannually on April 15 and October 15, commencing on April 15, 2022.
(3)The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance, together with cash on hand, to redeem in full both the outstanding $550 million of 9.375% Senior Notes due 2027 and $550 million of 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2025, each at a redemption price of 100% plus the applicable "make whole" premium together with accrued interest to the redemption date on both such notes.
See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information on the Company's indebtedness as of December 31, 2021, and Note 19, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information with respect to these refinancing transactions.
LIBOR Transition
LIBOR is the subject of recent national, international and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. As a result of concerns about the accuracy of the calculation of LIBOR, a number of British Bankers’ Association member banks entered into settlements with certain regulators and law enforcement agencies with respect to the alleged manipulation of LIBOR, and LIBOR and other "benchmark" rates are subject to ongoing national and international regulatory scrutiny and reform. The cessation date for submission and publication of rates for certain tenors of LIBOR has since been extended by the ICE Benchmark Administration until mid-2023. In response to concerns regarding the future of LIBOR, the United States Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, is considering replacing LIBOR with a new index calculated by short-term repurchase agreements, backed by U.S. Treasury securities: the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or "SOFR." We are unable to predict whether SOFR will attain market traction as a LIBOR replacement or the impact of other reforms, whether currently enacted or enacted in the future. Any new benchmark rate, including SOFR, will likely not replicate LIBOR exactly and if future rates based upon a successor rate are higher than LIBOR rates as currently determined, it could result in an increase in
the cost of our variable rate indebtedness and may have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Our primary interest rate exposure is interest rate fluctuations, specifically with respect to LIBOR, due to its impact on our variable rate borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility (for our Revolving Credit Facility) and the Term Loan A Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had interest rate swaps based on LIBOR with a notional value of $1,000 million to manage a portion of our exposure to changes in interest rates associated with our variable rate borrowings.
Covenants under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, Term Loan A Facility and Indentures
The Senior Secured Credit Agreement, Term Loan A Agreement and the indentures governing the Unsecured Notes contain various covenants that limit (subject to certain exceptions) Realogy Group’s ability to, among other things:
•incur or guarantee additional debt or issue disqualified stock or preferred stock;
•pay dividends or make distributions to Realogy Group’s stockholders, including Realogy Holdings;
•repurchase or redeem capital stock;
•make loans, investments or acquisitions;
•incur restrictions on the ability of certain of Realogy Group's subsidiaries to pay dividends or to make other payments to Realogy Group;
•enter into transactions with affiliates;
•create liens;
•merge or consolidate with other companies or transfer all or substantially all of Realogy Group's and its material subsidiaries' assets;
•transfer or sell assets, including capital stock of subsidiaries; and
•prepay, redeem or repurchase subordinated indebtedness.
As a result of the covenants to which we remain subject, we are limited in the manner in which we conduct our business and we may be unable to engage in favorable business activities or finance future operations or capital needs. In addition, the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement require us to maintain a senior secured leverage ratio.
Senior Secured Leverage Ratio applicable to our Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term Loan A Facility
The senior secured leverage ratio is tested quarterly and may not exceed 4.75 to 1.00. The senior secured leverage ratio is measured by dividing Realogy Group's total senior secured net debt by the trailing twelve-month EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as those terms are defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement. Total senior secured net debt does not include the 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes, our unsecured indebtedness, including the Unsecured Notes and Exchangeable Senior Notes, or the securitization obligations. EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement, includes adjustments to EBITDA for restructuring, retention and disposition costs, former parent legacy cost (benefit) items, net, loss (gain) on the early extinguishment of debt, non-cash charges and incremental securitization interest costs, as well as pro forma cost savings for restructuring initiatives, the pro forma effect of business optimization initiatives and the pro forma effect of acquisitions and new franchisees, in each case calculated as of the beginning of the twelve-month period. The Company was in compliance with the senior secured leverage ratio covenant at December 31, 2021.
See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt-Unsecured Notes" and "-Senior Secured Second Lien Notes", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The SEC has adopted rules to regulate the use in filings with the SEC and in public disclosures of "non-GAAP financial measures," such as Operating EBITDA. These measures are derived on the basis of methodologies other than in accordance with GAAP.
Operating EBITDA is defined by us as net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net (other than relocation services interest for securitization assets and securitization obligations), income taxes, and other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, former parent legacy items, gains
or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or losses on the sale of investments or other assets. Operating EBITDA is our primary non-GAAP measure.
We present Operating EBITDA because we believe it is useful as a supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our operating businesses and provides greater transparency into our results of operations. Our management, including our chief operating decision maker, uses Operating EBITDA as a factor in evaluating the performance of our business. Operating EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income or other statement of operations data prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We believe Operating EBITDA facilitates company-to-company operating performance comparisons by backing out potential differences caused by variations in capital structures (affecting net interest expense), taxation, the age and book depreciation of facilities (affecting relative depreciation expense) and the amortization of intangibles, as well as other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, gains or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, former parent legacy items, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or losses on the sale of investments or other assets, which may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to operating performance. We further believe that Operating EBITDA is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in their evaluation of companies, many of which present an Operating EBITDA measure when reporting their results.
Operating EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider Operating EBITDA either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•this measure does not reflect changes in, or cash required for, our working capital needs;
•this measure does not reflect our interest expense (except for interest related to our securitization obligations), or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•this measure does not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
•this measure does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often require replacement in the future, and this measure does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies may calculate this measure differently so they may not be comparable.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP") requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements and related notes. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We use our best judgment when measuring these estimates and routinely review our accounting policies and assumptions. However, actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions and any such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements. We consider the following critical accounting estimates to involve subjective and complex judgments that could potentially affect reported results. Refer to Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", of the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of all our significant accounting policies.
Impairment of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to an impairment assessment annually as of October 1, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable. The impairment assessment is performed at the reporting unit level which includes Realogy Brokerage Group, franchise services (reported within the Realogy Franchise Group reportable segment), Realogy Title Group and Realogy Leads Group (includes lead generation and Cartus Relocation Services and reported within the Realogy Franchise Group reportable segment). This assessment compares the carrying value of each reporting unit and the carrying value of each other indefinite lived intangible asset to their respective fair values and, when appropriate the carrying value is reduced to fair value and an impairment charge is recorded on a separate line in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the excess.
In testing goodwill, the fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using the income approach, a discounted cash flow method. For the other indefinite lived intangible assets, fair value is estimated using the relief from royalty method.
Management utilizes long-term cash flow forecasts and the Company's annual operating plans adjusted for terminal value assumptions. The fair value of the Company's reporting units and other indefinite lived intangible assets are determined utilizing the best estimate of future revenues, operating expenses including commission expense, market and general economic conditions, trends in the industry, as well as assumptions that management believes marketplace participants would utilize. These assumptions include discount rates based on the Company's best estimate of the weighted average cost of capital, long-term growth rates based on the Company's best estimate of terminal growth rates, and trademark royalty rates which are determined by reviewing similar trademark agreements with third parties.
Although management believes that assumptions are reasonable, actual results may vary significantly. These impairment assessments involve the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. Furthermore, significant negative industry or economic trends, disruptions to our business, unexpected significant changes or planned changes in use of the assets, a decrease in our business results, growth rates that fall below our assumptions, divestitures, and a sustained decline in our stock price and market capitalization may have a negative effect on the fair values and key valuation assumptions. Such changes could result in changes to our estimates of our fair value and a material impairment of goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets. To address this uncertainty, a sensitivity analysis is performed on key estimates and assumptions.
Based upon the impairment analysis performed in the fourth quarter of 2021, there was no impairment of goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021. Management evaluated the effect of lowering the estimated fair value for each of the reporting units by 10% and determined that no impairment of goodwill would have been recognized under this evaluation for 2021.
Income taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Our provision for income taxes is based on domestic and international statutory income tax rates in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions as well as deferred tax asset and liability balances, including the estimation of valuation allowances and the evaluation of tax positions.
Net deferred tax assets and liabilities are primarily comprised of temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards that are available to reduce taxable income in future periods. The determination of the amount of valuation allowance to be provided on deferred tax assets involves estimates regarding (1) the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary differences, (2) expected future taxable income, and (3) the impact of tax planning strategies.
Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax positions. We establish additional reserves for income taxes when, despite the belief that tax positions are fully supportable, there remain certain positions that do not meet the minimum recognition threshold. The approach for evaluating certain and uncertain tax positions is defined by the authoritative guidance and this guidance determines when a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority. In the normal course of business, the Company and its subsidiaries are examined by various federal, state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the potential outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations for the current or prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We continually assess the likelihood and amount of potential adjustments and adjust the income tax provision, the current tax liability and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision become known.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued FASB accounting pronouncements.