Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited financial statements included in our final prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on October 1, 2021 (the “Final Prospectus”) and the section entitled “Risk Factors” in our Final Prospectus. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” section of our Final Prospectus and under the “Forward-Looking Statements” section elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our
actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 24, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (a “Business Combination”). We have not yet selected any business combination target. Although we may pursue targets in any industry, we intend to focus our efforts on identifying high growth, U.S. and international acquisition targets in the financial technology (“Fintech”) or the Embedded Finance sector. Embedded Finance refers to the combination of a non-financial business
with a financial technology, enhancing the combined growth potential and value of the entity.
Our sponsor is Home Plate Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). We intend to capitalize on the ability of our sponsor team to identify and acquire and advise a business that can benefit from our founders’ management expertise and disciplined approach to capital allocation and investment oversight. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our IPO and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in a Business Combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the IPO, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in our Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of our Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one
basis upon conversion of our Class B common stock;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of our Class A common stock if shares of preferred stock are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A common stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our common or preferred stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions and fund other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements and execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any significant business operations nor generated any revenues to date. All activities to date relate to our formation and IPO. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income
in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the IPO. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $4,433,246, which consisted of $501,433 in formation, general and administrative expenses incurred as well as $1,359,240 in offering expense related to warrant issuance offset by $18,919 in gain on Investment Held in Trust Account and $6,275,000 in change on the fair value of warrant liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 we had approximately $2,132,242 in cash in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $2,260,912.
Our liquidity needs up to and through our IPO had been met through payment of $25,000 from the sale of the Founder Shares (as defined in Note 4) to our Sponsor and the loan under an unsecured promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) from the Sponsor of up to $300,000. The Promissory Note was fully repaid in connection with the IPO and there is no balance outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
On October 4, 2021, we completed the sale of 20,000,000 units (the “Units”) at $10.00 per Unit generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000 in our IPO. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we completed the sale of 7,600,000 private placement warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to certain funds and accounts managed by our Sponsor as well as to Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”), who acted as the sole book running manager for our IPO, generating gross proceeds of $7,600,000 from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
An aggregate of $10.00 per Unit sold in the IPO was held in the Trust Account and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 180 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting the conditions of Rule 2a-7 of
the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company.
As of December 31, 2021 we had $200,018,919 in Investment held in Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the trust account will be income and franchise taxes, if any. To the extent that our common stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We will use the funds held outside of the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, such loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts.. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants issued to our sponsor. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during the period between the consummation of our IPO and consummation of our Business Combination to include approximately $750,000 for D&O insurance; $850,000 for legal, accounting, and consulting costs in connection with any Business Combinations; $250,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $90,000 for Nasdaq continued listing fees; $360,000 for administrative, financial and support services; $270,000 for general working capital and support costs; $100,000 of liquidation reserve; and $230,000 for any other fees, including franchise taxes.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision
(a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed Business Combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop”
provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific Business Combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the IPO in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due
diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial
Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our Trust Account, or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we do not complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangement as of December 31, 2021 as defined in 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
The holders of our Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial Business Combination.
Pursuant to the underwriting agreement with our IPO underwriter, the IPO underwriter will be entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit sold in the IPO, or $7,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We have committed to pay up to $15,000 per month to our Sponsor for administrative, financial and support services provided to members of our sponsor team. This administrative service arrangement will terminate upon completion of our initial Business Combination or liquidation of the Company. We have incurred $30,000 pursuant to this agreement through December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our unaudited financial information. We describe our significant accounting policies in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies require that management apply significant judgments in defining the appropriate assumptions integral to financial estimates. On an ongoing basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, industry trends and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and, therefore, actual results could differ from our estimates.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting
for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The update simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt
with Conversion and Other Options for convertible instruments and introducing other changes. As a result of ASU No. 2020-06, more
convertible debt instruments will be accounted for as a single liability measured at amortized cost and more convertible preferred stock will be
accounted for as a single equity instrument measured at historical cost, as long as no features require bifurcation and recognition as derivatives. The amendments are effective for smaller reporting companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently assessing what impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.