Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this report. See “Special note regarding forward-looking statements” on page 1 of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a leader and an innovator in providing technology-enabled services that empower consumers to make healthcare saving and spending decisions. We use our innovative technology to manage consumers' tax-advantaged HSAs and other CDBs offered by employers, including FSAs and HRAs, and to administer COBRA, commuter and other benefits. As part of our services, we and our subsidiaries provide consumers with healthcare bill evaluation and payment processing services, personalized benefit information, including information on treatment options and comparative pricing, access to remote and telemedicine benefits, the ability to earn wellness incentives, and investment advice to grow their tax-advantaged healthcare savings.
The core of our offerings is the HSA, a financial account through which consumers spend and save long-term for healthcare expenses on a tax-advantaged basis. As of January 31, 2022, we administered 7.2 million HSAs, with balances totaling $19.6 billion, which we call HSA Assets, as well as 7.2 million complementary CDBs. We refer to the aggregate number of HSAs and other CDBs that we administer as Total Accounts, of which we had 14.4 million as of January 31, 2022.
We reach consumers primarily through relationships with their employers, which we call Clients. We reach Clients primarily through relationships with benefits brokers and advisors, integrated partnerships with a network of health plans, benefits administrators, benefits brokers and consultants, and retirement plan recordkeepers, which we call Network Partners, and a sales force that calls on Clients directly. As of January 31, 2022, our platforms were integrated with 185 Network Partners, and we serve approximately 120,000 Clients.
We have increased our share of the growing HSA market from 4% in December 2010 to 18% as of December 2021, measured by HSA Assets. According to Devenir, we are the largest HSA provider by accounts and second largest by assets as of December 2021. In addition, we believe we are the largest provider of other CDBs. We seek to differentiate ourselves through our proprietary technology, product breadth, ecosystem connectivity, and service-driven culture. Our proprietary technology allows us to help consumers optimize the value of their HSAs and other CDBs and gain confidence and skills in managing their healthcare costs as part of their financial security.
Our ability to assist consumers is enhanced by our capacity to securely share data in both directions with others in the health, benefits, and retirement ecosystems. Our commuter benefits offering also leverages connectivity to an ecosystem of mass transit, ride hailing, and parking providers. These strengths reflect our “DEEP Purple” culture of remarkable service to customers and teammates, achieved by driving excellence, ethics, and process into everything we do.
We earn revenue primarily from three sources: service, custodial, and interchange. We earn service revenue mainly from fees paid by Clients on a recurring per-account per-month basis. We earn custodial revenue mainly from HSA Assets held at our members’ direction in federally insured cash deposits, insurance contracts or mutual funds, and from investment of Client-held funds. We earn interchange revenue mainly from fees paid by merchants on payments that our members make using our physical payment cards and on our virtual payment system. See “Key components of our results of operations” for additional information on our sources of revenue, including the adverse impacts caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent acquisitions
WageWorks acquisition. On August 30, 2019, we completed the WageWorks Acquisition and paid approximately $2.0 billion in cash to WageWorks stockholders, financed through net borrowings of approximately $1.22 billion under our prior term loan facility and approximately $816.9 million of cash on hand.
The key strategy of the WageWorks Acquisition was to enable us to increase the number of our employer sales opportunities, the conversion of these opportunities to Clients, and the value of Clients in generating members, HSA Assets and complementary CDBs. WageWorks’ historic strength of selling to employers directly and through health benefits brokers and advisors complemented our distribution through Network Partners. With WageWorks’ CDB capabilities, we provide employers with a single partner for both HSAs and other CDBs, which is preferred by the vast majority of employers according to research conducted for us by Aite Group. For Clients that partner with us in this way, we believe we can produce more value by encouraging both CDB participants to contribute to HSAs and HSA-only members to take advantage of tax savings available through other CDBs.
As of January 31, 2022, we had substantially completed our multi-year integration effort and achieved approximately $80 million in annualized ongoing net synergies. We anticipate generating additional revenue synergies over the longer-term as our combined distribution channels and existing client base take advantage of the broader service offerings and as we continue to drive member engagement. Non-recurring merger integration costs to achieve these synergies were approximately $127 million resulting from investment in technology we use to provide our services and to run our back-office systems, integration of technology, and rationalization of cost of operations. Merger integration expenses attributable to the WageWorks Acquisition were substantially completed as of January 31, 2022, with the exception of ongoing lease expense related to certain WageWorks offices that have been permanently closed, less any related sublease income, professional fees associated with the remediation of remaining material weaknesses, and costs associated with remaining platform migrations.
Luum acquisition. In March 2021, we bolstered our commuter offering through the Luum Acquisition, in which we acquired 100% of the outstanding capital stock of Fort Effect Corp, d/b/a Luum. The aggregate purchase price for the acquisition consisted of $56.2 million in cash. Luum provides employers with various commuter services, including access to real-time commute data, to help them design and implement flexible return-to-office and hybrid-workplace strategies and benefits.
Fifth Third Bank HSA portfolio acquisition. On April 27, 2021, we signed an agreement to acquire the Fifth Third HSA portfolio, which consisted of $490.0 million of HSA Assets held in approximately 160,000 HSAs in exchange for a purchase price of $60.8 million in cash. This acquisition closed on September 29, 2021.
Further acquisition. On September 7, 2021, we signed an amended agreement to acquire the Further business (other than Further's voluntary employee beneficiary association business), a leading provider of HSA and other CDB administration services, with approximately 580,000 HSAs and $1.9 billion of HSA Assets, for $455 million in cash. This acquisition closed on November 1, 2021. We expect merger integration expenses attributable to the Further Acquisition totaling approximately $55 million to be incurred over a period of approximately three years from the acquisition date.
HealthSavings HSA portfolio acquisition. On December 4, 2021, we signed an agreement to acquire the HealthSavings HSA portfolio, which consisted of $1.3 billion of HSA Assets held in approximately 87,000 HSAs in exchange for a purchase price of $60 million in cash. This acquisition closed on March 2, 2022.
Key factors affecting our performance
We believe that our future performance will be driven by a number of factors, including those identified below. Each of these factors presents both significant opportunities and significant risks to our future performance. See also "Results of operations - Revenue" for information relating to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and also the section entitled “Risk factors” included in Part 1, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our other reports filed with the SEC.
Our acquisition and integration strategy
We have historically acquired HSA portfolios and businesses that strengthen our service offerings. We seek to continue this growth strategy and are regularly engaged in evaluating different opportunities. We have developed an internal capability to source, evaluate, and integrate acquired HSA portfolios. We intend to continue to pursue acquisitions of complementary assets and businesses that we believe will strengthen our service offering, and our success depends in part on our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses and HSA portfolios with our business in an efficient and effective manner and to realize anticipated synergies.
Structural change in U.S. health insurance
We derive revenue primarily from healthcare-related saving and spending by consumers in the U.S., which are driven by changes in the broader healthcare industry, including the structure of health insurance. The average premium for employer-sponsored health insurance has risen by 22% since 2016 and 47% since 2011, resulting in
increased participation in HSA-qualified health plans and HSAs and increased consumer cost-sharing in health insurance more generally. We believe that continued growth in healthcare costs and related factors will spur continued growth in HSA-qualified health plans and HSAs and may encourage policy changes making HSAs or similar vehicles available to new populations such as individuals in Medicare. However, the timing and impact of these and other developments in U.S. healthcare are uncertain. Moreover, changes in healthcare policy, such as "Medicare for all" plans, could materially and adversely affect our business in ways that are difficult to predict.
Trends in U.S. tax law
Tax law has a profound impact on our business. Our offerings to members, Clients, and Network Partners consist primarily of services enabled, mandated, or advantaged by provisions of U.S. tax law and regulations. Changes in tax policy are speculative, and may affect our business in ways that are difficult to predict.
Our client base
Our business model is based on a B2B2C distribution strategy, whereby we work with Network Partners and Clients to reach consumers to increase the number of our members with HSA accounts and complementary CDBs. We believe that there are significant opportunities to expand the scope of services that we provide to our current Clients.
Broad distribution footprint
We believe we have a diverse distribution footprint to attract new Clients and Network Partners. Our sales force calls on enterprise and regional employers in industries across the U.S., as well as potential Network Partners from among health plans, benefits administrators, and retirement plan record keepers.
Product breadth
We are the largest custodian and administrator of HSAs (by number of accounts), as well as a market-share leader in each of the major categories of complementary CDBs, including FSAs and HRAs, COBRA and commuter benefits administration. Our Clients and their benefits advisors increasingly seek HSA providers that can deliver an integrated offering of HSAs and complementary CDBs. With our CDB capabilities, we can provide employers with a single partner for both HSAs and complementary CDBs, which is preferred by the vast majority of employers, according to research conducted for us by Aite Group. We believe that the combination of HSA and complementary CDB offerings significantly strengthens our value proposition to employers, health benefits brokers and consultants, and Network Partners as a leading single-source provider.
Our proprietary technology
We believe that innovations incorporated in our technology, which enable us to better assist consumers to make healthcare saving and spending decisions and maximize the value of their tax-advantaged benefits, differentiate us from our competitors and drive our growth. We built on these innovations by combining our HSA offering with WageWorks' complementary CDB offerings, giving us a full suite of CDB products, and adding to our solutions set and leadership position within the HSA sector. We intend to continue to invest in our technology development to enhance our capabilities and infrastructure, while maintaining a focus on data security and the privacy of our customers' data. For example, we are making significant investments in the architecture and infrastructure of the technology that we use to provide our services to improve our transaction processing capabilities and support continued account and transaction growth, as well as in data-driven personalized engagement to help our members spend less, save more, and build wealth for retirement.
Our “DEEP Purple” service culture
The successful healthcare consumer needs education and guidance delivered by people as well as by technology. We believe that our "DEEP Purple" culture, which we define as driving excellence, ethics, and process while providing remarkable service, is a significant factor in our ability to attract and retain customers and to address nimbly, opportunities in the rapidly changing healthcare sector. We make significant efforts to promote and foster DEEP Purple within our workforce. We invest in and intend to continue to invest in human capital through technology-enabled training, career development, and advancement opportunities.
Interest rates
As a non-bank custodian, we hold custodial HSA cash assets pursuant to agreements with federally insured banks and credit unions, which we collectively call our Depository Partners (our "Basic Rates" offering), and also in annuity contracts or other similar arrangements with our insurance company partners (our "Enhanced Rates" offering). We earn a material portion of our total revenue from interest paid to us by these partners.
The lengths of our agreements with Depository Partners typically range from three to five years and may have fixed or variable interest rate terms. The terms of new and renewing agreements with our Depository Partners may be impacted by the then-prevailing interest rate environment, which in turn is driven by macroeconomic factors and government policies over which we have no control. Such factors, and the response of our competitors to them, also determine the amount of interest retained by our members.
HSA members who elect to place their HSA cash into our Enhanced Rates offering receive a higher yield compared to Basic Rates. An increase in the percentage of HSA cash held in our Enhanced Rates offering also positively impacts our custodial revenues, as we generally receive a higher yield on HSA cash held with insurance company partners compared to cash held with Depository Partners. As with our Depository Partners, yields paid by our insurance company partners may be impacted by the prevailing interest rate environment, which in turn is driven by macroeconomic factors and government policies over which we have no control. Such factors, and the response of our competitors to them, also determine the amount of interest retained by our members.
We believe that diversification of Depository Partners and insurance company partners, varied contract terms, and other factors reduce our exposure to short-term fluctuations in prevailing interest rates and mitigate the short-term impact of sustained increases or declines in prevailing interest rates on our custodial revenue. Over longer periods, sustained shifts in prevailing interest rates affect the amount of custodial revenue we can realize on custodial assets and the interest retained by our members.
Although interest rates have increased somewhat, we expect our custodial revenue to continue to be adversely affected by the interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, the lack of demand from Depository Partners for deposits, and other market conditions that have caused the interest rates offered by our Depository Partners to decline significantly.
Interest on our Term Loan Facility changes frequently due to variable interest rate terms, and as a result, our interest expense is expected to fluctuate based on changes in prevailing interest rates.
Our competition and industry
Our direct competitors are HSA custodians and other CDB providers. Many of these are state or federally chartered banks and other financial institutions for which we believe benefits administration services are not a core business. Some of our direct competitors (including healthcare service companies such as United Health Group's Optum, Webster Bank, and well-known retail investment companies, such as Fidelity Investments) are in a position to devote more resources to the development, sale, and support of their products and services than we have at our disposal. Our other CDB administration competitors include health insurance carriers, human resources consultants and outsourcers, payroll providers, national CDB specialists, regional third-party administrators, and commercial banks. In addition, numerous indirect competitors, including benefits administration service providers, partner with banks and other HSA custodians to compete with us. Our Network Partners may also choose to offer competitive services directly, as some health plans have done. Our success depends on our ability to predict and react quickly to these and other industry and competitive dynamics.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen a significant decline in the use of commuter benefits due to many of our members working from home during the outbreak or other impacts from the outbreak, which has negatively impacted both our interchange revenue and service revenue, and this "work from home" trend, or hybrid work environments, may continue after the pandemic. We have also seen a decline in interchange revenue across all other products. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will negatively impact our business remains highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted.
Regulatory environment
Federal law and regulations, including the Affordable Care Act, the Internal Revenue Code, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and Department of Labor regulations, and public health regulations that govern the provision of health insurance and provide the tax advantages associated with our services, play a pivotal role in determining our market opportunity. Privacy and data security-related laws such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, laws governing the provision of investment advice to consumers, such as the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or the Advisers Act, the USA PATRIOT Act, anti-money laundering laws, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, all play a similar role in determining our competitive landscape. In addition, state-level regulations also have significant implications for our business in some cases. For example, our subsidiary HealthEquity Trust Company is regulated by the Wyoming Division of Banking, and several states are considering, or have already passed, new privacy regulations that can affect our business. Various states also have laws and regulations that impose additional restrictions on our collection, storage, and use of personally identifiable information. Privacy regulation in particular has become a priority issue in many states, including
California, which in 2018 enacted the California Consumer Privacy Act broadly regulating California residents’ personal information and providing California residents with various rights to access and control their data, and the new California Privacy Rights Act. We have also seen an increase in regulatory changes related to our services due to government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and may continue to see additional regulatory changes. Our ability to predict and react quickly to relevant legal and regulatory trends and to correctly interpret their market and competitive implications is important to our success.
On March 21, 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 was signed into law, which provided a temporary 100% subsidy of COBRA premium payments for eligible individuals who lost coverage due to an involuntary termination or a reduction of hours for up to six months, which ended September 30, 2021.
On February 18, 2022, President Biden formally continued the National Emergency Concerning COVID-19, which tolls certain deadlines related to COBRA and other CDBs and increases the complexity of properly administering these programs. Each national emergency declaration generally lasts for one year unless the President announces an earlier termination.
Key financial and operating metrics
Our management regularly reviews a number of key operating and financial metrics to evaluate our business, determine the allocation of our resources, make decisions regarding corporate strategies, and evaluate forward-looking projections and trends affecting our business. We discuss certain of these key financial metrics, including revenue, below in the section entitled “Key components of our results of operations.” In addition, we utilize other key metrics as described below.
For a discussion related to key financial and operating metrics for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal year 2021 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021.
Total Accounts
The following table sets forth our HSAs, CDBs, and Total Accounts as of and for the periods indicated:
The number of our HSAs and CDBs are key metrics because our revenue is driven by the amount we earn from them. The number of our HSAs increased by approximately 1.4 million, or 25%, from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022, primarily driven by new HSAs from sales, HSAs acquired through the Further Acquisition, and the acquisition of Fifth Third's HSA portfolio. The number of our CDBs increased by 0.2 million, or 2%, from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022, primarily driven by CDBs acquired through the Further Acquisition, partially offset by a decrease in FSA accounts and also commuter benefit accounts that are currently suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic and fewer workers being required to commute to an office. The suspended commuter accounts continue to be administered on our platform and can be reinstated at any time. We have excluded the suspended commuter accounts from our account totals because they are currently not generating revenue for the Company.
HSA Assets
The following table sets forth our HSA Assets as of and for the periods indicated:
(1)HSA Assets that generate custodial revenue.
(2)HSA Assets that do not generate custodial revenue.
HSA Assets, which are our HSA members' assets for which we are the custodian or administrator, or from which we generate custodial revenue, consist of the following components: (i) HSA cash, which includes cash deposits with our Depository Partners or other custodians and cash placed in group annuity contracts with our insurance company partners, and (ii) HSA investments in mutual funds through our custodial investment fund partners. As of January 31, 2022, we had substantially completed the transition of HSA cash without yield to HSA cash with yield. Measuring HSA Assets is important because our custodial revenue is directly affected by average daily custodial balances for HSA Assets that are revenue generating.
Total HSA cash increased by $2.8 billion, or 28%, from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022, due primarily to HSA cash transferred to us as part of the Further Acquisition, HSA contributions, new HSAs from sales, and acquisitions of HSA portfolios, partially offset by transfers to HSA investments.
HSA investments increased by $2.5 billion, or 58%, from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022, due primarily to transfers from HSA cash and appreciation of invested balances.
Total HSA Assets increased by 5.3 billion, or 37%, from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022, due primarily to HSA contributions, new HSAs from sales, HSA Assets transferred to us as part of the Further Acquisition, acquisitions of HSA portfolios, and appreciation of invested balances.
Client-held funds
(1)Client-held funds that generate custodial revenue.
Client-held funds are interest-earning deposits from which we generate custodial revenue. These deposits are amounts remitted by Clients and held by us on their behalf to pre-fund and facilitate administration of CDBs. We deposit the Client-held funds with our Depository Partners in interest-bearing, demand deposit accounts that have a floating interest rate and no set term or duration. Client-held funds fluctuate depending on the timing of funding and spending of CDB balances and the number of CDBs we administer.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial metric, as adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, merger integration expenses, acquisition costs, gains and losses on equity securities, and certain other non-operating items. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and analysts in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and our board of directors because it reflects operating profitability before consideration of non-operating expenses and non-cash expenses, and serves as a basis for comparison against other companies in our industry.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated:
(1)For the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, acquisition costs included $0.3 million of stock-based compensation expense.
(2)For the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, Other consisted of amortization of incremental costs to obtain a contract of $4.3 million, partially offset by other income, net, of $0.5 million. For the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, Other consisted of amortization of incremental costs to obtain a contract of $2.0 million, offset by other income of $5.1 million.
The following table further sets forth our Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue:
Our Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $4.8 million, or 2%, from $240.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 to $236.0 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily driven by a decrease in average annualized yield on HSA cash with yield and an increase in service costs.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
Key components of our results of operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from three primary sources: service revenue, custodial revenue, and interchange revenue.
Service revenue. We earn service revenue from the fees we charge our Network Partners, Clients, and members for the administration services we provide in connection with the HSAs and other CDBs we offer. With respect to our Network Partners and Clients, our fees are generally based on a fixed tiered structure for the duration of the relevant service agreement and are paid to us on a monthly basis. We recognize revenue on a monthly basis as services are rendered to our members and Clients.
Custodial revenue. We earn custodial revenue primarily from HSA Assets deposited with our Depository Partners and with our insurance company partners, recordkeeping fees we earn in respect of mutual funds in which our members invest, and Client-held funds deposited with our Depository Partners. We deposit HSA cash with our Depository Partners pursuant to contracts that (i) typically have terms ranging from three to five years, (ii) provide for a fixed or variable interest rate payable on the average daily cash balances deposited with the relevant Depository Partner, and (iii) have minimum and maximum required deposit balances. HSA cash placed with our insurance company partners is placed in group annuity contracts or similar arrangements. We deposit the Client-held funds with our Depository Partners in interest-bearing, demand deposit accounts that have a floating interest rate and no set term or duration. We earn custodial revenue on HSA Assets and Client-held funds that is based on the interest rates offered to us by these Depository Partners and insurance company partners. In addition, once a member’s HSA cash balance reaches a certain threshold, the member is able to invest his or her HSA Assets in mutual funds through our custodial investment partner. We earn a recordkeeping fee, calculated as a percentage of
custodial investments. As of January 31, 2022, we had substantially completed the transition of HSA cash without yield to HSA cash with yield.
Interchange revenue. We earn interchange revenue each time one of our members uses one of our physical payment cards or virtual platforms to make a purchase. This revenue is collected each time a member “swipes” our payment card to pay expenses. We recognize interchange revenue monthly based on reports received from third parties, namely, the card-issuing banks and card processors.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue includes costs related to servicing accounts, managing Client and Network Partner relationships and processing reimbursement claims. Expenditures include personnel-related costs, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, common expense allocations (such as office rent, supplies, and other overhead expenses), new member and participant supplies, and other operating costs related to servicing our members. Other components of cost of revenue include interest retained by members on HSA cash and interchange costs incurred in connection with processing card transactions for our members.
Service costs. Service costs include the servicing costs described above. Additionally, for new accounts, we incur on-boarding costs associated with the new accounts, such as new member welcome kits, the cost associated with issuance of new payment cards, and costs of marketing materials that we produce for our Network Partners.
Custodial costs. Custodial costs are comprised of interest retained by our HSA members, in respect of HSA cash with yield, and fees we pay to banking consultants whom we use to help secure agreements with our Depository Partners. Interest retained by HSA members is calculated on a tiered basis. The interest rates retained by HSA members can change based on a formula or upon required notice.
Interchange costs. Interchange costs are comprised of costs we incur in connection with processing payment transactions initiated by our members. Due to the substantiation requirement on FSA/HRA-linked payment card transactions, payment card costs are higher for FSA/HRA card transactions. In addition to fixed per card fees, we are assessed additional transaction costs determined by the amount of the transaction.
Gross profit and gross margin
Our gross profit is our total revenue minus our total cost of revenue, and our gross margin is our gross profit expressed as a percentage of our total revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a number of factors, including interest rates, the amount we charge our Network Partners, Clients, and members, the mix of our sources of revenue, how many services we deliver per account, and payment processing costs per account.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our sales and marketing staff, including sales commissions for our direct sales force, external agent/broker commission expenses, marketing expenses, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and common expense allocations.
Technology and development. Technology and development expenses include personnel and related expenses for software development and delivery, licensed software, information technology, data management, product, and security. Technology and development expenses also include software engineering services, the costs of operating our on-demand technology infrastructure, depreciation, amortization of capitalized software development costs, stock-based compensation, and common expense allocations.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses include personnel and related expenses of, and professional fees incurred by our executive, finance, legal, internal audit, corporate development, compliance, and people departments. They also include depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and common expense allocations.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets. Amortization of acquired intangible assets results primarily from intangible assets acquired in connection with business combinations. The assets include acquired customer relationships, acquired developed technology, and acquired trade names and trademarks, which we amortize over the assets' estimated useful lives, estimated to be 7-15 years, 2-5 years, and 3 years, respectively. We also acquired intangible HSA portfolios from third-party custodians. We amortize these assets over the assets’ estimated useful life of 15 years. We evaluate our acquired intangible assets for impairment annually, or at a triggering event.
Merger integration. Merger integration expenses include personnel and related expenses, including severance, professional fees, legal expenses, and facilities and technology expenses directly related to integration activities to merge operations as a result of acquisitions.
Interest expense
Interest expense primarily consists of accrued interest expense and amortization of deferred financing costs associated with our long-term debt. Interest on our Term Loan Facility changes frequently due to variable interest rate terms, and as a result, our interest expense is expected to fluctuate based on changes in prevailing interest rates.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net, consists of acquisition costs, interest income earned on corporate cash and other miscellaneous income and expense.
Income tax provision (benefit)
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States based on a January 31 fiscal year end. We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes, under which current tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the estimated taxes payable or refundable on the tax returns for the current fiscal year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, net operating loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted statutory tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be realized or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. As of January 31, 2022, we have recorded a valuation allowance on certain state deferred tax assets and maintained an overall net federal and state deferred tax liability on our consolidated balance sheet.
The Company evaluates its tax positions in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-10-25, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Results of operations
For a discussion related to the results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal year 2021 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021.
Revenue
The following table sets forth our revenue for the periods indicated:
Service revenue. The $4.1 million, or 1%, decrease in service revenue was primarily due to lower average service fees per account, largely offset by new revenue from acquired businesses and HSA portfolios and an increase in revenue related to COBRA benefits administration, which was primarily driven by the temporary subsidy of COBRA premium payments available under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
Custodial revenue. The $11.9 million, or 6%, increase in custodial revenue was primarily due to the $1.9 billion, or 22%, increase in the average daily balance of HSA cash with yield. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in average annualized yield from 2.06% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 to 1.75% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, which was due in part to the interest rate cuts made by the Federal Reserve in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and by transfers from HSA cash to HSA investments.
As of January 31, 2022, we had substantially completed the transition of HSA cash without yield to HSA cash with yield. This cash was placed with our Depository Partners and insurance company partners at prevailing interest rates, which we expect will generate additional custodial revenue.
Interchange revenue. The $15.2 million, or 14%, increase in interchange revenue was primarily due to increased spend per account compared to the COVID-19 pandemic lows and an increase in accounts.
Total revenue. Total revenue increased by $23.0 million, or 3%, due to the increases in interchange and custodial revenues, partially offset by the decrease in service revenue.
Impact of COVID-19. Our business has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we expect that it will continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and related societal changes. Although interest rates have increased from their pandemic lows, rates remain significantly below the levels seen before the pandemic, which reduces the yield on funds placed with our Depository Partners and insurance company partners in this environment from the yield we would have received before the pandemic. Our financial results related to certain of our products have also been adversely affected, such as commuter benefits, due to many of our members working from home during the outbreak, and the "work from home" trend, or a new hybrid work environment, may continue after the pandemic. In particular, the increased spread of COVID-19 in early 2022 and the associated decisions by employers to delay return-to-office plans for their employees will further delay the recovery of use of these commuter benefits. During the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw a negative impact on our members' spend on healthcare, which negatively impacted both our interchange revenue and service revenue, and the recent increase in COVID-19 cases has negatively impacted our interchange revenue and service revenue. In addition, we are required to support our Clients' open enrollment activities virtually. Our compliance with the Vaccine Mandate has resulted in, and could continue to result in, increased team member attrition, absenteeism, and associated costs. We may be unable to meet our service level commitments to our Clients as a result of disruptions to our work force and disruptions to third-party contracts that we rely on to provide our services. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and any longer lasting impacts on the usage of our services will continue to negatively impact our business remains highly uncertain and as a result may have a material adverse impact on our business and financial results.
Cost of revenue
The following table sets forth our cost of revenue for the periods indicated:
Service costs. The $10.1 million, or 4%, increase in service costs was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs to support the increase in average Total Accounts and our efforts related to the temporary subsidy of COBRA premium payments available under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
Custodial costs. The $2.3 million, or 12%, increase in custodial costs was due to an increase in the average daily balance of HSA cash with yield, which increased from $8.6 billion for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 to $10.5 billion for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 and an associated increase in interest retained by HSA members, partially offset by a lower average annualized rate of interest retained by HSA members on HSA cash with yield, which decreased from 0.19% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 to 0.17% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022.
Interchange costs. The $2.2 million, or 12%, increase in interchange costs was due to increased spend per account compared to the COVID-19 pandemic lows and an increase in accounts.
Total cost of revenue. As we continue to add Total Accounts, we expect that our cost of revenue will increase in dollar amount to support our Network Partners, Clients, and members. We expect our cost of revenue to increase as a percentage of our total revenue, primarily due to the inclusion of Further's results of operations and expected increases in stock-based compensation. Cost of revenue will continue to be affected by a number of different factors, including our ability to scale our service delivery, Network Partner implementation, account management functions, realized synergies, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating expenses
The following table sets forth our operating expenses for the periods indicated:
Sales and marketing. The $8.6 million, or 17%, increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase in marketing expenses from increased staffing and marketing collateral costs and increases in team member and partner commissions.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we focus on our cross-selling program and marketing campaigns. On an annual basis, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase as a percentage of our total revenue, primarily due to the inclusion of Further's results of operations and expected increases in stock-based compensation. However, our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the seasonality of our total revenue and the timing and extent of our sales and marketing expenses.
Technology and development. The $32.6 million, or 26%, increase in technology and development expenses was primarily due to increases in amortization, stock-based compensation, and personnel-related expenses.
We expect our technology and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in the development and security of our proprietary technology. On an annual basis, we expect our technology and development expenses to continue to increase as a percentage of our total revenue, primarily due to the inclusion of Further's results of operations, expected increases in stock-based compensation, and our growth initiatives. Our technology and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the seasonality of our total revenue and the timing and extent of our technology and development expenses.
General and administrative. The $0.1 million, or less than one percent, decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to decreases in personnel-related expenses and professional fees, partially offset by increases in credit losses on trade receivables and stock-based compensation.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future due to the additional demands on our legal, compliance, and accounting functions that we incur as we continue to grow our business and the increased cost of cybersecurity and directors and officers insurance. On an annual basis, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase as a percentage of our total revenue, primarily due to the inclusion of Further's results of operations, expected increases in stock-based compensation, and our growth initiatives. Our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the seasonality of our total revenue and the timing and extent of our general and administrative expenses.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets. The $6.7 million increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets was primarily due to the inclusion of amortization related to identified intangible assets acquired through the Further Acquisition commencing November 1, 2021 and the Luum Acquisition commencing March 8, 2021. The remainder of the increase was due to amortization of acquired HSA portfolios.
Merger integration. The $64.8 million in merger integration expense for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily due to personnel and related expenses, including expenses incurred in conjunction with the migration of accounts, severance, professional fees, technology-related, and facilities expenses directly related to the WageWorks Acquisition, including $11.2 million of impairment losses on right-of-use assets, and additional integration expenses incurred related to the Further Acquisition. Merger integration expenses of approximately $127 million attributable to the WageWorks Acquisition were substantially completed as of January 31, 2022, with the exception of ongoing lease expense related to certain WageWorks offices that have been permanently closed, less any related sublease income, professional fees associated with the remediation of remaining material weaknesses, and costs associated with remaining platform migrations. We expect merger integration expenses attributable to the Further Acquisition totaling approximately $55 million to be incurred over a period of approximately three years from the acquisition date.
Interest expense
The $36.6 million in interest expense for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 consisted primarily of interest accrued on our long-term debt and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, as well as a $4.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt recorded during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 as a result of the refinancing of our prior credit facility. We expect interest expense to increase, primarily from the inclusion of a full year of interest expense we will incur on the $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes, which were outstanding for approximately four months during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022. The interest rate on our Term Loan Facility and Revolving Credit Facility is variable and, accordingly, we may incur additional expense if interest rates increase in future periods.
Other income (expense), net
The change in other income (expense), net, from income of $5.0 million during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 to expense of $5.9 million during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily due to a $9.7 million increase in acquisition costs and a $1.2 million decrease in other income, net.
Income tax provision (benefit)
For the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, we recorded an income tax benefit of $22.5 million and $4.7 million, respectively. The increase in income tax benefit was primarily the result of current year pre-tax book loss, a corresponding increase in benefit for state income taxes, an increase in research and development tax credits, and an increase in excess tax benefits on stock-based compensation expense.
Our effective income tax benefit rate for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 was 33.6% and 113.4%, respectively. The difference between the effective income tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate for each period is impacted by a number of factors, including the relative mix of earnings among state jurisdictions, credits, excess tax benefits or shortfalls on stock-based compensation expense, changes in valuation allowance, and other items. The decrease in the effective tax benefit rate for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to the impact of tax benefit items relative to the larger pre-tax book loss and smaller pre-tax book income, respectively.
Seasonality
Seasonal concentration of our growth combined with our recurring revenue model create seasonal variation in our results of operations. Revenue results are seasonally impacted due to ancillary service fees, timing of HSA contributions, and timing of card spend. Cost of revenue is seasonally impacted as a significant number of new and existing Network Partners bring us new HSAs and CDBs beginning in January of each year concurrent with the start of many employers’ benefit plan years. Before we realize any revenue from these new accounts, we incur costs related to implementing and supporting our new Network Partners and new accounts. These costs of services relate to activating accounts and hiring additional staff, including seasonal help to support our member support center. These expenses begin to ramp up during our third fiscal quarter, with the majority of expenses incurred in our fourth fiscal quarter.
Liquidity and capital resources
Cash and cash equivalents overview
Our principal sources of liquidity are our current cash and cash equivalents balances, collections from our service, custodial, and interchange revenue activities, and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. We rely on cash provided by operating activities to meet our short-term liquidity requirements, which primarily relate to the payment of corporate payroll and other operating costs, principal and interest payments on our long-term debt, and capital expenditures.
As of January 31, 2022 and January 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents were $225.4 million and $328.8 million, respectively.
Capital resources
We maintain a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC. A shelf registration statement, which includes a base prospectus, allows us at any time to offer any combination of securities described in the prospectus in one or more offerings. Unless otherwise specified in a prospectus supplement accompanying the base prospectus, we would use the net proceeds from the sale of any securities offered pursuant to the shelf registration statement for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, working capital, sales and marketing activities, general and administrative matters, capital expenditures, and repayment of indebtedness, and
if opportunities arise, for the acquisition of, or investment in, assets, technologies, solutions or businesses that complement our business. Pending such uses, we may invest the net proceeds in interest-bearing securities. In addition, we may conduct concurrent or other financings at any time.
In the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we closed a follow-on public offering of 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $80.30 per share, less the underwriters' discount. We received net proceeds of $456.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $4.6 million and other offering expenses of approximately $0.5 million.
On October 8, 2021, we completed our offering of $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.50% Senior Notes due 2029. In addition, on October 8, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement, which includes a five-year senior secured term loan A facility, in an aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million, and a Revolving Credit Facility, in an aggregate principal amount of up to $1.0 billion, which may be used for working capital and general corporate purposes, including the financing of acquisitions and other investments. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes together with borrowings under the Credit Agreement and $31.8 million of cash on hand, were used to repay the outstanding borrowings under our prior credit agreement. For a description of the terms of the Credit Agreement, refer to Note 8-Indebtedness. As of January 31, 2022, there were no amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of January 31, 2022, and for the period then ended.
Use of cash
We used $50.2 million of the net proceeds from the follow-on public offering to acquire 100% of the outstanding capital stock of Fort Effect Corp, d/b/a Luum, and used an additional $60.8 million to acquire the Fifth Third Bank HSA portfolio. We used the remaining net proceeds from the offering, and other cash on hand, for the Further Acquisition.
Capital expenditures for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 were $71.6 million and $64.6 million, respectively. We expect to continue our current level of increased capital expenditures during the fiscal year ending January 31, 2023 as we continue to devote a significant amount of our capital expenditures to improving the architecture and functionality of our proprietary systems. Costs to improve the architecture of our proprietary systems include computer hardware, personnel and related costs for software engineering and outsourced software engineering services.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, and Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our operating and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. To the extent these current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may need to raise additional funds through public or private equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required, we may not be able to raise it on favorable terms, if at all.
The following table shows our cash flows from operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities for the stated periods:
Cash flows from operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 resulted from net loss of $44.3 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $137.2 million, stock-based compensation expense of $52.8 million, impairment of right-of-use assets of $11.2 million, amortization of debt issuance costs of $4.4 million, and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.0 million, partially offset by a change in the fair value of contingent consideration of $2.1 million, a gain on equity securities of $1.7 million, and other non-cash items and working capital changes totaling $20.6 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 resulted from net income of $8.8 million, plus depreciation and amortization expense of $115.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of
$42.9 million, and amortization of debt issuance costs of $5.1 million, and other non-cash items and working capital changes totaling $8.9 million.
Cash flows from investing activities. Cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 resulted from $504.5 million used for the acquisitions of Luum and Further, $62.7 million in software and capitalized software development, $65.5 million in the acquisitions of the Fifth Third HSA portfolio and other intangible member assets, and $8.9 million in purchases of property and equipment, partially offset by $2.4 million of proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
Cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 resulted from $51.5 million in software and capitalized software development, $32.4 million in acquisitions of intangible member assets, and $13.1 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Cash flows from financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 resulted from $938.1 million of net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, $456.6 million of net proceeds from our follow-on public offering of 5,750,000 shares of common stock, and the exercise of stock options of $9.8 million. These items were partially offset by $1.0 billion of principal payments on our long-term debt, a $6.0 million payment of contingent consideration, and $0.5 million used in the settlement of Client-held funds obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 resulted from $286.8 million of net proceeds from our July 2020 follow-on public offering of 5,290,000 shares of common stock and the exercise of stock options of $8.6 million. These items were partially offset by $239.1 million of principal payments on our long-term debt and $3.9 million used in the settlement of Client-held funds obligations.
Contractual obligations
See Note 7-Commitments and contingencies for information about our contractual obligations.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of January 31, 2022, other than outstanding letters of credit issued under our Revolving Credit Facility, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements. The majority of the standby letters of credit expire within one year. However, in the ordinary course of business, we will continue to renew or modify the terms of the letters of credit to support business requirements. The letters of credit are contingent liabilities, supported by our Revolving Credit Facility, and are not reflected on our consolidated balance sheets.
Critical accounting policies and significant management estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable in the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application, while in other cases, management’s judgment is required in selecting among available alternative accounting standards that allow different accounting treatment for similar transactions. We believe that there are several accounting policies that are critical to understanding our business and prospects for future performance, as these policies affect the reported amounts of revenue and other significant areas that involve management’s judgment and estimates. These significant policies and our procedures related to these policies are described in detail below.
Capitalized software development costs
We account for the costs of computer software developed or obtained for internal use in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 350-40, Internal-Use Software. Costs incurred during operation and post-implementation stages are charged to expense. Costs incurred that are directly attributable to developing or obtaining software for internal use incurred in the application development stage are capitalized. Management’s judgment is required in determining the point when various projects enter the stages at which costs may be
capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized.
Valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill and intangible assets
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, discount rates and revenue growth rates, net of attrition, related to acquired customer relationships. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful life, whereas any indefinite lived intangible assets, including goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We review goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our single reporting unit below its carrying value. The Company’s annual goodwill impairment test resulted in no impairment charges in any of the periods presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the years presented.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 1-Summary of business and significant accounting policies within the financial statements included in this Form 10-K for further discussion.