Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Heritage Insurance Holdings, Inc., is a super-regional property and casualty insurance holding company that primarily provides personal and commercial residential insurance products across its multi-state footprint. We provide personal residential insurance in sixteen states and commercial residential insurance in three of those states, while maintaining licenses in one additional state. As a vertically integrated insurer, we control or manage substantially all aspects of underwriting, customer service, actuarial analysis, distribution and claims processing and adjusting.
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows provides information that will assist the reader in understanding our consolidated financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our consolidated financial statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document.
COVID-19 and Other Matters
We continue to monitor the short- and long-term impacts of the COVID-19 virus and its variants. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we saw negligible impact to our business, and that trend continued through the fourth quarter of 2021. As a residential property insurer, we view our business as somewhat insulated because property owners and renters generally view our products as a necessity. The majority of our gross and net premiums written are from renewals of expiring policies. New business, which accounts for a smaller portion of our revenue, may be impacted if consumers are not buying as many new homes in our geographies, but this could be partially or fully offset by increased retention in our renewal portfolio. In a prolonged recessionary and social-distancing environment, we could experience disruptions to our independent agency distribution channel, which may have a negative impact on our revenues and financial condition. Changes in the cost of materials and labor for home repairs can influence our loss costs associated with claims. The Company has implemented return-to-office and hybrid programs, with the latter including a combination of in-office and remote work.
While we acknowledge uncertainties associated with future economic conditions, we do not expect a material impact to our business going forward. We will continue to monitor economic conditions and, in the case of a prolonged economic slowdown as a result of COVID-19, will take necessary actions to mitigate any negative impacts to our business, operations or financial results.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. The CARES Act and related notices include several significant provisions, including delaying certain payroll tax payments, mandatory transition tax payments under the TCJ Act, and estimated income tax payments that were deferred to future periods. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has paid back 50% of the deferred payroll tax to the IRS with the remaining balance due in December 2022. We do not currently expect the CARES Act to have a material impact on our liquidity or our financial results, except for the benefit associated with a 5 year carryback of our 2020 tax net operating loss. We will continue to monitor and assess the impact the CARES Act and similar legislation may have on our business and financial results.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
Goodwill impairment
We evaluate goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment at least on an annual basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount of goodwill and other intangible assets may exceed their implied fair value. Goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level, for which we have one reporting unit level. Any impairment is charged to operations in the period that the impairment is identified. The evaluation of such factors requires considerable management judgment. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed our annual analysis of goodwill for potential impairment. As a result of the analysis, we impaired a portion of our goodwill, reducing our carrying value of goodwill from $152.5 million to $92 million.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Gross premiums written represent, with respect to a period, the sum of direct premiums written (premiums from policies written during the period, net of any midterm cancellations and renewals of voluntary policies) and assumed premiums written (primarily premiums from state fair plan policies), in each case prior to ceding premiums to reinsurers.
Gross premiums earned represent the total premiums earned during a period from policies written. Premiums associated with new and renewal policies are earned ratably over the twelve-month term of the policy and premiums associated with assumed policies are earned ratably over the remaining term of the policy.
Ceded premiums represent the cost of our reinsurance during a period. We recognize the cost of our reinsurance program ratably over term of the arrangement, which is typically twelve months. Our catastrophe excess of loss reinsurance generally incepts June 1 and runs through May 31 of the following year. Our net quota share treaty incepts December 31. Our other reinsurance programs may be purchased on a calendar or fiscal year basis.
Net premiums earned reflect gross premiums earned less ceded premiums during the period.
Net investment income represents interest earned on fixed maturity securities, short term securities and other investments, dividends on equity securities.
Net realized and unrealized gains or losses represent gains or losses on investment sales and unrealized gains or losses on equity securities.
Other revenue includes rental income due under non-cancelable leases for space at the Company’s commercial property in Clearwater, Florida, and all policy and pay-plan fees. Our regulators have approved a policy fee on each policy written for certain states; to the extent these fees are not subject to refund, the Company recognizes the income immediately when collected. The Company also charges pay-plan fees to policyholders that pay premiums in more than one installment and record the fees as income when collected.
Expenses
Losses and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) reflect losses paid, expenses paid to resolve claims, such as fees paid to adjusters, attorneys and investigators, and changes in our reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses during the period, in each case net of losses ceded to reinsurers. Our reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses represent the estimated ultimate cost of resolving all reported claims plus all losses we incurred related to insured events that we assume have occurred as of the reporting date, but that policyholders have not yet reported to us (which are commonly referred to as incurred but not reported, or “IBNR”). We estimate our reserves for unpaid losses using individual case-based estimates for reported claims and actuarial estimates for IBNR losses. We continually review and adjust our estimated losses as necessary based on our evolving claims experience, new information obtained and industry development trends. If our unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses are considered deficient or redundant, we increase or decrease the liability in the period in which we identify the difference and reflect the change in our current period results of operations.
Policy acquisition costs (“PAC”) consist of: (i) commissions paid to outside agents at the time of policy issuance, (ii) policy administration fees paid to a third-party administrator at the time of policy issuance, (iii) premium taxes and (iv) inspection fees. We recognize policy acquisition costs ratably over the term of the underlying policy. We earn ceding commissions on our net quota share reinsurance contract and certain other reinsurance contracts, which are reported as a reduction to policy acquisition costs and general and administrative expenses based upon the proportion these costs bear to production of new business. Refer to Note 11 “Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs” to our consolidated financial statements under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10K. Ceding commission income is deferred and earned over the contract period. The amount and rate of ceding commissions earned on the net quota share contract can slide within a prescribed minimum and maximum, depending on loss performance and how future losses develop.
General and administrative expenses (“G&A”) include compensation and related benefits, professional fees, office lease and related expenses, information system expenses, corporate insurance, and other general and administrative costs. As noted above, a certain portion of our ceding commissions are allocated to general and administrative expenses.
Provision for income taxes consists of federal and state corporate level income taxes. The effective tax rate can fluctuate throughout the year as estimates used in the quarterly tax provision are updated with additional information throughout the year. The effective tax rate can vary from the 26.5% statutory federal and state blended rate depending on the amount of pretax income in proportion to permanent tax differences as well as state tax apportionment. The 2020 effective tax rate was favorably impacted by the rate benefit associated with the 2020 tax loss carrybacks afforded through the CARES Act enactment.
Ratios
Ceded premium ratio represents ceded premiums earned as a percentage of gross premiums earned.
Net loss ratio represents net losses and LAE as a percentage of net premiums earned.
Net expense ratio represents PAC and G&A expenses as a percentage of net premiums earned. Ceding commission income is reported as a reduction of policy acquisition costs and G&A expenses.
Net combined ratio represents the sum of the net loss and expense ratio. The net combined ratio is a key measure of underwriting performance traditionally used in the property and casualty insurance industry. A net combined ratio under 100% generally reflects profitable underwriting results.
Financial Results Highlights for the Year Ended December 31, 2021
•Net loss was $74.7 million, or $(2.69) per diluted share.
•Book value per share decreased to $12.82 down 19.6% from year-end 2020.
•Gross premiums written and gross premiums in force of $1.2 billion, with gross premiums written up 7.8% year-over-year, including 16.2% growth outside Florida and a 0.1% reduction in Florida.
•Policies-in-force of 571,316, down 1.7% year-over-year.
•Realized and unrealized capital losses of $16,000, down from gains of $22.4 million in the prior year.
•Favorable prior year reserve development of $3.5 million.
•Net current accident year weather losses of $148.1 million, up from $134.2 million in the prior year. Current accident year weather losses include $67.5 million of catastrophe losses, down from $83.5 million in the prior year, and $80.7 million of other weather losses, up from $50.7 million in the prior year.
•Repurchased 1.3 million shares for $8.2 million at an average price of $6.52 per share, well below GAAP book value per share.
•Board of Directors approved a new $25.0 million share repurchase authorization through December 31, 2022.
•Total capital returned to shareholders of $14.9 million, including $0.06 per share regular quarterly dividend.
Results of Operations
In the following section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please Refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on March 9, 2021.
Please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
NM - not meaningful
Gross premiums written
Gross premiums written of $1.2 billion, up 7.8% year-over-year, including 16.2% growth outside Florida and a 0.1% reduction in Florida. The overall increase relates largely to rate-driven organic growth and policy count growth outside Florida. The largest amount of growth occurred in the northeast. Rate increases materially benefited the growth in 2021 gross premiums written, contributing to a 10.1% increase in average premium per policy across the book and a 15.5% increase per policy in our Florida personal residential book.
Gross premiums earned
Gross premiums earned were $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 14.8% compared to $996.8 million in the prior year. The increase in gross premiums earned reflects higher gross premiums written over the last twelve months.
Ceded premiums
Ceded premiums were $533.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 17.9% compared to $452.1 million in the prior year. The increase is primarily attributable to purchasing increased reinsurance coverage for a larger book of business. Ceded premiums associated with our quota share coverage increased due to the higher gross premiums written in the northeast. Additionally, favorable reinsurance premium true ups in the prior year contributed to the 2021 overall ceded premium increase.
Net premiums earned
Net premiums earned were $611.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 12.2% compared to $544.7 million in the prior year. The increase primarily stems from higher gross premiums earned, partly offset by higher ceded premiums.
Net investment income
Net investment income, inclusive of realized investment gains (losses) and unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities, was $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, down 83.8% compared to $34.7 million in the prior year. The decrease relates primarily to higher realized gains on investments sold in the prior year, coupled with a lower interest rate environment as the proceeds from those 2020 investment sales were re-invested.
Other revenue
Other revenue was $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 6.4% compared to $14.0 million in the prior year. The increase was driven largely by policy fee income associated with growing gross premiums written.
Total revenue
Total revenue was $631.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 6.4% compared to $593.4 million in the prior year. The increase primarily stems from higher net premiums earned partly offset by the decrease in net investment income, as described above.
Losses and loss adjustment expenses
Losses and LAE were $427.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 14.5% compared to $373.4 million in the prior year. The majority of the increase stems from a larger book of business, a $13.9 million uptick in current accident year weather losses and a $16.1 million reduction in favorable reserve development from prior year.
Policy acquisition costs
Policy acquisition costs were $146.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up 13.8% compared to $128.3 million in the prior year. Higher acquisition costs relate to the increase in gross premiums written.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $65.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, down 19.3% compared to $81.5 million in the prior year. The decrease primarily relates to separation payments to two of our executive officers as well as vesting of a significant amount of stock compensation in 2020.
Goodwill impairment
We evaluate goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment at least on an annual basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount of goodwill and other intangible assets may exceed their implied fair value. Goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level, for which we have one reporting unit level. Any impairment is charged to operations in the period that the impairment is identified. The evaluation Goodwill impairment includes a review of a variety of factors as described below, which require considerable management judgment. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed our annual analysis of goodwill for potential impairment. As a result of the analysis, we impaired a portion of our goodwill, reducing our carrying value of goodwill from $152.5 million to $92 million based on the following factors: (i) disruptions in the equity markets, specifically for property and casualty insurance companies, largely due to recent weather-related catastrophe events; (ii) elevated loss ratios for property insurers in our markets; and (iii) trading of our stock below book value. These factors reduced our previously modeled fair value of the Company and resulted in a $60.5 million goodwill impairment charge, which is not tax deductible.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, flat from the prior year.
Benefit for income taxes
The benefit for income taxes was $1.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to a benefit for income taxes of $7.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate for the current year is 1.7% compared to (321.3%) for the prior year. The variance in the effective tax rate relates primarily to a tax net operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was carried back five years under The CARES Act and deductible at a 35% corporate income tax rate rather than the current 21% statutory corporate income tax rate. Our effective tax rate was also impacted by the non-deductible goodwill impairment recognized during the fourth quarter of 2021. See further discussion of the goodwill impairment in the critical accounting estimates section and Note 1 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Additionally, the effective tax rate can fluctuate throughout the year as estimates used in the quarterly tax provision are updated with additional information throughout the year, including changes to pre-tax income. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the impact of permanent differences on the pre-tax loss.
Net (loss) income
Net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $74.7 million, down 901.3% from net income of $9.3 million in the prior year. The decrease primarily relates to a goodwill impairment charge as described in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements and large realized investment gains and income tax benefits in the prior year which offsets the increase in revenue over the prior year, each of which is described above.
Ratios
Ceded premium ratio
The ceded premium ratio was 46.6% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, up 1.2 points from 45.4% in the prior year. The increase primarily stems from ceded premium growth that outpaced growth in gross premiums earned, as described above.
Net loss ratio
The net loss and LAE ratio was 69.9% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, up 1.4 points from 68.5% in the prior year. The increase primarily relates to lower favorable prior year reserve development as a percentage of net premiums earned, coupled with higher weather losses in the current year.
Net expense ratio
The net expense ratio was 34.7% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, down 3.8 points from 38.5% in the prior year. The decrease primarily stems from growth in net premiums earned and lower general and administrative expenses, as described above.
Net combined ratio
The net combined ratio was 104.6% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, down 2.4 points from 107.0% in the prior year. The decrease stems from a lower net expense ratio, partly offset by a higher net loss ratio, as described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity include cash flows generated from operations, our cash, cash equivalents, our marketable securities balances and borrowings available under our credit facilities. As of December 31, 2021, we held $364.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $694.7 million in investments, compared to $446.4 million and $589.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to the re-investment in fixed income securities in 2021 using proceeds from sales of fixed income securities in 2020.
We generally hold substantial cash balances to meet seasonal liquidity needs including amounts to pay quarterly reinsurance installments as well as meet the collateral requirements of Osprey, our captive reinsurance company, which is required to maintain a collateral trust account equal to the risk that it assumes from our insurance company affiliates.
We believe that our sources of liquidity are adequate to meet our cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
We may continue to pursue the acquisition of complementary businesses and make strategic investments. We may increase capital expenditures consistent with our investment plans and anticipated growth strategy. Cash and cash equivalents may not be sufficient to fund such expenditures. As such, in addition to the use of our existing Credit Facilities, we may need to utilize additional debt to secure funds for such purposes.
Statement of Cash Flows
The net increases (decreases) in cash and cash equivalents are summarized in the following table:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for December 31, 2021 was $60.1 million compared to net cash provided by of $170.2 million during the prior year. The decrease was driven primarily by the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 coupled with an increase in claim payments, a smaller increase in unearned premiums due to significant premium growth during 2020, and collection of income taxes receivable in 2021 related to our income tax return filings from previous years.
Investing Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was ($124.5) million compared to net cash provided by of $22.1 million in the prior year. The variance relates primarily to proceeds from strategic sales of fixed income securities in 2020 the proceeds of which were re-invested during 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $17.3 million, compared net cash used of $28.9 million in the prior year. The variance relates primarily to payments on our term loan facility during 2020, coupled with larger purchases of treasury stock in 2020, as well as income tax withholding in 2020 related to the vesting of a large amount of restricted stock.
Credit Facilities
The Company is party to a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by and among the Company, as borrower, certain subsidiaries of the Company from time to time party thereto as guarantors, the lenders from time to time party thereto (the “Lenders”), Regions Bank, as Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent, BMO Harris Bank N.A., as Syndication Agent, Hancock Whitney Bank and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, as Co-Documentation Agents, and Regions Capital Markets and BMO Capital Markets Corp., as Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Bookrunners (as amended from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”).
The Credit Agreement, as amended, provides for (1) a five-year senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $75 million (the “Term Loan Facility”) and (2) a five-year senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal
amount of $75 million (inclusive of a $5 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $10 million sublimit for swingline loans) (the “Revolving Credit Facility” and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Credit Facilities”).
Term Loan Facility. The principal amount of the Term Loan Facility amortizes in quarterly installments, which began with the close of the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2019, in an amount equal to $1.9 million per quarter, payable quarterly, decreasing to $875,000 per quarter commencing with the quarter ending December 31, 2021 and increasing to $1.3 million per quarter commencing with the quarter ending December 31, 2024, with the remaining balance payable at maturity. The Term Loan Facility matures on July 27, 2026. As of December 31, 2021, there was $70.0 million in aggregate principal outstanding on the Term Loan Facility. On July 28, 2021, the principal amount of the term loan outstanding under the Term Loan Facility was increased by $13.75 million to a total of $70.0 million from $56.25 million prior to the advance.
Revolving Credit Facility. The Revolving Credit Facility allows for borrowings of up to $75 million inclusive of a $5 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $10 million sublimit for swingline loans. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings and no letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
At our option, borrowings under the Credit Facilities bear interest at rates equal to either (1) a rate determined by reference to LIBOR (based on one, two, three or six-month interest periods), adjusted for statutory reserve requirements, plus an applicable margin or (2) a base rate determined by reference to the greatest of (a) the “prime rate” of Regions Bank, (b) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, and (c) the LIBOR index rate applicable for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%, plus an applicable margin.
The applicable margin for loans under the Credit Facilities varies from 3.25% per annum to 3.75% per annum (for LIBOR loans) and 1.5% to 2.0% per annum (for base rate loans) based on our consolidated leverage ratio. Interest payments with respect to the Credit Facilities are required either on a quarterly basis (for base rate loans) or at the end of each interest period (for LIBOR loans) or, if the duration of the applicable interest period exceeds three months, then every three months. As of December 31, 2021, the borrowing under our Credit Facilities were accruing interest at a rate of 2.9375% per annum.
In addition to paying interest on outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, we are required to pay a quarterly commitment fee based on the unused portion of the Revolving Credit Facility, which is determined by our consolidated leverage ratio.
We may prepay the loans under the Credit Facilities, in whole or in part, at any time without premium or penalty, subject to certain conditions including minimum amounts and reimbursement of certain costs in the case of prepayments of LIBOR loans. In addition, we are required to prepay the loan under the Term Loan Facility with the proceeds from certain financing transactions, involuntary dispositions or asset sales (subject, in the case of asset sales, to reinvestment rights).
All obligations under the Credit Facilities are or will be guaranteed by each existing and future direct and indirect wholly owned domestic subsidiary of the Company, other than all of the Company’s current and future regulated insurance subsidiaries (collectively, the “Guarantors”).
The Company and the Guarantors are party to a Pledge and Security Agreement, (as amended from time to time the “Security Agreement”), in favor of Regions Bank, as collateral agent. Pursuant to the Security Agreement, amounts borrowed under the Credit Facilities are secured on a first priority basis by a perfected security interest in substantially all of the present and future assets of the Company and each Guarantor (subject to certain exceptions), including all of the capital stock of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries, other than its regulated insurance subsidiaries.
The Credit Agreement contains, among other things, covenants, representations and warranties and events of default customary for facilities of this type. The Company is required to maintain, as of each fiscal quarter (1) a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 2.75 to 1.00 for each fiscal quarter ending in 2021, stepping down to 2.50 to 1.00 in 2022 and thereafter; (2) a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.20 to 1.00 and (3) a minimum consolidated net worth for the Company and its subsidiaries. Events of default include, among other events, (i) nonpayment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts; (ii) failure to perform or observe certain covenants set forth in the Credit Agreement; (iii) breach of any representation or warranty; (iv) cross-default to other indebtedness; (v) bankruptcy and insolvency defaults; (vi) monetary judgment defaults and material nonmonetary judgment defaults; (vii) customary ERISA defaults; (viii) a change of control of the Company; and (ix) failure to maintain specified catastrophe retentions in each of the Company’s regulated insurance subsidiaries.
Convertible Notes
On August 10, 2017, the Company and Heritage MGA, LLC (the “Notes Guarantor”) entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Citigroup Global Markets Inc., as the initial purchaser (the “Initial Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell, and the Initial Purchaser agreed to purchase, $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s 5.875% Convertible Senior Notes due 2037 (the “Convertible Notes”) in a private placement transaction pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Purchase Agreement contained customary representations, warranties and agreements of the Company and the Notes Guarantor and customary conditions to closing, indemnification rights and obligations of the parties and termination provisions. The net proceeds from the offering of the Convertible Notes, after deducting
discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company, were approximately $120.5 million. The offering was completed on August 16, 2017.
The Company issued the Convertible Notes under an Indenture (the “Convertible Note Indenture”), dated August 16, 2017, by and among the Company, as issuer, the Notes Guarantor, as guarantor, and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”).
The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.875% per year. Interest began accruing on August 16, 2017 and is payable semi-annually in arrears, on February 1 and August 1 of each year, starting on February 1, 2018. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company that rank senior in right of payment to the Company’s future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Convertible Notes; equal in right of payment to the Company’s unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated; effectively junior to any of the Company’s secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally junior to all indebtedness or other liabilities incurred by the Company’s subsidiaries other than the Notes Guarantor, which fully and unconditionally guarantee the Convertible Notes on a senior unsecured basis.
The Convertible Notes mature on August 1, 2037, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted.
Holders may convert their Convertible Notes at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding February 1, 2037, other than during the period from, and including, February 1, 2022 to the close of business on the second business day immediately preceding August 5, 2022, only under the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2017, if the closing sale price of the Company’s common stock, for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) in the period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the calendar quarter immediately preceding the calendar quarter in which the conversion occurs, is more than 130% of the conversion price of the Convertible Notes in effect on each applicable trading day; (2) during the ten consecutive business-day period following any five consecutive trading-day period in which the trading price for the Convertible Notes for each such trading day was less than 98% of the closing sale price of the Company’s common stock on such date multiplied by the then-current conversion rate; (3) if the Company calls any or all of the Convertible Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second business day immediately preceding the redemption date; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events.
During the period from and including February 1, 2022 to the close of business on the second business day immediately preceding August 5, 2022, and on or after February 1, 2037 until the close of business on the second business day immediately preceding August 1, 2037, holders may surrender their Convertible Notes for conversion at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances.
The conversion rate for the Convertible Notes was initially 67.0264 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $14.92 per share of common stock). The conversion rate is subject to adjustment in certain circumstances and is subject to increase for holders that elect to convert their Convertible Notes in connection with certain corporate transactions (but not, at the Company’s election, a public acquirer change of control (as defined in the Convertible Note Indenture)) that occur prior to August 5, 2022.
Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the Convertible Note Indenture) (but not, at the Company’s election, a public acquirer change of control (as defined in the Convertible Note Indenture), holders of the Convertible Notes may require the Company to repurchase for cash all or a portion of their Convertible Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
Except as described below, the Company may not redeem the Convertible Notes prior to August 5, 2022. On or after August 5, 2022 but prior to February 1, 2037, the Company may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Convertible Notes, at the Company’s option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the Convertible Notes, which means that the Company is not required to redeem or retire the Convertible Notes periodically. Holders of the Convertible Notes are able to cause the Company to repurchase their Convertible Notes for cash on any of August 1, 2022, August 1, 2027 and August 1, 2032, in each case at 100% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the relevant repurchase date.
The Convertible Note Indenture contains customary terms and covenants and events of default. If an Event of Default (as defined in the Convertible Note Indenture) occurs and is continuing, the Trustee by notice to the Company, or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes then outstanding by notice to the Company and the Trustee, may declare 100% of the principal of, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on, all the Convertible Notes to be immediately due and payable. In the case of certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization (as set forth in the Convertible Note Indenture) with respect to the Company, 100% of the principal of, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on, the Notes automatically become immediately due and payable.
In the second quarter of 2018, the Company repurchased $10.6 million principal amount of Convertible Notes for cash. In the fourth quarter of 2018 and first quarter of 2019, the Company repurchased Convertible Notes in the aggregate principal amount of
$81.6 million for a combination of cash and the issuance of an aggregate of 3,880,653 shares of the Company’s common stock, valued at $53.0 million, leaving $23.4 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding as of December 31, 2021. In January 2022, the Company reacquired an additional $11.7 million principal amount of outstanding Convertible Notes.
FHLB Loan Agreements
In December 2018, a subsidiary of the Company pledged U.S. government and agency fixed maturity securities with an estimated fair value of $31.0 million as collateral and received $19.2 million in a cash loan under an advance agreement with the FHLB Atlanta. The loan originated on December 12, 2018 and bears a fixed interest rate of 3.094% with interest payments due quarterly commencing in March 2019. The principal balance on the loan has a maturity date of December 13, 2023. In connection with the agreement, the subsidiary became a member of FHLB. Membership in the FHLB required an investment in FHLB’s common stock which was purchased on December 31, 2018 and valued at $1.4 million. The subsidiary is permitted to withdraw any portion of the pledged collateral over the minimum collateral requirement at any time, other than in the event of a default by the subsidiary. The proceeds from the loan was used to prepay the Company’s Senior Secured Notes due 2023 in 2018.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Amounts represent principal and interest payments to debt obligations. Debt obligations are classified based on their stated maturity date. For further information on long-term debt, Refer to Note 14 “Long Term Debt” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The expected timing of payments of the obligations in the preceding table is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different due to changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis presents the more significant factors that affected our financial conditions as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and results of operations for each of the years then ended. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles of generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. While we base estimates on historical experience, current information and other factors deemed to be relevant, actual results could differ from those estimates.
We consider accounting estimates to be critical to reported financial results if (i) the accounting estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain and (ii) different estimates that management reasonably could have used for the accounting estimates in the current period, or changes in the accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets arise as a result of business combinations and consist of the excess of the fair value of consideration paid over the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is subject to evaluation for impairment using a fair value-based test. This evaluation is performed annually, during the fourth quarter or more frequently if facts and circumstances warrant. An impairment loss would be recognized if, and to the extent that, the carrying value of goodwill exceeded the implied value. We review amortizable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that carrying amounts may not be recoverable. If we have concluded that impairment exists, the carrying amount is reduced to fair value. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $60.5 million for a goodwill impairment charge. There was deemed to be no impairment of the amortizable intangible assets.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets Including Intangible Assets Subject to Amortization. We assess the recoverability of long-lived assets when events or circumstances indicate that the assets might have become impaired. We determine whether the assets can be recovered from undiscounted future cash flows and, if not recoverable, we would recognize impairment to reduce the carrying value to
fair value. Recoverability of long-lived assets is dependent upon, among other things, our ability to maintain profitability, so as to be able to meet its obligations when they become due. No impairment was recognized in any period presented.
Premiums. We recognize direct and assumed premiums written as revenue, net of ceded amounts, on a daily pro rata basis over the contract period of the related policies that are in force. For any portion of premiums not earned at the end of the reporting period, we record an unearned premium liability.
Premiums receivable represents amounts due from our policyholders for billed premiums and related policy fees. Our billing system is equity based such that policies are cancelled if the unpaid premium exceeds the amount of premium earned. When we receive payments on amounts previously charged off, we credit bad debt expense in the period we receive the payment. Balances in premiums receivable and the associated allowance account are removed upon cancellation of the policy due to non-payment. We recorded bad debt expense of approximately $0, $161,300 and $290,300 in 2021, 2020, 2019, respectively.
When we receive premium payments from policyholders prior to the effective date of the related policy, we record an advance premium liability. On the policy effective date, we reduce the advance premium liability and record the premiums as described above.
Reserves for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses. Reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, also referred to as loss reserves, represent the most significant accounting estimate inherent in the preparation of our financial statements. These reserves represent management’s best estimate of the amount we will ultimately pay for losses and loss adjustment expenses and we base the amount upon the application of various actuarial reserve estimation techniques as well as considering other material facts and circumstances known at the balance sheet date. We establish two categories of loss reserves as follows: Case reserves-When a claim is reported, we establish an initial estimate of the losses that will ultimately be paid on the reported claim. Our initial estimate for each claim is based upon the judgment of our claims professionals who are familiar with property and liability losses associated with the coverage offered by our policies. Then, our claims personnel perform an evaluation of the type of claim involved, the circumstances surrounding each claim and the policy provisions relating to the loss and adjust the reserve, as necessary. As claims mature, we increase or decrease the reserve estimates as deemed necessary by our claims department based upon additional information we receive regarding the loss, the results of on-site reviews and any other information we gather while reviewing the claims. IBNR reserves-Our IBNR reserves include true IBNR reserves plus “bulk” reserves. True IBNR reserves represent amounts related to claims for which a loss occurred on or before the date of the financial statements, but which have not yet been reported to us. Bulk reserves represent additional amounts that cannot be allocated to particular claims, but which are necessary to estimate ultimate losses on known claims. We estimate our IBNR reserves by projecting our ultimate losses using industry accepted actuarial methods and then deducting actual loss payments and case reserves from the projected ultimate losses. We review and adjust our IBNR reserves on a quarterly basis based on information available to us at the balance sheet date.
When we establish our reserves, we analyze various factors such as the evolving historical loss experience of the insurance industry as well as our experience, claims frequency and severity, our business mix, our claims processing procedures, legislative enactments, judicial decisions and legal developments in imposition of damages, and general economic conditions, including inflation. A change in any of these factors from the assumptions implicit in our estimates will cause our ultimate loss experience to be better or worse than indicated by our reserves, and the difference could be material. Due to the interaction of the foregoing factors, there is no precise method for evaluating the impact of any one specific factor in isolation, and an element of judgment is ultimately required. Due to the uncertain nature of any future projections, the ultimate amount we will pay for losses will be different from the reserves we record.
We determine our ultimate loss reserves by selecting an estimate within a relevant range of indications that we calculate using generally accepted actuarial techniques. Our selection of the point estimate is influenced by the analysis of our paid losses and incurred losses since inception.
Our external reserving actuaries evaluated the adequacy of our reserves as of December 31, 2021 and concluded that our reported loss reserves would meet the requirements of the insurance laws of the states in which our insurance subsidiaries are domiciled, be consistent with reserves computed in accordance with accepted loss reserving standards and principles, and make a reasonable provision for all unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense obligations under the terms of our contracts and agreements. In addition to $297.0 million of recorded case reserves, we recorded $293.2 million of IBNR reserves as of December 31, 2021 to achieve overall gross reserves of $590.2 million. At December 31, 2021, ceded IBNR and net IBNR were $76.8 million and $216.4 million, respectively.
The process of establishing our reserves is complex and inherently imprecise, as it involves using judgment that is affected by many variables. We believe a reasonably likely change in almost any of the factors we evaluate as part of our loss reserve analysis could have an impact on our reported results, financial position and liquidity.
The following table quantifies the pro forma impact of hypothetical changes in our net loss reserves on our net income and stockholders’ equity as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Estimated cash, cash equivalents and investments is intended to reflect the impact of loss reserves, net of taxes.
Policy Acquisition Costs. We incur policy acquisition costs that vary with, and are directly related to, the production of new business. Policy acquisition costs consist of the following four items: (i) commissions paid to outside agents at the time of policy issuance, (ii) policy administration fees paid to a third-party administrator at the time of policy issuance, (iii) premium taxes and (iv) inspection fees. We capitalize policy acquisition costs to the extent recoverable, then we amortize those costs over the contract period of the related policy. We also earn ceding commission on our quota share reinsurance contracts, which is presented as a reduction of policy acquisition costs with any excess unearned ceding commission recognized as a liability. Ceding commission income is deferred and earned over the contract period. The amount and rate of ceding commissions earned on the net quota share contract can slide within a prescribed minimum and maximum, depending on loss performance and how future losses develop.
We earn ceding commission on its gross and net quota share reinsurance contracts. Our accounting policy is to allocate ceding commission between policy acquisition costs and general and administrative expenses for financial reporting purposes. Ceding commission is allocated between policy acquisition costs and general and administrative expenses based upon the proportion these costs bear to production of new business. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we earned ceding commission income of $62.7 million, $57.1 million and $62.4 million of which $47.1 million, $43.0 million and $47.0 million was allocable to policy acquisition costs.
Provision for Premium Deficiency. At each reporting date, we determine whether we have a premium deficiency. A premium deficiency would result if the sum of our expected losses, deferred policy acquisition costs and policy maintenance costs (such as costs to store records and costs incurred to collect premiums and pay commissions) exceeded our related unearned premiums plus investment income. Should we determine that a premium deficiency exists, we would write off the unrecoverable portion of deferred policy acquisition costs. No accruals for premium deficiency were considered necessary as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Reinsurance. We follow industry practice of reinsuring a portion of our risks. Reinsurance involves transferring, or “ceding”, all or a portion of the risk exposure on policies we write to another insurer, known as a reinsurer. To the extent that our reinsurers are unable to meet the obligations they assume under our reinsurance agreements, we remain liable for the entire insured loss.
Our reinsurance agreements are prospective contracts. We record an asset, prepaid reinsurance premiums, and a liability, reinsurance payable, for the entire contract amount upon commencement of our new reinsurance agreements. We amortize our prepaid reinsurance premiums over the 12-month contract period.
In the event that we incur losses recoverable under our reinsurance program, we record amounts recoverable from our reinsurers on paid losses plus an estimate of amounts recoverable on unpaid losses. The estimate of amounts recoverable on unpaid losses is a function of our liability for unpaid losses associated with the reinsured policies; therefore, the amount changes in conjunction with any changes to our estimate of unpaid losses. In the event that we incur losses recoverable under the reinsurance program, the estimate of amounts recoverable from reinsurers on unpaid losses may change at any point in the future because of its relation to our reserves for unpaid losses.
We estimate uncollectible amounts receivable from reinsurers based on an assessment of factors including the creditworthiness of the reinsurers and the adequacy of collateral obtained, where applicable. We had no uncollectible amounts under our reinsurance program or bad debt expense related to reinsurance for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective
The Company describes the recent pronouncements that have had or may have a significant effect on its financial statements or on its disclosures. The Company does not discuss recent pronouncements that a) are not anticipated to have an impact on, or b) are unrelated to its financial condition, results of operations, or related disclosures. For accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, Refer to Note 1 “Basis of Presentation, Nature of Business and Significant Accounting Policies and Practices” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further information.
Seasonality of our Business
Our insurance business is seasonal; hurricanes typically occur during the period from June 1 through November 30 and winter storms generally impact the first and fourth quarters each year. With our catastrophe reinsurance program effective on June 1 each year, any variation in the cost of our reinsurance, whether due to changes to reinsurance rates or changes in the total insured value of our policy base will occur and be reflected in our financial results beginning June 1 of each year, subject to certain adjustments.