Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements of Harsco Corporation provided under Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Amounts included in this Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K are rounded in millions and all percentages are calculated based on actual amounts. As a result, minor differences may exist due to rounding.
Forward-Looking Statements
The nature of the Company's business, together with the number of countries in which it operates, subject it to changing economic, competitive, regulatory and technological conditions, risks and uncertainties. In accordance with the "safe harbor" provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Company provides the following cautionary remarks regarding important factors that, among others, could cause future results to differ materially from the results contemplated by forward-looking statements, including the expectations and assumptions expressed or implied herein. Forward-looking statements contained herein could include, among other things, statements about management's confidence in and strategies for performance; expectations for new and existing products, technologies and opportunities; and expectations regarding growth, sales, cash flows, and earnings. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of such terms as "may," "could," "expect," "anticipate," "intend," "believe," "likely," "estimate," "outlook," "plan" or other comparable terms.
Factors that could cause actual results to differ, perhaps materially, from those implied by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: (1) changes in the worldwide business environment in which the Company operates, including changes in general economic conditions or changes due to COVID-19 and governmental and market reactions to COVID-19; (2) changes in currency exchange rates, interest rates, commodity and fuel costs and capital costs; (3) changes in the performance of equity and bond markets that could affect, among other things, the valuation of the assets in the Company's pension plans and the accounting for pension assets, liabilities and expenses; (4) changes in governmental laws and regulations, including environmental, occupational health and safety, tax and import tariff standards and amounts; (5) market and competitive changes, including pricing pressures, market demand and acceptance for new products, services and technologies; (6) the Company's inability or failure to protect its intellectual property rights from infringement in one or more of the many countries in which the Company operates; (7) failure to effectively prevent, detect or recover from breaches in the Company's cybersecurity infrastructure; (8) unforeseen business disruptions in one or more of the many countries in which the Company operates due to political instability, civil disobedience, armed hostilities, public health issues or other calamities; (9) disruptions associated with labor disputes and increased operating costs associated with union organization; (10) the seasonal nature of the Company's business; (11) the Company's ability to successfully enter into new contracts and complete new acquisitions or strategic ventures in the time-frame contemplated, or at all; (12) the Company's ability to negotiate, complete, and integrate strategic transactions; (13) failure to conduct and complete a satisfactory process for the divestiture of the Rail division, as announced on November 2, 2021; (14) potential severe volatility in the capital or commodity markets; (15) failure to retain key management and employees; (16) the outcome of any disputes with customers, contractors and subcontractors; (17) the financial condition of the Company's customers, including the ability of customers (especially those that may be highly leveraged, have inadequate liquidity or whose business is significantly impacted by COVID-19) to maintain their credit availability; (18) implementation of environmental remediation matters; (19) risk and uncertainty associated with intangible assets and (20) other risk factors listed from time to time in the Company's SEC reports. A further discussion of these, along with other potential risk factors, can be found in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company cautions that these factors may not be exhaustive and that many of these factors are beyond the Company's ability to control or predict. Accordingly, forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual results. The Company undertakes no duty to update forward-looking statements except as may be required by law.
Executive Overview
The Company is a market-leading, global provider of environmental solutions for industrial, retail and medical waste streams. The Company's operations consist of two reportable segments: Harsco Environmental and Harsco Clean Earth. The Company is a single-thesis environmental solutions company that is a leader in the markets that we serve. The Harsco Environmental Segment operates primarily under long-term contracts, providing critical environmental services and material processing to the global steel and metals industries, including zero waste solutions for manufacturing byproducts within the metals industry. The Harsco Clean Earth Segment provides waste management services including transportation, specialty waste processing, recycling and beneficial reuse solutions for hazardous waste and soil and dredged materials. The Company has locations in approximately 30 countries, including the U.S. The Company was incorporated in 1956.
On March 10, 2021, the Company amended its Senior Secured Credit Facilities to, among other things, extend the maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility to March 10, 2026, and to increase certain levels set forth in the total net leverage ratio covenant. In addition, the Company issued a New Term Loan, using the proceeds to repay in full the outstanding Term Loan A and Term Loan B. The New Term Loan matures on March 10, 2028, or earlier, on the date that is 91 days prior to the maturity date of the Company's 5.75% Senior Notes due 2027 if such Senior Notes are outstanding or have not been refinanced at such time. See Note 8, Debt, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements," for additional details.
In November 2021, the Company announced its intent to explore strategic alternatives for the Rail business, with the intention to sell the business. As a result, the (i) carrying value of the assets and liabilities of the Harsco Rail Segment have been classified as Assets held-for-sale and Liabilities of assets held-for-sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the operating results of the Harsco Rail Segment have been reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Operations as discontinued operations for all periods presented; and (iii) all disclosures have been updated to reflect these changes.
Highlights for 2021 include (refer to the discussion of segment and consolidated results included within Results of Operations below, as well as Liquidity and Capital Resources, for additional information pertaining to the key drivers impacting these highlights):
•Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased approximately 20% compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary drivers for this increase were the acquisition of ESOL, increased volumes in the Harsco Environmental Segment and Harsco Clean Earth Segment and the impact of foreign currency translation.
•Operating income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $91.7 million compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary drivers for this increase were increased volumes in the Harsco Environmental Segment and the Clean Earth Segment; the acquisition of ESOL; acquisition and integration costs primarily related to the ESOL acquisition, which were incurred during 2020 and not repeated; and the recovery of $9.8 million of Brazil sales and use tax expense in the Harsco Environmental Segment.
•Diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations attributable to Harsco Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0.28, an increase compared with diluted losses per common share from continuing operations of $(0.63) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary drivers of this increase are those noted above for operating income from continuing operations.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $72.2 million, an increase of $18.4 million compared with cash flows provided by operating activities the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary drivers for this increase was higher net income partially offset by an unfavorable change in net working capital. The primary driver of the unfavorable changes in net working capital included lower customer advances and an increase in contract assets primarily for the Rail business related to the continued build of long-term contracts and the timing of sales and collections of accounts receivable primarily in the Harsco Environmental Segment, partially offset by timing of accounts payable.
•Capital expenditures for purchases of property, plant and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $158.3 million, an increase of $38.1 million or 31.7% compared with the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company maintains a positive outlook across its businesses supported by favorable underlying growth characteristics in its businesses and investments by the Company to further supplement growth. Financial results have been impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic that began in 2020. The Company took steps to protect all stakeholders and to minimize the operational and financial impacts of COVID-19. This business pressure was most significant during the second and third quarters of 2020, and while the pace of the recovery varies by end market, and various economic pressures remain, such as supply-chain challenges as well as labor availability and inflation, the Company's financial performance has improved meaningfully since mid-2020. Please refer Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" for additional information related to the potential impacts of COVID-19 on the Company.
For 2022, the Company expects continued growth and increased operating income in both of our reporting segments supported by:
•HE: improved demand for environmental services supported by higher steel production and growth in ecoproducts. Over the longer-term the Company expects that the Harsco Environmental Segment's growth will be driven by economic growth that supports higher global steel consumption as well as investments and innovation that support the environmental solutions needs of customers.
•CE: results are expected to improve in 2022 as a result of organic growth within its hazardous waste processing business as well as the continuous improvement benefits and integration efforts; and despite the current challenges related to labor, transportation and material inflation; and disposal constraints. Beyond 2022, the Company expects this segment to benefit from positive underlying market trends, further growth opportunities and operational synergy opportunities as well as from the less cyclical and recurring nature of this business. These dynamics are expected to provide favorable returns on the Company's investments over time.
Results of Operations
Revenues by Segment
Revenues by Region
(a) Includes Mexico.
Operating Income (Loss) and Operating Margins by Segment
Harsco Environmental Segment:
The following factors contributed to the changes in operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Factors Positively Affecting Operating Income:
•Operating income was positively affected by improved overall steel production by customers under environmental service contracts for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Operating income was positively affected by higher contributions from ecoproducts for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Operating income was positively affected by the recovery of Brazil sales and use tax expense of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by $9.4 million of employee termination costs as compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Foreign currency translation did not significantly impact operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Factors Negatively Impacting Operating Income:
•Impact of cost increases relating to raw materials, labor, equipment rental, freight and maintenance.
Harsco Clean Earth Segment:
The Company acquired ESOL on April 6, 2020 and the operating results are reflected in CE.
(b) Includes net revenue of ESOL for the three months ended March 31, 2021.
The following factors contributed to the changes in operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Factors Positively Affecting Operating Income:
•Favorable volume and mix for the hazardous waste business for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•The ESOL acquisition contributed $7.0 million to operating income during the first quarter of 2021.
Factors Negatively Impacting Operating Income:
•Decrease in soil and dredged material volume due principally to the impacts of COVID-19 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily to support the expanded business.
•Impact of increases in costs related to labor, transportation and materials.
•Constraints in incineration market capacity during part of the year.
Corporate Costs:
In addition to the factors highlighted above that positively effected or negatively impacted segment operating income, the Company's Corporate function was positively affected by acquisition related and integration costs of approximately $48.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 not repeated in the current year. This was partially offset by increased insurance and compensation costs.
Consolidated Results
Comparative Analysis of Consolidated Results
Total Revenues
Revenues for 2021 increased $314.4 million or 20% from 2020. Revenues for 2020 increased $329.7 million or 27% from 2019. These increases were attributable to the following significant items:
Cost of Services and Products Sold
Cost of services and products sold for 2021 increased $248.3 million or 20% from 2020. Cost of services and products sold for 2020 increased $312.2 million or 34% from 2019. These increases were attributable to the following significant items:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2021 decreased $12.2 million or 4% from 2020. The decrease is primarily due to acquisition and integration costs incurred in 2020 related to the acquisition of ESOL that did not repeat in 2021, partially offset by the incremental impact of selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the ESOL business and higher compensation costs in 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 increased $79.3 million or 39% from 2019. This increase primarily relates to incremental acquisition related and integration costs of approximately $24 million during 2020, primarily related to the acquisition of ESOL and the inclusion of selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the ESOL and Clean Earth acquisitions, which occurred in April 2020 and June 2019, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a provision for doubtful accounts related to a U.K. customer that entered administration during 2019 that did not repeat in 2020 and decreased travel and entertainment expenses.
Other (Income) Expenses, Net
The major components of this Consolidated Statement of operations caption are detailed below. See Note 18, Other (Income) Expenses, Net, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Interest Expense
Interest expense in 2021 was $63.2 million, an increase of $5.0 million or 9% compared with 2020. This increase primarily relates to higher outstanding borrowings.
Interest expense in 2020 was $58.2 million, an increase of $24.2 million or 71% compared with 2019. The increase primarily relates to higher outstanding borrowings and weighted average interest rates related to the June 2019 issuance of the Senior Notes and the April 2020 issuance of the Term Loan A.
See Note 8, Debt and Credit Agreements, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Unused Debt Commitment Fees, Amendment Fees and Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
During 2021, the Company recognized $5.5 million, respectively, of fees and other costs primarily related to the amended Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
During 2020, the Company recognized $1.9 million of fees and expenses related to the amended Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
During 2019, the Company recognized $6.7 million of expenses for fees and other costs related to the unused bridge financing commitment that the Company arranged in the event that the Senior Notes were not issued prior to the acquisition of CE. Additionally, the Company recognized $1.0 million of expenses related to the amendment of the Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
See Note 8, Debt and Credit Agreements, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Defined Benefit Pension Income (Expense)
Defined benefit pension income in 2021 was $15.6 million compared to defined benefit pension income of $7.1 million in 2020. This change is primarily the result of higher plan asset values at December 31, 2020.
Defined benefit pension income in 2020 was $7.1 million compared to defined benefit pension expense of $5.6 million in 2019. This change is primarily the result of higher plan asset values at December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense) from Continuing Operations
Income tax expense from continuing operations in 2021 was $9.1 million, compared with income tax benefit from continuing operations of $8.7 million in 2020. The effective income tax rate relating to continuing operations for 2021 was 24.2% versus 16.0% for 2020. The increase in income tax expense and the effective tax rate was primarily due to the increase in operating income including decreased expenses from corporate strategic spending, disallowed interest expense in 2021 and recognition of net operating loss carrybacks in 2020 not recurring in 2021, offset by a $6.8 million Brazil tax benefit recorded in 2021 resulting from the recognition of deferred tax assets as well as the change in mix of income in various foreign countries.
Income tax benefit from continuing operations in 2020 was $8.7 million, compared with income tax expense from continuing operations of $12.7 million in 2019. The effective income tax rate relating to continued operations for 2020 was 16.0% versus 41.0% for 2019. The decrease in income tax expense and the effective income tax rate related to continuing operations was primarily due to increased acquisition and integration costs, decreased operation income due to impacts of COVID-19 and a $2.7 million favorable income tax adjustment in connection with an increase in estimated usage of assumed net operating losses related to the Clean Earth acquisition.
See Note 11, Income Taxes, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Gain on Sale of Discontinued Businesses
In January 2020, the Company sold IKG and recognized a gain on sale of $18.3 million pre-tax (or approximately $9 million after-tax).
In July 2019, the Company completed the sale of AXC for $600 million in cash and recognized a gain on sale of $527.9 million pre-tax (approximately $421 million after tax). In November 2019, the Company completed the sale of PK for $60 million cash and recognized a gain on sale of $41.2 million pre-tax (or approximately $33 million after-tax).
These transactions have been recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as discontinued operations.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Businesses
The operating results of the former Harsco Rail Segment and the former Harsco Industrial Segment, costs directly related to these disposals, an allocation of interest expense associated with mandatory debt repayments required as a result of the disposal of the former Harsco Industrial Segment and the write-off of deferred financing costs resulting from the mandatory repayment of debt have been reflected as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for all periods presented. In addition, this caption includes costs directly attributable to retained contingent liabilities of the former Harsco Industrial Segment. The primary driver for the loss in 2021 is the recognition of forward loss provisions of $33.4 million for certain contracts in the Harsco Rail business. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Total Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Total other comprehensive income was $84.1 million in 2021, compared with total other comprehensive loss of $55.3 million in 2020. The primary driver of the increase is due to higher discount rates for the U.S. and U.K. pension plans and a higher return on assets than expected for the U.S. pension plan.
Total other comprehensive loss was $55.3 million in 2020, compared with total other comprehensive loss of $0.1 million in 2019. The primary driver of the decrease was due to lower discount rates for the U.S. and U.K. pension plans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
The Company currently expects to have sufficient financial liquidity and borrowing capacity to support the strategies. The Company currently expects operational and business needs to be met by cash provided by operations supplemented with borrowings from time to time principally under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. The Company supplements the cash provided by operations with borrowings from time to time due to historical patterns of seasonal cash flow, the funding of various projects and the impact of COVID-19. The Company regularly assesses capital needs in the context of operational trends and strategic initiatives.
The Company's cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, are summarized in the following table:
Cash provided (used) by operating activities - Net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 was $72.2 million, an increase of $18.4 million from 2020. The primary driver for this increase was higher net income partially offset by an unfavorable change in net working capital. The primary drivers of the unfavorable changes in net working capital included lower customer advances and an increase in contract assets for the Rail business related to the continued build of long-term contracts and the timing of sales and collections of accounts receivable primarily in the Harsco Environmental Segment, partially offset by timing of accounts payable.
Also included in the Cash flows from operating activities section of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows is the caption, Other assets and liabilities. A summary of the major components of this caption for the periods presented is as follows:
(a) Other relates primarily to other accruals that are individually not significant.
Cash used by investing activities - Net cash used by investing activities in 2021 was $124.4 million, a decrease of $396.2 million from 2020. The decrease reflected the purchase of the ESOL business in 2020, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of the IKG business in 2020 and increased net capital expenditures in 2021.
Cash provided (used) by financing activities - Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was $60.2 million, a decrease of $426.7 million from 2020. The decrease reflected lower net cash borrowings of $423.7 million in 2021 compared with the cash used to purchase the ESOL business in 2020.
Cash Requirements
The Company's expected future payments related to contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2021 to consist of:
•Principal payments related to our short-term borrowings and long-term debt obligations that are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. See Note 8, Deb and Credit Agreements, in Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information on short-term borrowings and long-term debt.
•Projected interest payments on long-term debt are anticipated to be approximately $58 million annually based upon borrowings, interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates at December 31, 2021, including interest rate swaps currently in effect. The interest rates on variable-rate debt and foreign currency exchange rates are subject to changes
beyond the Company's control and may result in actual interest expense and payments differing from the projected amounts.
•Purchase obligations representing legally binding obligations to purchase property, plant and equipment, inventory and other commitments made in the normal course of business to meet operations requirements At December 31, 2021, the Company has $198.3 million of outstanding purchase commitments, of which $140.8 million will be fulfilled in the next twelve months.
•Operating lease liabilities which are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 9, Leases, in Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
•Expected employer contributions to defined benefit pension plans for the next year. See Note 10, Employee Benefit Plans, in Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
•Expected net cash payable of $1.3 million representing the fair value of the foreign currency exchange contracts outstanding at December 31, 2021. The foreign currency exchange contracts are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. See Note 15, Financial Instruments, in Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
•At December 31, 2021, in addition to the above contractual obligations, the Company had $4.9 million of potential long-term tax liabilities, including interest and penalties, related to uncertain tax positions. Because of the high degree of uncertainty regarding the future cash flows associated with these potential long-term tax liabilities, the Company is unable to estimate the years in which settlement will occur with the respective taxing authorities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table summarizes the Company's contingent commercial commitments at December 31, 2021. These amounts are not included on the Consolidated Balance Sheets since there are no current circumstances known to management indicating that the Company will be required to make payments on these contingent commercial commitments.
Commercial Commitments at December 31, 2021
(b) Includes total commitments of $190.8 for the former Harsco Rail Segment.
Certain commercial commitments that are of a continuous nature do not have an expiration date and are therefore considered to be indefinite in nature. See Note 15, Financial Instruments, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The Company’s principal sources of liquidity are cash provided by operations and borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, augmented by cash proceeds from asset sales. In addition, the Company has other bank credit facilities available throughout the world. The Company expects to continue to utilize all of these sources to meet future cash requirements for operations and growth initiatives.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
March 2021 Amendment
In March 2021, the Company amended its Senior Secured Credit Facilities to, among other things, extend the maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility to March 10, 2026, and to modify aspects of its total net leverage ratio covenant. As a result of this amendment, the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant was increased to 5.75 through December 2021 and then decreases quarterly until reaching 4.50 in December 2022 and 4.00 in March 2023. In addition, the Company issued the New Term Loan, as an additional tranche, under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, in an aggregate principal amount of $500 million. The New Term Loan bears interest at a rate per annum of 1.25% over base rate, subject to a zero floor, or 2.25% over LIBOR, subject to a 0.50% floor. The New Term Loan is subject to quarterly amortization of principal of 0.25%, beginning September 30, 2021. The proceeds of the New Term Loan were used to repay in full the outstanding Term Loan A and Term Loan B under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, which were due on June 28, 2024 and December 8, 2024, respectively. The New Term Loan matures on March 10, 2028, or earlier, on the date that is 91 days prior to the maturity date of the Company’s 5.75% Senior Notes, due 2027, if such Senior Notes are outstanding or have not been refinanced at such time.
In October 2021, the Company amended its Senior Secured Credit Facilities to, among other things, to make certain amendments in connection with the discontinuation of LIBOR.
At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants for the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized $5.5 million, $1.9 million and $1.0 million, respectively, of fees and expenses related to amendments to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities in the caption Unused debt commitment, amendment fees and loss on the extinguishment of debt on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The amount for 2021 includes a write-off of $2.7 million of previously recorded deferred financing costs. The Company capitalized fees of $7.8 million related to the March 2021 Amendment.
In addition, on February 22, 2022, the Company amended its Senior Credit Facilities (“Amendment No. 9 to the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”) to reset the levels of the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant. As a result of this amendment, the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant was set at 5.75 for the quarter ending March 31, 2022, and then decreases quarterly by 0.25 until reaching 4.00 for the quarter ending December 31, 2023 and thereafter. In addition, upon closing on the divestiture of the former Harsco Rail Segment, the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant will decrease by an additional 0.25, provided, however, it will not go below 4.00.
See Note 20 Subsequent Events, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," and Item 9B Other Information for discussion of the Amendment No. 9 to the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement imposes certain restrictions including, but not limited to, restrictions as to types and amounts of debt or liens that may be incurred by the Company; limitations on increases in dividend payments; limitations on repurchases of the Company's stock and limitations on certain acquisitions by the Company.
With respect to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, the obligations of the Company are guaranteed by substantially all of the Company’s current and future wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries (“Guarantors”). All obligations under the Senior Credit Facility, and the guarantees of those obligations, are secured, subject to certain exceptions, by substantially all of the Company’s assets and the assets of the Guarantors.
The Credit Agreement requires certain mandatory prepayments for the New Term Loan, subject to certain exceptions, based on net cash proceeds of certain sales or distributions of assets, as well as certain casualty and condemnation events, in some cases subject to reinvestment rights and certain other exceptions; net cash proceeds of any issuance of debt, excluded permitted debt issuances; and a percentage of excess cash flow, as defined by the Credit Agreement, during a fiscal year.
Revolving Credit Facility
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, a U.S.-based program, bear interest at a rate per annum ranging from 50 to 150 basis points over the base rate or 150 to 250 basis points over adjusted LIBOR as defined in the Credit Agreement, subject to a 0% floor. Any principal amount outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility is due and payable on its maturity on March 10, 2026.
The following table shows the amount outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility and available credit at December 31, 2021.
Other
In 2019, the Company recognized $6.7 million of expenses in the caption Unused commitment, amendment fees and loss on extinguishment of debt on the Consolidated Statements of Operations, for fees and other costs related to bridge financing commitments that the Company arranged in the event that the Senior Notes were not issued prior to the acquisition of Clean Earth. The Senior Notes were issued prior to completion of the Clean Earth acquisition thus the bridge financing commitments were not utilized.
Certainty of Cash Flows
The majority of the Company's cash flows provided by operations has historically been generated in the second half of the year. The certainty of the Company's future cash flows is underpinned by the long-term nature of the Company's HE services contracts, the recurring nature of revenues within the Clean Earth Segment and overall discretionary cash flows (operating cash flows plus cash from asset sales in excess of the amounts necessary for capital expenditures to maintain current revenue levels) generated by the Company. Historically, the Company has utilized these discretionary cash flows for growth-related capital expenditures, strategic acquisitions, and debt repayment.
The types of products and services that the Company provides are not subject to rapid technological change, which increases the stability of related cash flows. Additionally, the Company believes each business in its portfolio is a leader in the industries and major markets the Company serves. Due to these factors, the Company is confident in the Company's future ability to generate positive cash flows from operations.
Debt Covenants
The Senior Secured Credit Facility contains a consolidated net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant, which is not to exceed 5.75 at December 31, 2021, and a minimum consolidated adjusted EBITDA to consolidated interest charges ratio covenant, which is not to be less than 3.0. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with these covenants as the net leverage ratio was 4.6 to 1.0 and interest coverage ratio was 4.4 to 1.0. Based on balances and covenants in effect at December 31, 2021, the Company could increase net debt by $338.6 million and still be in compliance with these debt covenants. Alternatively, adjusted EBITDA could decrease by $58.9 million, and the Company would remain in compliance with these covenants. The Company has estimated the negative impact of COVID-19 on its financial position, results of operations and cash flows, and believes it will continue to maintain compliance with these covenants based on its current outlook. However, the Company's estimates of compliance with these covenants could change in the future with a deterioration in economic conditions including as a result of COVID-19 and the related impacts.
Cash Management
The Company has various cash management systems throughout the world that centralize cash in various bank accounts where it is economically justifiable and legally permissible to do so. These centralized cash balances are then redeployed to other operations to reduce short-term borrowings and to finance working capital needs or capital expenditures. Due to the transitory nature of cash balances, they are normally invested in bank deposits that can be withdrawn at will or in very liquid short-term bank time deposits and government obligations. The Company's policy is to use the largest banks in the various countries in which the Company operates. The Company monitors the creditworthiness of banks and, when appropriate, will adjust banking operations to reduce or eliminate exposure to less creditworthy banks.
At December 31, 2021, the Company's consolidated cash and cash equivalents included $80.8 million held by non-U.S. subsidiaries. At December 31, 2021, approximately 4% of the Company's consolidated cash and cash equivalents had regulatory restrictions that would preclude the transfer of funds with and among subsidiaries. Non-U.S. subsidiaries also held $24.4 million of cash and cash equivalents in consolidated strategic ventures. The strategic venture agreements may require strategic venture partner approval to transfer funds with and among subsidiaries. While the Company's remaining non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents can be transferred with and among subsidiaries, the majority of these non-U.S. cash balances will be used to support the ongoing working capital needs and continued growth of the Company's non-U.S. operations.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its critical accounting estimates, including those related to defined benefit pension benefits, notes and accounts receivable, fair value estimates for business combinations and goodwill, long-lived asset impairment, inventories, revenue recognition - cost-to-cost method, insurance reserves and income taxes. The impact of changes in these estimates, as necessary, is reflected in the respective segment's results of operations in the period of the change. The Company bases estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different outcomes, assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies are affected by the Company's more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. Management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates described below with the Audit Committee of the Board and they have reviewed the Company's disclosures relating to these estimates in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition. These items should be read in conjunction with Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Defined Benefit Pension Benefits
The Company has defined benefit pension plans in several countries. The largest of these plans are in the U.K. and the U.S. The Company's funding policy for these plans is to contribute amounts sufficient to meet the minimum funding pursuant to U.K. and U.S. statutory requirements, plus any additional amounts that the Company may determine to be appropriate.
Changes in the discount rate assumption and the actual performance of plan assets compared with the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are the primary drivers in the change in funded status of the Company's defined benefit pension plans. These factors are components of actuarial loss (gain) and impact the amount recognized in OCI, as such actuarial changes are not reflected directly on the Consolidated Statements of Operations but amortized over time in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Critical Estimate-Defined Benefit Pension Benefits
Accounting for defined benefit pension plans requires the use of actuarial assumptions. The principal assumptions used include the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Each assumption is reviewed annually and represents management's best estimate at that time. The assumptions are selected to represent the average expected experience over time and may differ, in any one year, from actual experience due to changes in capital markets and the overall economy. These differences will impact the amount of unfunded benefit obligation and the NPPC recognized.
The discount rates used in calculating the Company's projected benefit obligations at the December 31, 2021 measurement date for the U.K. and U.S. defined benefit pension plans were 1.8% and 2.7%, respectively, and the global weighted-average discount rate was 2.1%. The discount rates selected represent level-equivalent rates using the yield curve spot rates on a year-by-year expected cash flow basis, using yield curves of high-quality corporate bonds. Annual NPPC is determined using the
discount rates at the beginning of the year. The discount rates for 2021 NPPC were 1.4% for the U.K. plan, 2.4% for the U.S. plans and 1.6% for the global weighted-average of plans.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by evaluating the asset return expectations with the Company's advisors as well as actual, long-term, historical results of asset returns for the pension plans. Generally, the NPPC increases as the expected long-term rate of return on assets decreases. For 2021 and 2020, the global weighted-average expected long-term rate of return on asset assumption was 5.1% and 5.6%, respectively. This rate was determined based on a model of expected asset returns for an actively managed portfolio.
Changes in NPPC may occur in the future due to changes in actuarial assumptions and due to changes in returns on plan assets resulting from financial market conditions. Holding all other assumptions constant, using December 31, 2021 plan data, a one-quarter percent increase or decrease in the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would increase or decrease annual 2022 pre-tax defined benefit NPPC (expense) as follows:
Increases or decreases to net pension obligations may be required should circumstances that affect these estimates change. Additionally, certain events could result in the pension obligation changing at a time other than the annual measurement date. This would occur when a benefit plan is amended or when plan curtailments or settlements occur.
See Note 10, Employee Benefit Plans, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at net realizable value, which represents the face value of the receivable less an allowance for expected credit losses. The allowance for expected credit losses is maintained for expected lifetime losses resulting from the inability or unwillingness of customers to make required payments.
The Company’s expected credit loss allowance methodology for accounts receivable is developed using historical collection experience, current and future economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of customers' trade accounts receivables. When required, the Company adjusts the loss-rate methodology to account for current conditions and reasonable and supportable expectations of future economic and market conditions. The Company generally assesses future economic conditions for a period which corresponds with the contractual life of its accounts receivable. Additionally, specific allowance amounts are established to record the appropriate provision for customers that have a higher probability of default.
Prior to the adoption of the expected credit loss allowance methodology on January 1, 2020, the Company established an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a specific-identification method, as well as historical collection experience, as appropriate. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, trade accounts receivable of $377.9 million and $355.3 million, respectively, were net of reserves of $7.3 million and $7.5 million, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Notes and Accounts Receivable
A considerable amount of judgment is required to assess the realizability of receivables, including the current creditworthiness of each customer, related aging of past due balances and the facts and circumstances surrounding any non-payment. The Company's provisions for expected credit losses and doubtful accounts during 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $0.6 million, $2.0 million and $7.1 million, respectively.
On at least a quarterly basis, customer accounts are analyzed for collectability. Reserves are established based upon the expected credit loss allowance methodology noted above. Reserves are based on the facts available to the Company and are re-evaluated and adjusted as additional information becomes available. Specific issues are discussed with corporate management and any significant changes in reserve amounts or the write-off of balances must be approved by specifically designated corporate personnel. All approved items are monitored to ensure they are recorded in the proper period. Additionally, any significant changes in reserve balances are reviewed to ensure the proper corporate approval has occurred.
If the financial condition of the Company's customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Conversely, an improvement in a customer's ability to make payments could result in a decrease of the allowance for doubtful accounts. Changes in the allowance for doubtful accounts related to both of these situations would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the change was determined.
See Note 4, Accounts Receivable and Note Receivable, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Fair Value Estimates for Business Combinations and Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests, be recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. During 2020, the Company acquired 100% of ESOL, an established waste transportation, processing and services provider with a comprehensive portfolio of disposal solutions for customers primarily across the industrial, retail and healthcare markets. During 2019, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of Clean Earth, one of the largest U.S. providers of specialty waste processing and beneficial reuse solutions for hazardous wastes, and soil and dredged materials. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information.
The Company's goodwill balances were $883.1 million and $889.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company performs its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1.
Critical Estimate-Business Combinations and Goodwill
The acquisition method of accounting requires the excess of purchase price over the fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities to be recorded as goodwill. The determination of fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires numerous estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of cash flow projections, revenue growth rates, customer attrition rates, discount rates and useful lives. Such estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable and, when appropriate, include assistance from independent third-party valuation firms. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with corresponding offsets to goodwill. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information regarding the purchase price allocation related to acquisitions.
In accordance with U.S. GAAP, goodwill is not amortized and is tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist or if a decision is made to dispose of a business. Goodwill is allocated among and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include declining cash flows or operating losses at the reporting unit level, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel or a more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of, among others.
In applying the goodwill impairment test, the Company has the option to perform a qualitative test or a quantitative test. Under the qualitative test, the Company assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors may include, but are not limited to, economic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance of the reporting unit, and other entity and reporting unit specific events. If after assessing these qualitative factors, the Company determines it is “more-likely-than-not” that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the Company would perform a quantitative test.
The quantitative approach of testing for goodwill impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to the net book value, including goodwill. The Company uses a discounted cash flow model (“DCF model”) to estimate the current fair value of reporting units, as management believes forecasted operating cash flows are the best indicator of current fair value. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the preparation of DCF models including future revenues and operating margin growth, the weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”), tax rates, capital spending, pension funding, the impact of business initiatives and working capital projections. These assumptions and estimates may vary significantly among reporting units. DCF models are based on approved long-range plans for the early years and historical relationships and projections for later years. WACC rates are derived from internal and external factors including, but not limited to, the average market price of the Company's stock, shares outstanding, book value of the Company's debt, the long-term risk-free interest rate, and both market and size-specific risk premiums. Due to the many variables noted above and the relative size of the Company's goodwill, differences in assumptions may have a material impact on the results of the Company's annual goodwill impairment testing. If the net book value of a reporting unit were to exceed the current fair value, then an impairment charge would be recognized as the difference between the fair value and the net book value.
The performance of the Company’s 2021 annual impairment tests did not result in any impairment of the Company’s goodwill.
See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information.
Long-lived Asset Impairment (Other than Goodwill)
Long-lived assets (or asset groups) are reviewed for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the book value of an asset (or asset group) may be impaired. The amounts charged against pre-tax income from continuing operations related to impaired long-lived assets (or asset groups) included in Other (income) expenses, net on the Consolidated Statements of Operations were $1.0 million, $0.8 million and $0.6 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Asset Impairment
The determination of a long-lived asset (or asset group) impairment involves significant judgments based upon short-term and long-term projections of future asset (or asset group) performance. If the undiscounted cash flows associated with an asset (or asset group) do not exceed the asset's book value, impairment loss estimates would be based upon the difference between the book value and fair value of the asset (or asset group). The fair value is generally based upon the Company's estimate of the amount that the assets (or asset group) could be bought or sold for in a transaction between willing parties. If quoted market prices for the asset (or asset group) or similar assets are unavailable, the fair value estimate is generally calculated using a DCF model. Should circumstances change that affect these estimates, additional impairment charges may be required and would be recorded through income in the period the change was determined.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating long-lived asset impairments for the years presented. U.S. GAAP requires consideration of all valuation techniques for which market participant inputs can be obtained without undue cost and effort. The use of a DCF model continues to be an appropriate method for determining fair value; however, methodologies such as quoted market prices must also be evaluated.
Because of the lower-than-expected results for the Altek Group of the Harsco Environmental Segment for 2021 due to the timing of customer orders, the Company tested Altek’s asset group's recoverability in the fourth quarter of 2021. The asset group primarily consists of intangible assets which had a carrying value of $39.9 million at the measurement date. Recoverability of the carrying value of the asset groups was based upon estimated future cash flows while taking into consideration various assumptions and estimates, including future use of the assets, remaining useful life of the assets, and eventual disposition of the assets. Undiscounted estimated cash flows of the Altek asset group exceeded the carrying value, therefore, no impairment was recorded. If actual results prove inconsistent with the Company’s assumptions and judgments, it could result in impairment of the Altek intangible assets in future periods.
See Note 18, Other (Income) Expenses, Net in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Inventories
Inventory balances are adjusted for estimated obsolete or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and its net realizable value or estimated market value, as applicable. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, inventories of $70.5 million and $61.0 million, respectively, are net of reserves of $5.1 million and $4.7 million, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Inventories
In assessing the realization of inventory balances, the Company is required to make judgments as to future demand and compare these with current or committed inventory levels. If actual market conditions are determined to be less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the determination is made. Additionally, the Company records reserves to adjust a substantial portion of its U.S. inventory balances to the LIFO method of inventory valuation. In adjusting these reserves throughout the year, the Company estimates its year-end inventory costs and quantities. At December 31 of each year, the reserves are adjusted to reflect actual year-end inventory costs and quantities. During periods of inflation, LIFO expense usually increases and during periods of deflation it decreases. These year-end adjustments resulted in pre-tax expense of $0.5 million in 2021, pre-tax income of $0.2 million in 2020 and pre-tax income of $0.4 million in 2019.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating inventory reserves for the years presented. See Note 5, Inventories, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Revenue Recognition - Cost-to-Cost Method
For certain contracts with customers, which meet specific criteria established in U.S. GAAP, the Company recognizes revenue on an over time basis utilizing an input method based on costs incurred (“cost-to-cost method”) to measure progress, which
requires the Company to make estimates regarding the revenues and costs associated with design, manufacturing and delivery of products.
Critical Estimate-Revenue Recognition - Cost-to-Cost Method
The Company uses the cost-to-cost method to measure progress because it is the measure that best depicts the transfer of control to the customer, which occurs as the Company incurs costs under the contracts. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is based on the ratio of costs incurred to total estimated costs at completion which includes both actual costs already incurred and the estimated costs to complete. Accounting for contracts with customers using the cost-to-cost method requires significant judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues (including estimates of variable consideration, if applicable, as well as estimating any liquidating damages or penalties related to performance); estimating contract costs (including estimating engineering costs to design the machine and the material, labor and overhead manufacturing costs to build the machine); making assumptions for schedule and technical items; properly executing the engineering and design phases consistent with customer expectations; the availability and costs of labor and material resources; productivity; and evaluating whether a significant financing component is present. Due to the number of years it may take to complete certain contracts and the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on those contracts, primarily in the former Harsco Rail Segment's business, estimating total revenues and costs at completion is inherently complicated and subject to many variables. Accordingly, estimates are subject to change as experience is gained and as more information is obtained, even though the scope of the work under the contract may not have changed. When adjustments in estimated total contract sales or estimated total costs are required, any changes from prior estimates are recognized in current period earnings for the inception-to-date effect of such changes. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract using the cost-to-cost method exceed estimates of total sales to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in current period earnings when the loss is determined. Railway track maintenance equipment revenue of approximately $102 million was recognized using the cost-to-cost method in 2021, the net profit or loss of which is included, in Income (loss) from discontinued businesses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
The Company's former Harsco Rail Segment is currently manufacturing highly-engineered equipment under large long-term fixed-price contracts with the SBB, the infrastructure manager for most of the railway in the U.K. ("Network Rail"), and the national railway company in Germany ("Deutsche Bahn"). Post-engineering, the Company has made significant progress in the development of the prototype/initial units for certain portions of these contracts during the fourth quarter of 2021, which has provided clarity in terms of material requirements and associated cost impacts. As a result, in the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recognized estimate forward loss provisions related to these contracts of $33.4 million. The principal driver of the provisions was recent expected cost inflation for all contracts, including for vendors in Europe who perform the manufacturing and assembly of certain equipment under these contracts. In addition, the estimate for liquidated damages for delivery delays for the Network Rail contract was increased based on the current status of negotiations with the customer during the quarter, as well as delayed prototype build and the resulting delayed delivery schedule. The estimated forward loss provision represents the Company's best estimate based on currently available information. It is possible that the Company's overall estimate of costs to complete these contracts may increase, which would result in an additional estimated forward loss provision at such time.
The first contract with SBB is complete, and the second contract with SBB is 78% complete as of December 31, 2021. The contracts with Network Rail and Deutsche Bahn are 42% and 18% complete, respectively, as of December 31, 2021.
Insurance Reserves
The Company retains a significant portion of the risk for U.S. workers' compensation, U.K. employers' liability, automobile, general and product liability losses. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded liabilities of $28.3 million and $27.3 million, respectively, related to both asserted and unasserted insurance claims. At December 31, 2021 and 2020,
$4.1 million and $5.2 million, respectively, was included in insurance liabilities related to claims covered by insurance carriers for which a corresponding receivable has been recorded.
Critical Estimate-Insurance Reserves
Insurance reserves have been recorded based upon actuarial calculations that reflect the undiscounted estimated liabilities for ultimate losses, including claims incurred but not reported. Inherent in these estimates are assumptions that are based on the Company's history of claims and losses, a detailed analysis of existing claims with respect to potential value and current legal and legislative trends. If actual claims differ from those projected by management, increases or decreases to insurance reserves may be required and would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the change was determined. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded insurance reserve adjustments that decreased pre-tax insurance expense from continuing operations for self-insured programs by $0.2 million, $1.3 million and $0.8 million, respectively. The Company has programs in place to improve claims experience, such as disciplined claim and insurance litigation management and a focused approach to workplace safety.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating insurance reserves for the years presented. There are currently no known trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that are reasonably likely to occur that would materially affect the methodology or assumptions described above. See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Income Taxes
The Company's income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for uncertain tax positions reflect management's best estimate of taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to various international, federal, state and local income taxes in jurisdictions where the Company operates. In determining income tax expense, the Company makes its best estimate of the annual effective income tax rate at the end of each quarter and applies that rate to year-to-date income (loss) before income taxes to arrive at the year-to-date income tax provision (exclusive of loss jurisdictions for which no tax benefit is realizable with any discrete tax items recorded separately). At December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company's annual effective income tax rate on income from continuing operations was 24.2%, 16.0% and 41.0%, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Income Taxes
Annual effective income tax rates are estimated by giving recognition to currently enacted tax rates, tax holidays, tax credits, capital losses and tax deductions as well as certain exempt income and non-deductible expenses for all jurisdictions where the Company operates. Quarterly income tax provisions incorporate any change in the year-to-date provision from the previous quarterly periods.
The Company records deferred tax assets to the extent the Company believes these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determinations, the Company considers all available evidence, including future reversals of existing deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, feasible and prudent tax planning strategies and recent financial operating results. If the Company determines that it will not be able to realize deferred income tax assets in the future, a valuation allowance is recorded. If sufficient positive evidence arises in the future indicating that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets meet the more likely than not standard for realization, the valuation allowance would be reduced accordingly in the period that such a conclusion is reached.
Valuation allowances of $92.4 million and $108.6 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related principally to deferred tax assets for pension liabilities, NOLs, foreign tax credit carryforwards and foreign currency translation that are uncertain as to realizability. In 2021, the Company recorded a valuation allowance reduction of $19.3 million related to current year pension adjustment recorded through AOCI, a valuation allowance reduction of $6.8 million in Brazil where the Company determined that it is more likely than not that these assets will be realized, and a valuation allowance reduction of $3.5 million from the effects of foreign currency translation adjustments, partially offset by a $14.4 million valuation allowance increase related to the UK tax rate change, and a $4.8 million valuation allowance related to disallowed interest expense.
An income tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on its technical merits. The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $3.1 and $2.9 million, respectively, excluding accrued interest and penalties. The unrecognized income tax benefit may decrease as a result of the lapse of statute of limitations or as a result of final settlement and resolution of outstanding tax matters in various state and international jurisdictions.
The Company has not materially changed the methodology for calculating income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for uncertain tax positions for the years presented or for quarterly periods. See Note 11, Income Taxes, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information on recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards is included in Note 2, Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."