ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Further, you should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. See also “Forward-Looking Statements”. All information is stated in U.S. dollars unless otherwise specified.
Overview
We are a neurotechnology company focused on neurological wellness. Our purpose is to develop, license or acquire non-implanted technologies targeted at reducing symptoms of neurological disease or trauma.
Our product, known as the PoNS, is an innovative non-implanted medical device, inclusive of a controller and mouthpiece, which delivers mild electrical stimulation to the surface of the tongue to provide treatment of gait deficit and is indicated for use in the U.S. as a short term treatment of gait deficit due to mild-to-moderate symptoms from MS and is to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program in patients 22 years of age and over by prescription only. We are currently accepting prescriptions for PoNS in the U.S. and we anticipate our first commercial sales to occur in the near term. PoNS is authorized for sale in Canada for two indications: (i) for use as a short term treatment (14 weeks) of chronic balance deficit due to mmTBI and is to be used in conjunction with physical therapy (PoNS Therapy); and (ii) for use as a short term treatment (14 weeks) of gait deficit due to mild and moderate symptoms from MS and it is to be used in conjunction with physical therapy. It has been commercially available in Canada since March 2019. PoNS is authorized for sale as a Class IIa medical device in Australia and we are currently seeking a business partner to commercialize and distribute PoNS in Australia.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net loss was $18.1 million and $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $137.0 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance the PoNS Therapy and seek regulatory clearance and pursue its commercialization. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the successful commercialization of PoNS Therapy in the U.S., as we expect that the revenue opportunity in the U.S. is significantly greater than in Canada. Further, we may incur expenses in connection with the in-license or acquisition of other potential products. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information.
Business Update
U.S. Regulatory Status: MS
On May 7, 2020 we received Breakthrough Designation for the PoNS device as a potential treatment for gait deficit due to symptoms of MS, to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program. The goal of the Breakthrough Devices Program is to provide patients and health care providers with timely access to these medical devices by speeding up their development, assessment, and review, while preserving the statutory standards for premarket approval, 510(k) clearance, and de novo classification and clearance, consistent with FDA’s mission to protect and promote public health.
On March 26, 2021, we received marketing authorization from the FDA of the PoNS device. The PoNS device is indicated for use as a short term treatment of gait deficit due to mild-to-moderate symptoms of MS and is to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program in patients 22 years of age and over by prescription only.
In September 2021, we initiated activities to setup and implement a new study as part of a Therapeutic Experience Program, or TEP, with NYU Langone Health as our first Center of Excellence clinical site.
U.S. Regulatory Status: Stroke
In August 2021, we received Breakthrough Designation for the PoNS device as a potential treatment for dynamic gait and balance deficits due to symptoms from stroke, to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program in patients 22 years of age and over. With Breakthrough Designation received, a clinical trial of PoNS therapy in stroke patients in collaboration with Medical University of South Carolina is planned to commence in the second quarter of 2022 with initial patient enrollments beginning in the second half of 2022.
U.S. Regulatory Status: mmTBI
Our U.S. regulatory strategy initially focused on pursuing de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device from the FDA for the treatment of balance deficit due to mmTBI.
We submitted a request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device to the FDA for this indication in August 2018. This request was supported by data from two of our clinical trials in mmTBI, including our registrational trial, TBI-001.
In April 2019, we announced that the FDA had completed its review and had denied our request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device for the treatment of balance deficit due to mmTBI. In reaching its conclusion, the FDA noted, via a denial letter, that although the safety profile of the PoNS device is acceptable, the FDA did not have sufficient information to discern the relative independent contributions of the PoNS device and physical therapy on the improvements from baseline. The FDA noted that we could generate additional data to address its concerns and resubmit our application.
In October 2019, we had a pre-submission meeting where the FDA provided feedback needed to help complete the design of a new clinical trial intended to address the FDA’s request for a trial that demonstrates the benefit of the PoNS Therapy compared to physical therapy alone. In January 2020, we received the FDA’s feedback on the minutes from the October 2019 pre-submission meeting. In its feedback, the FDA provided post-meeting notes with specific recommendations regarding the trial design that were not discussed in the October 2019 pre-submission meeting.
Based on the receipt of the FDA’s final minutes from the pre-submission meeting, we are assessing the feasibility of a clinical program to advance the development of a study aimed to obtain clearance for gait and balance deficits in mmTBI if nondilutive financing to fund the program becomes available.
European Regulatory Status
In December 2018, we submitted an application for a CE Mark, which, if approved, would allow us to market the PoNS device in the EU. During the second quarter of 2019, we engaged with regulators in Europe to answer questions that we received from them as part of their review of our PoNS device for CE marking. In August 2019, we withdrew our application from the EU marketing process due to uncertainty in Europe caused by the switch from the Medical Device Directive, or MDD, to the Medical Device Regulation, or MDR, Brexit, and the withdrawal of Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance, our notified body, from the EU notified body business. We have engaged G-MED NA (North America) as our new ISO registrar and will reconsider submitting to the EU when conditions stabilize.
Australian Regulatory Status
In the third quarter of 2019, we initiated the submission of our application to the TGA. We supplemented our submission with additional data based on questions supplied to date and provided responses to additional questions during the third quarter of 2020. In November 2021, we received market authorization from the TGA for the sale of PoNS as a Class IIa medical device. In Australia, the PoNS device is indicated for short term use by healthcare professionals as an adjunct to a therapeutic exercise program to improve balance and gait. PoNS is not intended to be used alone without an exercise program. We are working to establish a distribution partner for Australia but currently do not expect to have commercial sales of PoNS in Australia in 2022.
Canadian Commercialization Efforts
Following in-depth market analysis and field intelligence, our Canadian commercial team began an expansion plan to increase the number of authorized PoNS clinics. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we authorized 6 new clinical locations to have 37 clinic locations across Canada as of December 31, 2021. In addition to continuing to increase the number of clinic locations, we have shifted our focus to driving patient throughput to these clinics. Sales performance in Canada continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to space restrictions that the provincial governments have imposed as well as the risk tolerance of patients and therapists.
In collaboration with Toronto Rehabilitation Institute (part of University Health Network) we are continuing our clinical experience program, the results of which we will look to publish in 2022.
We continue to refine our go-to-market pricing model. In 2020, we implemented a modified pricing approach which is focused on reducing the need for clinics and patients to pay large, upfront costs at the start of treatment. We have also experimented with various promotional pricing programs resulting in lower unit prices for both PoNS system purchases and mouthpieces in order to increase access to the PoNS Therapy and drive market awareness which we believe resulted in an increase in the volume of units sold, beginning in the second half of 2020. We extended the promotional pricing through the end of 2021 including any order placed but not fulfilled before December 31, 2021. The promotional pricing was discontinued in 2022 with new pricing established.
The value dossiers for mmTBI and MS that were created in mid-2020 to fully demonstrate in both scientific and financial terms, the merits of PoNS Therapy for claimants are now being utilized along with submissions from clinics on behalf of their patients. The dossiers are provided to our clinics across Canada to submit as part of treatment plans with reimbursement applications to the payer community. Our reimbursement strategy for mmTBI is focused initially on the auto collision insurance and workers’ compensation, or WC, market as well as long-term disability cases. Our reimbursement strategy for MS is focused on commercial insurers/extended health benefits.
As part of our overall PoNS Therapy strategy, we are also gathering comprehensive health economic assessments of treatment outcomes. These data will, in-turn, be used to support our applications for WC, auto insurance and commercial insurance reimbursement initiatives in Canada, the U.S. and other markets around the world. We believe the Canadian commercial experience will be extremely valuable to prepare us for our launches in the U.S. and internationally.
The real-world results from the collective experience of our patients that have completed the 14-week PoNS Therapy in Canada thus far, have been encouraging. Consistent with what we observed in our two clinical trials, one for 5 weeks and the other for 14 weeks, commercial MS and mmTBI patients demonstrated improvements in balance and gait within the first two weeks followed by continued improvement over the following twelve weeks. The majority of patients had a mean patient adherence to treatment of over 90% and showed significant improvement in their balance and gait with a meaningful clinical difference at the end of their treatment. The consistency of the patient results from our initial commercial experience supports our plans to expand access PoNS Therapy in Canada.
U.S. Commercialization Efforts
As previously stated, on March 26, 2021, we received marketing authorization from the FDA for the PoNS device. The PoNS device is indicated for use as a short term treatment of gait deficit due to mild-to-moderate symptoms of MS and is to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program in patients 22 years of age and over by prescription only.
Throughout the pre-commercial phase during 2021, we developed and refined our commercial strategy including a focus on payer strategy, both government and commercial, securing distribution licenses in various states and beginning to build relationships with key large neurorehabilitation centers, which focus on treatment of MS patients. We continue to generate data on outcomes of the PoNS Therapy generated from treatment of patients in Canada and ensuring that our scientific data is presented at many of the key national and international neurology and neuromodulation meetings. We believe this scientific dissemination may begin to pave the way to establishing the PoNS Therapy as the standard of care for the treatment of MS-related gait deficit.
We are currently accepting prescriptions for PoNS in the United States, and we anticipate our first commercial sales in the near term. We have targeted specific Key Opinion Leaders (i.e., neurologists and physiatrists) and their associated neurorehabilitation centers, where selected physical therapists will be trained to deliver the PoNS Therapy. Importantly, this focused strategy will also allow us to measure patient outcomes to determine if they are similar to those observed in our clinical trials. To further develop and implement the PoNS commercialization strategy, we have hired a Vice President of Sales and Marketing, North America, have identified the initial launch areas within the U.S., and we have continued to build out our commercial team, including field sales, reimbursement specialists, and marketing and operational support commensurate with PoNS sales activity.
Material Trends and Uncertainties
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic, which has spread throughout the U.S. and around the world. The Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition have been and may continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and global economic conditions. The outbreak and spread of COVID-19 has significantly increased economic uncertainty. Authorities implemented, and continue to implement, numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place orders, and business shutdowns. The COVID-19 pandemic initially led to the closure of PoNS authorized clinic locations across Canada from March until June 2020. Patients who completed their initial training in the clinics prior to the closures were able to continue working independently in the at-home portion of the treatment, with remote check-ins with their certified therapists. While all clinics have re-opened, as of December 31, 2021, they were all operating at reduced capacity, which limited operations to 50% capacity during the second half of 2021. Some patients have begun to return to these clinics for treatment, but patients have been and may continue to be less willing to return to the clinics due to COVID-19, impacting our commercial activities and our customer engagement efforts. This was especially true in the first half of 2021, as cases of COVID-19 increased significantly in Canada and additional restrictions, shelter in place orders, and business shutdowns were imposed. The rate of vaccination increased throughout all provinces throughout 2021, facilitating the lifting of some of the previously imposed restrictions. Thus far during the first quarter of 2022, capacity has remained at the 50% threshold with the expectation that the capacity limit will increase as provinces continue to lift restrictions. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 and adjust our operations as the circumstances change.
We have expanded our services to include remote training and treatment, but the long-term viability of these remote programs is still being assessed. Additionally, current and planned clinical experience programs and clinical trials have experienced and may continue to experience delays in the programs as trial participant attendance has generally decreased as a result of the pandemic, and clinics and clinical research sites have experienced delays and difficulties in recruiting and re-hiring clinical site staff.
The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to cause delays in or the suspension of our business partners manufacturing operations, our research and product development activities, our regulatory workstreams, our research and development activities and other important commercial functions. We are also dependent upon our suppliers for the manufacture of our PoNS device. In the second quarter of 2020, two of our business partners diverted resources towards other activities related to COVID-19, resulting in delays in our product development activities. Such diversion of suppliers’ resources may occur again in the future, and the pandemic could limit our suppliers’ ability to travel or ship materials or force temporary closure of facilities that we rely upon. Manufacturing delays have occurred and may also occur as the result of labor shortages. Two of our suppliers experienced significant labor shortages as a result of COVID-19 from the end of November 2021 through early January 2022 which reduced the available resources needed to build and test product resulting in production delays of the PoNS devices. Disruptions in business operations or governmental operations due to COVID-19 may delay the timing for the submission and approval of our marketing applications with regulatory agencies. Further, the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our ability to access the public markets and obtain necessary capital in order to properly capitalize and continue our operations.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, including our U.S. commercial launch and sales in Canada, as well as our results of operations and our financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. We do not yet know the full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, operations or the global economy as a whole.
Other Trends and Uncertainties
Beginning in late 2021, production delays began to negatively impact the ability of our contract manufacturer to successfully ramp up production during 2022 to fulfill orders for both commercial sales and clinical trials, which has been exacerbated by both labor and supply chain shortages currently being experienced by many industries in the U.S.
To successfully commercialize, we need to continue to build infrastructure necessary to grow our business including adding headcount and implementing or upgrading business systems. Competition for talent in today’s labor market may impact our ability to add headcount and to recruit talent with the expertise we need to develop our commercial infrastructure.
In response to the aforementioned challenges and trends, we have supplemented our personnel including quality resources at our contract manufacturer. Additionally, we continue to actively recruit and source candidates to fill positions as we build out our team to support our anticipated growth.
Financings
See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for information regarding our financing activities in 2021.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have three categories of revenue: Product Sales, Fee Revenue and License Revenue. Product Sales is derived from the sale of the PoNS device. Fee Revenue was derived from franchise fees from new neuroplasticity clinics engaged in providing the PoNS Therapy. This practice ended during the first quarter of 2020. License Revenue is recognized ratably over the ten-year term as the performance obligation is met in connection with the Co-Promotion Agreement as a result of the Heuro acquisition. We expect our revenue will increase substantially over historical levels throughout 2022 as a result of the commercialization of PoNS Therapy in the U.S.
Cost of Sales
Cost of product sales includes the cost to manufacture the PoNS device, royalty expense, freight charges, customs duties as well as wages and salaries of employees involved in the management of the supply chain and logistics of fulfilling sales orders. We expect cost of sales to increase as a result of increased sales of PoNS devices in the U.S.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product. We expense R&D costs as incurred. These expenses include:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
•
outsourced professional scientific development services;
•
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•
expenses relating to product development and manufacturing of clinical trial devices;
•
expenses relating to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies; and
•
laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities.
R&D activities are central to our business model. Products in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage registrational clinical trials. We expect our R&D expenses to continue to increase over the next several years as we increase personnel costs, conduct feasibility and pilot studies and registrational clinical trials for our existing and additional indications, invest in our product development and manufacturing-related expenses and prepare regulatory filings for our products in additional indications. Our expenditures are subject to certain uncertainties, including those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, commercial operations, finance and legal functions, including stock-based compensation, and travel expenses. Other G&A expenses include facility related costs, professional fees for legal, auditing and tax services, consulting, professional services and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our SG&A expenses will increase as a result of increased personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting services related to our commercial operations, legal and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing and SEC requirements, accounting and investor relations costs, and director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense consists of the periodic amortization of intangible assets, including customer relationships and proprietary software recognized in connection with the acquisition of Heuro on October 30, 2019 and internally developed software. The customer relationships, proprietary software and reacquired rights recognized in connection with the acquisition of Heuro had remaining useful lives at acquisition of 1.25 years, 5 years and 3.87 years, respectively. They are amortized using the straight-line method. The customer relationships intangible asset became fully amortized and was written off during the first quarter of 2021. The internally developed software has a useful life of 3 years and is amortized using the straight-line method.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This preparation requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. U.S. GAAP provides the framework from which to make these estimates, assumption and disclosures. We choose accounting policies within U.S. GAAP that management believes are appropriate to accurately and fairly report our operating results and financial position in a consistent manner. Management regularly assesses these policies in light of current and forecasted economic conditions. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management. While there are a number of significant accounting policies affecting our financial statements, we believe the critical accounting policies involving the most complex, difficult and subjective estimates and judgments are: revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, derivative financial instruments, accounting for warrants and goodwill and other intangible assets.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with FASB’s ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”), we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We apply the five-step model to contracts when we determine that it is probable we will collect substantially all of the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price, after consideration of variability and constraints, if any, that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Sales
Product sales were derived from the sale of the PoNS device to clinics in Canada. According to the supply agreement with each of these clinics, our performance obligation was met when we delivered the PoNS device to the clinic’s facility and the clinic assumed title of the PoNS device upon acceptance. As such, revenue is recognized at a point in time. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight before control of a product has been transferred to a customer are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales. Our payment terms are defined within each customer’s supply agreement and are all 30 days or less. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $0.6 million in product sales. As of December 31, 2020, the control of 21 of the 55 PoNS devices included as consideration in the Heuro acquisition had been transferred resulting in revenue of $0.1 million being recognized which is included in the aforementioned $0.6 million in product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $0.5 million in product sales. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the control of an additional 18 of the 55 PoNS devices included as consideration in the Heuro acquisition had been transferred resulting in revenue of $0.1 million being recognized which is included in the aforementioned $0.5 million in product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021. The fair value of the remaining 16 devices is recorded as deferred revenue of $0.1 million on the consolidated balance sheet. Revenue will be recognized for these devices as control is transferred. The only returns during 2021 were the result of warranty returns for defective products. These returns were insignificant during the year and any future replacements are expected to be insignificant.
Fee Revenue
During the first half of 2020, we earned fee revenue for engaging new neuroplasticity clinics to provide the PoNS Therapy. These agreements were terminated in the second quarter of 2020.
License Revenue
As described above, in connection with the Heuro acquisition, we entered into a Clinical Research and Co-Promotion Agreement with HTC (the “Co-Promotion Agreement”). The Co-Promotion Agreement had a fair value of CAD$360 thousand at the time of acquisition and a ten-year term. License revenue has been recognized ratably over the ten-year term of the Co-Promotion Agreement as the performance obligation is met.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payments and awards under the fair value-based method. We recognize our stock-based compensation expense using the straight-line method. Compensation cost is not adjusted for estimated forfeitures, but instead is adjusted upon an actual forfeiture of a stock option.
We account for the granting of stock options to employees and non-employees using the fair value method whereby all awards are measured at fair value on the date of the grant. The fair value of all employee-related stock options is expensed over the requisite service period with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in capital. Upon exercise of stock options, the consideration paid by the option holder, together with the amount previously recognized in additional paid-in capital is recorded as an increase to common stock, while the par value of the shares received is reclassified from additional paid in capital. Stock options granted to employees are accounted for as liabilities when they contain conditions or other features that are indexed to other than a market, performance or service conditions.
Stock-based payments to non-employees are measured based on the fair value of the equity instrument issued. Compensation expense for non-employee stock awards is recognized over the requisite service period following the measurement of the fair value on the grant date.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to calculate the fair value of stock options. The use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected term of the option, risk-free interest rates, the value of the common stock and expected dividend yield of the common stock. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Awards of options that provide for an exercise price that is not denominated in: (a) the currency of a market in which a substantial portion of the Company's equity securities trades, (b) the currency in which the employee's pay is denominated, or (c) the Company's functional currency, are required to be classified as liabilities.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments and other contracts to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the derivative is re-measured at each balance sheet date and recorded as a liability or asset and the change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Upon settlement of a derivative financial instrument, the instrument is re-measured at the settlement date and then that fair value of the underlying instrument is reclassified to equity.
The classification of derivative financial instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities/assets or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative financial instruments that become subject to reclassification are reclassified at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative financial instrument liabilities are classified in the consolidated balance sheet as current if the right to exercise or settle the derivative financial instrument lies with the holder.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value derivative financial instrument liabilities. This model uses Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy established by ASC 820 - Fair Value Measurement.
As of December 31, 2020, our derivative financial instruments accounted for in accordance with ASC 815 were comprised of warrants issued in connection with public securities offerings. The last of the warrants accounted for in accordance with ASC 815 expired in April 2021, and as such, as of December 31, 2021, we do not hold any derivative financial instruments accounted for in accordance with ASC 815.
Accounting for Warrants
We have issued and may continue to issue warrants to purchase shares of common stock through our public and private offerings. We account for such warrants in accordance with ASC 480 Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, which identifies three categories of freestanding financial instruments that are required to be accounted for as a liability. If determined to be classified as a liability, we will remeasure the fair value of the warrants at each balance sheet date. If determined to be classified as equity, the fair value of the warrants will be measured as of the date of issuance and will not be subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date.
The fair value of the warrants is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, based on the market value of the underlying common stock at the measurement dates, the contractual terms of the warrants, risk-free interest rates and expected volatility of the price of the underlying common stock. There are no expected dividends.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair values underlying net assets acquired in an acquisition. All of our goodwill as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021 is the result of the Heuro acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather will be tested annually for impairment or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We will test goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of each year using data as of October 1 of that year.
Goodwill is allocated to, and evaluated for impairment at our one identified reporting unit. Goodwill is tested for impairment by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a quantitative test. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of factors to determine whether it is “more likely than not” that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. We may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment for our reporting unit and perform the quantitative impairment test. The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires us to compare the carrying value of the reporting unit’s net assets to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit.
If the estimated fair value exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is required, and no impairment loss is recognized. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds the estimated fair value, the excess of the carrying value over the
estimated fair value is recorded as an impairment loss, the amount of which is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Our methodology for estimating the fair value of our reporting unit, if required, utilizes the income approach. The income approach is based on the Discounted Cash Flow, or DCF, method, which is based on the present value of future cash flows. The principal assumptions utilized in the DCF methodology include long-term growth rates, operating margins, discount rates and future economic and market conditions. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding forecasted cash flow, long-term growth rates and operating margins made for purposes of the annual goodwill impairment test will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. We believe the current assumptions and estimates utilized are both reasonable and appropriate.
Definite-lived intangibles consist principally of acquired customer relationships, reacquired rights and proprietary software as well as internally developed software. All are amortized straight-line over their estimated useful lives.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. The asset and liability method provide that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
We have adopted the provisions of ASC 740 Income Taxes regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. We initially recognize tax positions in the financial statements when it is more likely than not the position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Such tax positions are initially and subsequently measured as the largest amount of the tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority, assuming full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts. Application requires numerous estimates based on available information. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating its tax positions and tax benefits. These periodic adjustments may have a material impact on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. When applicable, we classify penalties and interest associated with uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense in its consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Going Concern
From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have generated approximately $2.6 million in revenue from the commercial sale of products or services. Because we have generated limited revenues from commercialization, our operations to date have been principally financed through public and private offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and exercises of options and warrants. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the successful commercialization of the PoNS device in the U.S.
These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. While we had $11.0 million of cash as of December 31, 2021, we do not currently have sufficient resources to accomplish all of the above conditions necessary for us to generate sufficient revenues to achieve profitability, and we expect that we will require additional financing to continue to fund our operations. There is no guarantee that such funding will be available at all or in sufficient amounts to satisfy our required expenditures. In reviewing this filing, you should carefully consider this uncertainty, the risks described in the section entitled “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and other risks described throughout this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized revenue of $0.5 million, of which $0.5 million was generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada pursuant to our executed supply agreements with neuroplasticity clinics in Canada and $29 thousand was generated from license fee revenue related to our co-promotion agreement with HTC. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized revenue of $0.7 million, of which $0.6 million was generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada pursuant to our executed supply agreements with neuroplasticity clinics in Canada and $27 thousand was generated from license fee revenue related to our co-promotion agreement with HTC. The decrease year-over-year in revenue generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada is the result of the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our product sales beginning in March 2020 as well as the impact of price changes focused on reducing the need for clinics and patients to pay large, upfront costs at the start of treatment.
Cost of Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $0.3 million in cost of sales, compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $0.1 million. The decrease is attributable to a decrease in sales during 2021 compared to 2020 combined with an inventory reserve of $0.2 million recorded in 2020, partially offset by an increase in overhead costs including wages and salaries of employees involved in the management of the supply chain.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses were $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $1.4 million. The increase was primarily driven by a $0.8 million increase in product development expenses, a $0.5 million increase in professional expenses and a $0.5 million increase in clinical trial expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $0.2 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense and a $0.2 million decrease in legal expenses compared to those incurred during 2020 as a result of the submission of our request to the FDA for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device for the treatment of gait deficit due to symptoms from MS.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses were $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.5 million. The increase was primarily due to a $1.9 million increase in our stock-based compensation expense and a $0.8 million increase in wages and salaries, both resulting primarily from the addition of key management and sales executives in the second and third quarters of 2021 preparing for the commercial launch of PoNS in the U.S. Approximately $1.0 million of the stock-based compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the June 2021 one-time fully vested stock option grant to our then Interim President and Chief Executive Office in recognition of his service since August 2020 and election to take no additional compensation and continue to be compensated as a non-employee director of the Company while serving in that capacity. These increases were partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in other operating expenses primarily as the result of the $0.2 million impairment of customer relationship intangible assets in the first quarter of 2020 and a $0.1 million loss as the result of the disposal of furniture and fixtures and leasehold improvements in the second quarter of 2020.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.2 million. The decrease is primarily the result of the customer relationships intangible asset becoming fully amortized during the first quarter of 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Financial Instruments
There was no change in fair value of derivative financial instruments for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants that qualified as derivatives required to be accounted for in accordance with ASC 815 (requiring the re-measurement of fair value at each balance sheet date) expired in April 2021 and had been valueless during the period. This compared to a gain of $4 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The change in fair value of our derivative financial instruments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable the change in our stock price, volatility and the number of derivative financial instruments being measured during the period (see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The change in the fair value of derivative financial instruments is a non-cash item.
Foreign Exchange Gain
Foreign exchange gain was $10 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gain of $189 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to fluctuations in the foreign exchange rate as it relates to the amount of Canadian dollars held at the end of each reporting period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We currently have limited working capital and liquid assets. The following table summarizes our cash and working capital (which we define as current assets less current liabilities excluding derivative financial instruments) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands):
From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have generated approximately $2.6 million in revenue from the commercial sale of products or services. Because we have generated limited revenues from commercialization, our operations to date have been principally financed through public and private offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and exercises of options and warrants. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the successful commercialization of PoNS Therapy in the U.S.
To date, our major sources of cash have been proceeds from various public and private offerings of our common stock and exercises of options and warrants. From June 2014 through December 31, 2021, we raised approximately $130.6 million in gross proceeds from various public and private offerings of our securities as well as the exercise of options and warrants, including during 2021, $21.3 million
in aggregate net proceeds from two public offerings, the exercise of options and warrants and the use of the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement.
In January 2021, 81,633 warrants issued in conjunction with the March 2020 registered direct offering were exercised at an exercise price of $16.10 for proceeds of $1.3 million.
On February 1, 2021, in an underwritten public offering (the “February 2021 Offering”), we issued 744,936 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 372,468 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $14.82 per unit, consisting of one share and a warrant to purchase 0.50 shares of common stock. The warrants have an initial exercise price of $16.302 per share and are exercisable for five years from the date of issuance. We also issued warrants to the underwriter to purchase 25,910 shares of common stock, with an exercise price of $18.525 per share. Net proceeds from the February 2021 Offering after underwriter’s discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us were approximately $9.6 million. Affiliates of one of our officers and directors participated in the February 2021 Offering on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers. During the second quarter of 2021, 262 warrants had been exercised for proceeds of $4 thousand.
During the second quarter of 2021, employees exercised 214 stock options for proceeds of $2 thousand.
On September 1, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “LPC Purchase Agreement”) and a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which, under the terms and subject to the conditions of the LPC Purchase Agreement, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase, up to $15.0 million of our common stock. Such sales of common stock by us, if any, will be subject to certain limitations, and may occur from time to time, at our sole discretion, over the 36-month period commencing September 15, 2021, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions.
Actual sales of shares of common stock to Lincoln Park will depend on a variety of factors to be determined by us from time to time, including, among others, market conditions, the trading price of the common stock and determinations by us as to the appropriate sources of funding for us and our operations. The net proceeds under the LPC Purchase Agreement will depend on the frequency and prices at which we sell shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park. We expect that any proceeds received from such sales to Lincoln Park will be used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Under the LPC Purchase Agreement, on any business day on which the closing sale price of the common stock is not below the “floor price” stated in the LPC Purchase Agreement, we may, by written notice delivered by us to Lincoln Park, direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to 20,000 shares of common stock on such business day, at a purchase price per share that will be determined and fixed in accordance with the Purchase Agreement at the time we deliver such written notice to Lincoln Park (each, a “Regular Purchase”), provided that the maximum number of shares we may sell to Lincoln Park in a Regular Purchase may be increased to (i) up to 25,000 shares, provided that the closing sale price of the common stock on the applicable purchase date is not below $20.00 and (ii) up to 30,000 shares, provided that the closing sale price of the common stock on the applicable purchase date is not below $25.00, in each case, subject to adjustment for any reorganization, recapitalization, non-cash dividend, stock split, reverse stock split or other similar transaction as provided in the LPC Purchase Agreement and provided that Lincoln Park’s maximum purchase commitment in any single Regular Purchase may not exceed $2.0 million. The purchase price per share of common stock sold in each such Regular Purchase, if any, will be based on prevailing market prices of the common stock immediately preceding the time of sale as computed under the LPC Purchase Agreement. In addition to Regular Purchases, we may also direct Lincoln Park to purchase other amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the LPC Purchase Agreement.
We have agreed with Lincoln Park that we will not enter into an additional “equity line” or a substantially similar transaction whereby a specific investor is irrevocably bound pursuant to an agreement with us to purchase securities over a period of time from us at a price based on the market price of the common stock at the time of such purchase for a period defined in the LPC Purchase Agreement. Lincoln Park has covenanted not to cause or engage in any manner whatsoever, any direct or indirect short selling or hedging of our shares.
As part of the LPC Purchase Agreement, we issued 31,958 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the LPC Purchase Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 40,000 shares, excluding the 31,958 shares issued as the commitment fee, under the LPC Purchase Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $0.6 million.
In November 2021, in an underwritten public offering (the “November 2021 Offering”), we issued 1,385,031 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $8.00 per share. Net proceeds from the November 2021 Offering after underwriter’s discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us were approximately $9.9 million. Affiliates of one of our officers and directors participated in the November 2021 Offering on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers.
Statements of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13.4 million. This was comprised primarily of a net loss of $18.1 million, partially offset by $127 thousand net cash provided by operating activities resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, certain adjustments for non-cash items comprised primarily of stock-based compensation expense of $4.3 million and depreciation and amortization of $0.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.7 million. This was comprised primarily of a net loss of $14.1 million, unrealized foreign exchange gains of $0.2 million, gain on lease modification of $0.1 million and $1.2 million net cash used resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by certain adjustments for non-cash items comprised of stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.5 million, non-cash lease expense of $0.2 million, provision for inventory reserve of $0.2 million, impairment loss on intangible assets of $0.2 million (related to the customer relationships from the Heuro acquisition), provision for doubtful accounts of $0.1 million, and loss on disposal of office furniture and leasehold improvements of $0.1 million.
Net Cash used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was nominal and primarily related to the purchase of equipment and computer software and hardware.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was nominal, with $63 thousand for the purchase of equipment and $7 thousand for internally developed software, offset by $61 thousand in proceeds received from the sale of office furniture.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $21.1 million, which was primarily comprised of $11.1 million in gross proceeds received from the November 2021 Offering, $11.0 million in gross proceeds received from the February 2021 Offering, $1.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and $0.6 million in gross proceeds from the sale of common stock pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement. These proceeds were partially offset by $2.9 million in issuance costs primarily related to the aforementioned offerings.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.6 million, which was primarily comprised of $2.2 million in gross proceeds received from the March 2020 registered direct offering, $5.0 million in gross proceeds from the sale of common stock under our former At-the-Market program and $3.4 million in gross proceeds received from the October 2020 private placement. These proceeds were partially offset by $1.0 million in issuance costs primarily related to the aforementioned offerings.
Cash Requirements
Funding Requirements
Our ability to generate product revenues sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful commercialization of PoNS Therapy in the U.S. Our net loss was $18.1 million and $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $137.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We intend to use our available capital resources primarily to expand our U.S.
commercialization efforts; fund manufacturing activities for the PoNS device; conduct clinical trials; and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
We believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund our operations into the third quarter of 2022, but we will be required to seek additional funding through the sale of equity or debt financing to continue to fund our operations thereafter. We will need additional funding for our planned clinical trial for stroke. The amount required to fund operations thereafter will depend on various factors, including timing of approval of clinical trials, duration and result of clinical trials and other factors that affect the cost of the clinical trial, manufacturing costs of product, development of our product for new indications and demand for our authorized products in the market.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional capital or that such capital, if available, will be on terms that are acceptable to us. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional capital, we may be compelled to reduce the scope of our operations and planned capital expenditure or sell certain assets, including intellectual property, and we may be forced to cease or wind down operations, seek protection under the provisions of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, or liquidate and dissolve our company.
Contractual and Other Obligations
We have entered into arrangements that contractually obligate us to make payments that will affect our liquidity and cash flows in future periods. Such arrangements include those related to our lease commitments.
Lease Commitments
Our cash requirements greater than twelve months from various contractual obligations and commitments include operating lease liabilities. Our lease commitments reflect payments due for our lease arrangement for office space at our head office located in Newtown, Pennsylvania. As of December 31, 2021, our contractual commitment for our lease was $0.1 million. The amount of lease commitments reflects payments due for the new lease in Newtown, Pennsylvania that had not commenced under ASC Topic 842, Leases, as of December 31, 2021, and as a result, these leases are not reflected within our consolidated balance sheets. The new lease commenced on January 1, 2022 and is contracted to terminate on March 31, 2025. Refer to Note 7 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
Other Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, testing and manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation generally consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments have not been separately included within these contractual and other obligations disclosures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held and requires enhanced disclosures regarding significant estimates and judgments used in estimating credit losses. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) and Leases (Topic 842): Effective Dates, which amends the effective date of ASU 2016-13. Public business entities meeting the definition of an SEC filer, excluding entities eligible to be a Small Reporting Company (“SRC”) as defined by the SEC, are required to adopt the standard for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. All other entities are required to adopt the standard for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We meet the definition of an SRC and therefore the standard will not be effective until the beginning of 2023. We are evaluating the effect that ASU 2016-13 will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which adds disclosure requirements to Topic 820 for the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. This ASU is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. We adopted this standard as of January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In November 2018, FASB issued ASU 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808): Clarifying the Interaction Between Topic 808 and Topic 606, which, among other things, provides guidance on how to assess whether certain collaborative arrangement transactions should be accounted for under Topic 606. The amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods
within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. FASB has specified that an entity should adopt the guidance as of the beginning of its annual fiscal year. The guidance is to be applied using either a full retrospective or modified retrospective method. In applying the full retrospective method, the cumulative effect of the accounting change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the first comparative period presented. In applying the modified retrospective method, the cumulative effect of the accounting change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings at the date of adoption. We early adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 under the modified retrospective approach. The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.