ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
In accordance with the “Safe Harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we provide the following cautionary remarks regarding important factors that, among others, could cause future results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, expectations and assumptions expressed or implied herein. All forward-looking statements made by us are subject to risks and uncertainties and are not guarantees of future performance. These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance and achievements or industry results to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These statements are generally identified by the use of such terms as “may,” “could,” “expect,” “intend,” “believe,” “plan,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “project,” “anticipate,” “to be,” “to make” or other comparable terms. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and in particular the risks discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report and those that may be discussed in other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Forward looking statements include the overall impact of the Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) on the Company, its results of operations, liquidity and financial condition (including any estimates of the impact on these items), the rate and consistency with which dental and other practices resume or maintain normal operations in the United States and internationally, expectations regarding personal protective equipment (“PPE”) and COVID-19 related product sales and inventory levels, whether additional resurgences or variants of the virus will adversely impact the resumption of normal operations, whether vaccine mandates will adversely impact the Company (by disrupting our workforce and/or business), whether supply chain disruptions will adversely impact our business, the impact of restructuring programs as well as of any future acquisitions, and more generally current expectations regarding performance in current and future periods. Forward looking statements also include the (i) ability of the Company to have continued access to a variety of test types, expectations regarding COVID-19 test sales, demand and inventory levels, as well as the efficacy or relative efficacy of the test results given that the test efficacy has not been, or will not have been, independently verified under normal FDA procedures and (ii) potential for the Company to distribute the COVID-19 vaccines and ancillary supplies.
Risk factors and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from current and historical results include, but are not limited to: risks associated with COVID-19 and any variants thereof, as well as other disease outbreaks, epidemics, pandemics, or similar wide-spread public health concerns and other natural disasters; our dependence on third parties for the manufacture and supply of our products; our ability to develop or acquire and maintain and protect new products (particularly technology products) and technologies that achieve market acceptance with acceptable margins; transitional challenges associated with acquisitions, dispositions and joint ventures, including the failure to achieve anticipated synergies/benefits; financial and tax risks associated with acquisitions, dispositions and joint ventures; certain provisions in our governing documents that may discourage third-party acquisitions of us; effects of a highly competitive (including, without limitation, competition from third-party online commerce sites) and consolidating market; the repeal or judicial prohibition on implementation of the Affordable Care Act; changes in the health care industry; risks from expansion of customer purchasing power and multi-tiered costing structures; increases in shipping costs for our products or other service issues with our third-party shippers; general global macro-economic and political conditions, including international trade agreements, potential trade barriers and terrorism; failure to comply with existing and future regulatory requirements; risks associated with the EU Medical Device Regulation; failure to comply with laws and regulations relating to health care fraud or other laws and regulations; failure to comply with laws and regulations relating to the collection, storage and processing of sensitive personal information or standards in electronic health records or transmissions; changes in tax legislation; risks related to product liability, intellectual property and other claims; litigation risks; new or unanticipated litigation developments and the status of litigation matters; risks associated with customs policies or legislative import restrictions; cyberattacks or other privacy or data security breaches; risks associated with our global operations; our dependence on our senior management, employee hiring and retention, and our relationships with customers, suppliers and manufacturers; and disruptions in financial markets. The order in which these factors appear should not be construed to indicate their relative importance or priority.
We caution that these factors may not be exhaustive and that many of these factors are beyond our ability to control or predict. Accordingly, any forward-looking statements contained herein should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual results. We undertake no duty and have no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
Where You Can Find Important Information
We may disclose important information through one or more of the following channels: SEC filings, public conference calls and webcasts, press releases, the investor relations page of our website (www.henryschein.com) and the social media channels identified on the Newsroom page of our website.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of global financial markets. In response, many countries implemented business closures and restrictions, stay-at-home and social distancing ordinances and similar measures to combat the pandemic, which significantly impacted global business and dramatically reduced demand for dental products and certain medical products in the second quarter of 2020. Demand increased in the second half of 2020 and continued throughout 2021 resulting in growth over the prior year driven by sales of PPE, COVID-19 tests and other COVID-19 related products.
Our consolidated financial statements reflect estimates and assumptions made by us that affect, among other things, our goodwill, long-lived asset and definite-lived intangible asset valuation; inventory valuation; equity investment valuation; assessment of the annual effective tax rate; valuation of deferred income taxes and income tax contingencies; the allowance for doubtful accounts; hedging activity; supplier rebates; measurement of compensation cost for certain share-based performance awards and cash bonus plans; and pension plan assumptions. Due to the significant uncertainty surrounding the future impact of COVID-19, our judgments regarding estimates and impairments could change in the future. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 pandemic had a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and cash flows in the second quarter of 2020. In the latter half of the second quarter of 2020, dental and medical practices began to re-open worldwide, and continued to do so during the second half of 2020. During the year ended December 25, 2021, patient traffic levels returned to levels approaching pre-pandemic levels. There is an ongoing risk that the COVID-19 pandemic may again have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and cash flows and may result in a material adverse effect on our financial condition and liquidity. However, the extent of the potential impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Policies, rules and regulations relating to vaccine mandates currently vary by jurisdiction and by customer. In the United States, the vaccine mandate requiring that all federal contractors be vaccinated was stayed in December 2021 and is currently pending litigation. In addition, in January 2022, the United States Supreme Court blocked a federal mandate that would require businesses with more than 100 employees to make their employees receive a COVID-19 vaccination or undergo weekly COVID-19 testing. In addition, state governments and some customers have also issued vaccine requirements for workers in their jurisdictions or who may service their accounts, and some state regulations contradict the contemplated federal vaccine mandates. Also, various international jurisdictions have, or may in the future impose vaccine mandates or additional COVID-19 regulations. The imposition of government or customer mandated vaccination or testing mandates may impact our ability to retain current employees, attract new employees and retain certain product and service contracts. It is possible that a significant number of our employees have not been vaccinated, and in the event of a vaccine mandate some of those employees may seek exemptions or otherwise resist vaccination. The implementation of vaccine mandates could potentially cause labor shortages if employees refuse to get vaccinated and their employment is terminated, either voluntarily or involuntarily. Such labor shortages could also affect our ability to retain certain specific contracts to which the mandates may apply, reduce our sales and/or affect our ability to fulfill customer orders, impacting our revenue and profitability. Furthermore, managing and tracking vaccination status and ongoing testing for exempt and/or unvaccinated employees could potentially increase our costs, as could addressing inconsistent mandates. COVID-19 vaccine mandates and similar regulations have the potential to significantly adversely affect our business, as the nature and effect of such mandates are uncertain at this time.
Corporate Transactions
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we sold an equity investment in Hu-Friedy Mfg. Co., LLC (“Hu-Friedy”), a manufacturer of dental instruments and infection prevention solutions. Our investment was non-controlling, we were not involved in running the business and had no representation on the board of directors. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we also sold certain other equity investments. In the aggregate, the sales of these investments resulted in a pre-tax gain in 2019 of approximately $250.2 million and an after-tax gain of approximately $186.8 million. During 2020 and 2021, we received contingent proceeds of $2.1 million and $9.8 million from the 2019 sale of Hu-Friedy resulting in the recognition of additional after-tax gains of $1.6 million and $7.3 million, respectively.
On February 7, 2019 (the “Distribution Date”), we completed the separation (the “Separation”) and subsequent merger of our animal health business (the “Henry Schein Animal Health Business”) with Direct Vet Marketing, Inc. (d/b/a Vets First Choice, “Vets First Choice”) (the “Merger”). This was accomplished by a series of transactions among us, Vets First Choice, Covetrus, Inc. (f/k/a HS Spinco, Inc. “Covetrus”), a wholly owned subsidiary of ours prior to the Distribution Date, and HS Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Covetrus (“Merger Sub”). In connection with the Separation, we contributed, assigned and transferred to Covetrus certain applicable assets, liabilities and capital stock or other ownership interests relating to the Henry Schein Animal Health Business. On the Distribution Date, we received a tax-free distribution of $1,120 million from Covetrus pursuant to certain debt financing incurred by Covetrus. On the Distribution Date and prior to the Animal Health Spin-off, Covetrus issued shares of Covetrus common stock to certain institutional accredited investors (the “Share Sale Investors”) for $361.1 million (the “Share Sale”). The proceeds of the Share Sale were paid to Covetrus and distributed to us. Subsequent to the Share Sale, we distributed, on a pro rata basis, all of the shares of the common stock of Covetrus held by us to our stockholders of record as of the close of business on January 17, 2019 (the “Animal Health Spin-off”). After the Share Sale and Animal Health Spin-off, Merger Sub consummated the Merger whereby it merged with and into Vets First Choice, with Vets First Choice surviving the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Covetrus. Immediately following the consummation of the Merger, on a fully diluted basis, (i) approximately 63% of the shares of Covetrus common stock were (a) owned by our stockholders and the Share Sale Investors, and (b) held by certain employees of the Henry Schein Animal Health Business (in the form of certain equity awards), and (ii) approximately 37% of the shares of Covetrus common stock were (a) owned by stockholders of Vets First Choice immediately prior to the Merger, and (b) held by certain employees of Vets First Choice (in the form of certain equity awards). After the Separation and the Merger, we no longer beneficially owned any shares of Covetrus common stock and, following the Distribution Date, will not consolidate the financial results of Covetrus for the purpose of our financial reporting. Following the Separation and the Merger, Covetrus was an independent, publicly traded company on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
Executive-Level Overview
Henry Schein, Inc. is a solutions company for health care professionals powered by a network of people and technology. We believe we are the world’s largest provider of health care products and services primarily to office-based dental and medical practitioners, as well as alternate sites of care. We serve more than one million customers worldwide including dental practitioners, laboratories, physician practices, and ambulatory surgery centers, as well as government, institutional health care clinics and other alternate care clinics. We believe that we have a strong brand identity due to our more than 89 years of experience distributing health care products.
We have established strategically located distribution centers around the world to enable us to better serve our customers and increase our operating efficiency. This infrastructure, together with broad product and service offerings at competitive prices, and a strong commitment to customer service, enables us to be a single source of supply for our customers’ needs.
While our primary go-to-market strategy is in our capacity as a distributor, we also manufacture certain dental specialty products and solutions in the areas of implants, orthodontics and endodontics. We have achieved scale in these global businesses primarily through acquisitions as manufacturers of these products typically do not utilize a distribution channel to serve customers.
We conduct our business through two reportable segments: (i) health care distribution and (ii) technology and value-added services. These segments offer different products and services to the same customer base. Our global dental businesses serve office-based dental practitioners, dental laboratories, schools and other institutions. Our global medical businesses serve office-based medical practitioners, ambulatory surgery centers, other alternate-care settings and other institutions.
The health care distribution reportable segment aggregates our global dental and medical operating segments. This segment distributes consumable products, dental specialty products, small equipment, laboratory products, large equipment, equipment repair services, branded and generic pharmaceuticals, vaccines, surgical products, dental specialty products (including implant, orthodontic and endodontic products), diagnostic tests, infection-control products, PPE and vitamins.
Our global technology and value-added services business provides software, technology and other value-added services to health care practitioners. Our technology business offerings include practice management software systems for dental and medical practitioners. Our value-added practice solutions include practice consultancy, education, revenue cycle management and financial services on a non-recourse basis, e-services, practice technology, network and hardware services, as well as consulting, and continuing education services for practitioners.
A key element to grow closer to our customers is our One Schein initiative, which is a unified go-to-market approach that enables practitioners to work synergistically with our supply chain, equipment sales and service and other value-added services, allowing our customers to leverage the combined value that we offer through a single program. Specifically, One Schein provides customers with streamlined access to our comprehensive offering of national brand products, our private label products and proprietary specialty products and solutions (including implant, orthodontic and endodontic products). In addition, customers have access to a wide range of services, including software and other value-added services.
Industry Overview
In recent years, the health care industry has increasingly focused on cost containment. This trend has benefited distributors capable of providing a broad array of products and services at low prices. It also has accelerated the growth of HMOs, group practices, other managed care accounts and collective buying groups, which, in addition to their emphasis on obtaining products at competitive prices, tend to favor distributors capable of providing specialized management information support. We believe that the trend towards cost containment has the potential to favorably affect demand for technology solutions, including software, which can enhance the efficiency and facilitation of practice management.
Our operating results in recent years have been significantly affected by strategies and transactions that we undertook to expand our business, domestically and internationally, in part to address significant changes in the health care industry, including consolidation of health care distribution companies, health care reform, trends toward managed care, cuts in Medicare and collective purchasing arrangements.
Our current and future results have been and could be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the current economic environment and continued economic and public health uncertainty. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, we have been carefully monitoring its impact on our global operations and have taken appropriate steps to minimize the risk to our employees. We have seen and expect to continue to see changes in demand trends for some of our products and services, supply chain challenges and labor challenges, as rates of infection fluctuate, new strains or variants of COVID-19 emerge and spread, vaccine uptake and mandates increase and change, governments adapt their approaches to combatting the virus (including without limitation, vaccine mandates), and local conditions change across geographies. For example, vaccine mandates affecting our workforce, whether imposed through government regulations or contracts with governmental authorities or other customers, could potentially cause staffing shortages if employees choose not to comply as well as other consequences to our business or operations, managing and tracking vaccination status and ongoing testing for exempt employees could potentially increase our costs, as could addressing inconsistent COVID-19 vaccination mandates. As a result, we expect to see continued volatility through at least the duration of the pandemic.
Industry Consolidation
The health care products distribution industry, as it relates to office-based health care practitioners, is fragmented and diverse. The industry ranges from sole practitioners working out of relatively small offices to group practices or service organizations ranging in size from a few practitioners to a large number of practitioners who have combined or otherwise associated their practices.
Due in part to the inability of office-based health care practitioners to store and manage large quantities of supplies in their offices, the distribution of health care supplies and small equipment to office-based health care practitioners has been characterized by frequent, small quantity orders, and a need for rapid, reliable and substantially complete order fulfillment. The purchasing decisions within an office-based health care practice are typically made by the practitioner or an administrative assistant. Supplies and small equipment are generally purchased from more than one distributor, with one generally serving as the primary supplier.
The trend of consolidation extends to our customer base. Health care practitioners are increasingly seeking to partner, affiliate or combine with larger entities such as hospitals, health systems, group practices or physician hospital organizations. In many cases, purchasing decisions for consolidated groups are made at a centralized or professional staff level; however, orders are delivered to the practitioners’ offices.
We believe that consolidation within the industry will continue to result in a number of distributors, particularly those with limited financial, operating and marketing resources, seeking to combine with larger companies that can provide growth opportunities. This consolidation also may continue to result in distributors seeking to acquire companies that can enhance their current product and service offerings or provide opportunities to serve a broader customer base.
Our trend with regard to acquisitions and joint ventures has been to expand our role as a provider of products and services to the health care industry. This trend has resulted in our expansion into service areas that complement our existing operations and provide opportunities for us to develop synergies with, and thus strengthen, the acquired businesses.
As industry consolidation continues, we believe that we are positioned to capitalize on this trend, as we believe we have the ability to support increased sales through our existing infrastructure, although there can be no assurances that we will be able to successfully accomplish this. We also have invested in expanding our sales/marketing infrastructure to include a focus on building relationships with decision makers who do not reside in the office-based practitioner setting.
As the health care industry continues to change, we continually evaluate possible candidates for joint venture or acquisition and intend to continue to seek opportunities to expand our role as a provider of products and services to the health care industry. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully pursue any such opportunity or consummate any such transaction, if pursued. If additional transactions are entered into or consummated, we would incur merger and/or acquisition-related costs, and there can be no assurance that the integration efforts associated with any such transaction would be successful. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had taken a range of actions to preserve cash, including the temporary suspension of significant acquisition activity. During the second half of 2020, as global conditions improved, we resumed our acquisition strategy.
Aging Population and Other Market Influences
The health care products distribution industry continues to experience growth due to the aging population, increased health care awareness, the proliferation of medical technology and testing, new pharmacology treatments, and expanded third-party insurance coverage, partially offset by the effects of unemployment on insurance coverage. In addition, the physician market continues to benefit from the shift of procedures and diagnostic testing from acute care settings to alternate-care sites, particularly physicians’ offices.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s International Database, in 2021 there were more than six and a half million Americans aged 85 years or older, the segment of the population most in need of long-term care and elder-care
services. By the year 2050, that number is projected to nearly triple to approximately 19 million. The population aged 65 to 84 years is projected to increase by approximately 32% during the same period.
As a result of these market dynamics, annual expenditures for health care services continue to increase in the United States. We believe that demand for our products and services will grow while continuing to be impacted by current and future operating, economic, and industry conditions. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, published “National Health Expenditure Data” indicating that total national health care spending reached approximately $4.1 trillion in 2020, or 19.7% of the nation’s gross domestic product, the benchmark measure for annual production of goods and services in the United States. Health care spending is projected to reach approximately $6.2 trillion in 2028, approximately 19.7% of the nation’s projected gross domestic product. The latest projections begin after the latest historical year 2018 and go through 2028. These projections do not take into account the impacts of COVID-19 because of the timing of the report and the highly uncertain nature of the pandemic.
Government
Our businesses are generally subject to numerous laws and regulations that could impact our financial performance, and failure to comply with such laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on our business.
See “Item 1. Business - Governmental Regulations” for a discussion of laws, regulations and governmental activity that may affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Results of Operations
Refer to Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K for management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
The following tables summarize the significant components of our operating results and cash flows from continuing operations (in thousands):
Plans of Restructuring
On November 20, 2019, we committed to a contemplated restructuring initiative intended to mitigate stranded costs associated with the Animal Health Spin-off and to rationalize operations and to provide expense efficiencies. These activities were originally expected to be completed by the end of 2020. In light of the changes to the business environment brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, we extended such activities to the end of 2021.
During the years ended December 25, 2021, December 26, 2020, and December 28, 2019 we recorded restructuring charges of $7.9 million, $32.1 million and $14.7 million, respectively. The restructuring costs for these periods included costs for severance benefits and facility exit costs. The costs associated with these restructurings are included in a separate line item, “Restructuring costs” within our consolidated statements of income.
Our restructuring activities under this initiative are now complete and we do not expect to report any restructuring costs separately in 2022.
2021 Compared to 2020
Net Sales
Net sales were as follows (in thousands):
(1) Consists of consumable products, small equipment, laboratory products, large equipment, equipment repair services, branded and generic pharmaceuticals, vaccines, surgical products, dental specialty products (including implant, orthodontic and endodontic products), diagnostic tests, infection-control products, PPE and vitamins.
(2) Consists of practice management software and other value-added products, which are distributed primarily to health care providers, practice consultancy, education, revenue cycle management and financial services on a non-recourse basis, e-services, continuing education services for practitioners, consulting and other services.
(3) Corporate TSA revenues represents sales of certain products to Covetrus under the transition services agreement entered into in connection with the Animal Health Spin-off, which ended in December 2020. See Note-23 Related Party Transactions for further information.
The 22.6% increase in net sales consists of an increase of 21.1% in local currency revenue (16.9% increase in internally generated revenue and 4.2% growth from acquisitions) and an increase of 1.5% related to foreign currency exchange. Excluding sales of products under the transition services agreement with Covetrus, our net sales increased 23.5%, consisting of an increase in local currency revenue of 22.0% (17.8% increase in internally generated revenue and 4.2% growth from acquisitions) and an increase of 1.5% related to foreign currency exchange. We estimate that sales for the year ended December 25, 2021 of PPE and COVID-19 related products were approximately $1,744.2 million, an estimated increase of 34.2% versus the prior year. Excluding PPE and COVID-19 related products, the estimated increase in internally generated local currency sales excluding Corporate TSA revenues was 16.7%.
The 27.6% increase in dental net sales consists of an increase of 25.2% in local currency revenue (20.7% increase in internally generated revenue and 4.5% growth from acquisitions) and an increase of 2.4% related to foreign currency exchange. The 25.2% increase in local currency sales was attributable to an increase in dental consumable merchandise revenue of 26.2% (20.6% increase in internally generated revenue and 5.6% growth from acquisitions), and an increase in dental equipment sales and service revenues of 21.9% (21.1% increase in internally generated revenue and 0.8% growth from acquisitions). The COVID-19 pandemic began to adversely impact our worldwide dental revenue beginning in mid-March of 2020 as many dental offices progressively closed or began seeing a limited number of patients. However, in the second half of the quarter ended June 27, 2020 and continuing through the year ended December 25, 2021, patient traffic stabilized and approached pre-pandemic levels. The growth in dental revenues reflects this recovery. Additionally, we estimate that global dental sales for the year ended December 25, 2021 of PPE and COVID-19 related products were approximately $680.9 million, an estimated increase of 38.2% versus the prior year. Excluding PPE and COVID-19 related products, the estimated increase in internally generated local currency dental sales was 21.3%.
The 16.6% increase in medical net sales is attributable to an increase of 16.5% in local currency growth (13.7% increase in internally generated revenue and 2.8% growth from acquisitions) and an increase of 0.1% related to foreign currency exchange. Our medical business has continued to have strong sales of PPE, such as masks, gowns and face shields, and other COVID-19 related products, such as diagnostic kits. Globally, we estimate our medical business recorded sales of approximately $1,063.3 million of such PPE and other COVID-19 related products for the year ended December 25, 2021, an increase of approximately 31.8% compared to the prior year. Excluding PPE and other COVID-19 related products, the estimated increase in internally generated local currency medical sales was 8.7%.
The 24.6% increase in technology and value-added services net sales is attributable to an increase of 23.5% in local currency revenue (13.0% increase in internally generated revenue and 10.5% growth from acquisitions) and 1.1% related to foreign currency exchange. The closure of dental and medical offices beginning in mid-March of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in lower technology and value-added services revenues in 2020, especially in the second quarter of that year. The growth in revenues in 2021 reflects the recovery of activity approaching pre-pandemic levels in our practice management business, as well as strong financial services revenue, which benefitted from dental equipment sales growth.
Gross Profit
Gross profit and gross margin percentages by segment and in total were as follows (in thousands):
As a result of different practices of categorizing costs associated with distribution networks throughout our industry, our gross margins may not necessarily be comparable to other distribution companies. Additionally, we realize substantially higher gross margin percentages in our technology and value-added services segment than in our health care distribution segment. These higher gross margins result from being both the developer and seller of software products and services, as well as certain financial services. The software industry typically realizes higher gross margins to recover investments in development.
During December 2020, our transition services agreement with Covetrus, in connection with the completion of the Animal-Health Spin-off, concluded. Under this agreement, Covetrus had agreed to purchase certain products from us at a mark-up that ranged from 3% to 6% of our product cost to cover handling costs.
Within our health care distribution segment, gross profit margins may vary from one period to the next. Changes in the mix of products sold as well as changes in our customer mix have been the most significant drivers affecting our gross profit margin. For example, sales of our private label products achieve gross profit margins that are higher than average. With respect to customer mix, sales to our large-group customers are typically completed at lower gross margins due to the higher volumes sold as opposed to the gross margin on sales to office-based practitioners, who normally purchase lower volumes at greater frequencies.
Health care distribution gross profit increased $791.7 million, or 32.3% primarily due to the increase in net sales discussed above. Health care distribution gross profit margin increased to 27.6% from 25.7%. Although we recorded significant adjustments to inventory in 2021, primarily related to PPE inventory, these adjustments were less than in 2020 and contributed to the improved gross profit margin. Such adjustments to inventory may recur and adversely impact gross profit margins in future periods, although we do not expect further significant inventory adjustments. The increase in the health care distribution gross profit margin is also attributable to an increase in supplier rebates during 2021 due to increased purchase volumes. The overall increase in our health care distribution gross profit is attributable to a $500.7 million increase in internally generated revenue, $176.9 million in gross profit due to the increase in the gross margin rates and $114.1 million additional gross profit from acquisitions.
Technology and value-added services gross profit increased $68.4 million, or 18.8%, due to an increase of $50.9 million in internally generated revenue and $31.6 million additional gross profit from acquisitions, partially offset by a $14.1 million decrease due to the lower gross profit margin. Technology and value-added services gross profit margin decreased to 67.3% from 70.6% primarily due to lower gross margins of recently acquired companies in the business services sector and certain transactions with the U.S. federal government.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses by segment and in total were as follows (in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses (including restructuring costs) increased $541.7 million, or 23.8%. In the prior year, there were significant cost-saving measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These cost-saving measures were temporary and substantially ended during the third quarter of 2020.
The $497.8 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses within our health care distribution segment was attributable to an increase of $411.5 million of operating costs and an increase of $111.3 million of additional costs from acquired companies, partially offset by a decrease of $25.0 million in restructuring costs. The $43.9 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses within our technology and value-added services segment was attributable to an increase of $28.8 million of additional costs from acquired companies, an increase of $14.3 million of operating costs and an increase of $0.8 million in restructuring costs.
As a component of total selling, general and administrative expenses, selling expenses increased $294.8 million, or 21.7% to $1,655.6 million, primarily due to an increase in payroll and payroll related costs. As a percentage of net sales, selling expenses decreased to 13.4% from 13.5%.
As a component of total selling, general and administrative expenses, general and administrative expenses increased $246.9 million, or 26.9% to $1,165.0 million, primarily due to an increase in payroll and payroll related costs. As a percentage of net sales, general and administrative expenses increased to 9.4% from 9.1%.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was as follows (in thousands):
Interest expense decreased $13.8 million primarily due to reduced credit line borrowings.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 25, 2021, our effective tax rate was 23.8% compared to 19.1% for the prior year period. In 2021, our effective tax rate was primarily impacted by state and foreign income taxes and interest expense. In 2020, our effective tax rate was primarily impacted by the agreement with the U.S Internal Revenue Service on our Advanced Pricing Agreement (APA), other audit resolutions, and state and foreign income taxes and interest expense.
Gain on Sale of Equity Investment
In the third quarter of 2021 we received contingent proceeds of $9.8 million from the 2019 sale of Hu-Friedy resulting in the recognition of an additional after-tax gain of $7.3 million. We also received contingent proceeds in 2020 of $2.1 million resulting in the recognition of an additional gain of $1.6 million after-tax. No further proceeds are expected from this sale.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal capital requirements have included funding of acquisitions, purchases of additional noncontrolling interests, repayments of debt principal, the funding of working capital needs, purchases of fixed assets and repurchases of common stock (which had been temporarily suspended in April 2020, but were resumed in early March 2021). Working capital requirements generally result from increased sales, special inventory forward buy-in opportunities and payment terms for receivables and payables. Historically, sales have tended to be stronger during the second half of the year and special inventory forward buy-in opportunities have been most prevalent just before the end of the year, and have caused our working capital requirements to be higher from the end of the third quarter to the end of the first quarter of the following year.
The pandemic and the governmental responses to it had a material adverse effect on our cash flows in the second quarter of 2020. In the latter half of the second quarter of 2020 and continuing through 2021, dental and medical practices began to re-open worldwide. During 2021, patient traffic levels returned to levels approaching pre-pandemic levels. There is an ongoing risk that the COVID-19 pandemic may again have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and cash flows and may result in a material adverse effect on our financial condition and liquidity. However, the extent of the potential impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
We finance our business primarily through cash generated from our operations, revolving credit facilities and debt placements. Please see Note 12 - Debt for further information. Our ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations is dependent on the continued demand of our customers for our products and services, and access to products and services from our suppliers.
Our business requires a substantial investment in working capital, which is susceptible to fluctuations during the year as a result of inventory purchase patterns and seasonal demands. Inventory purchase activity is a function of sales activity, special inventory forward buy-in opportunities and our desired level of inventory. We anticipate future increases in our working capital requirements.
We finance our business to provide adequate funding for at least 12 months. Funding requirements are based on forecasted profitability and working capital needs, which, on occasion, may change. Consequently, we may change our funding structure to reflect any new requirements.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, our ability to access private debt markets and public equity markets, and our available funds under existing credit facilities provide us with sufficient liquidity to meet our currently foreseeable short-term and long-term capital needs.
Net cash from continuing operations provided by operating activities was $709.6 million for the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to net cash from continuing operations provided by operating activities of $593.5 million for the prior year. The net change of $116.1 million was primarily attributable to higher net income, partially offset by increased working capital requirements, specifically an increase in inventories due to ongoing stocking of PPE and COVID-19 related products, and reduced accounts payable and accrued expenses. These working capital increases were partially offset by lower growth in accounts receivable as days sales outstanding were lower than in the prior year.
Net cash from continuing operations used in investing activities was $677.2 million for the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to $115.0 million for the prior year. The net change of $562.2 million was primarily attributable to increased payments for equity investments and business acquisitions.
Net cash from continuing operations used in financing activities was $333.0 million for the year ended December 25, 2021, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $181.8 million for the prior year. The net change of $151.2 million was primarily due to increased repurchases of common stock partially offset by decreased net proceeds from bank borrowings.
The following table summarizes selected measures of liquidity and capital resources (in thousands):
Our cash and cash equivalents consist of bank balances and investments in money market funds representing overnight investments with a high degree of liquidity.
Accounts receivable days sales outstanding and inventory turns
Our accounts receivable days sales outstanding from operations decreased to 41.8 days as of December 25, 2021 from 46.0 days as of December 26, 2020. During the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, we wrote off approximately $8.5 million and $7.8 million, respectively, of fully reserved accounts receivable against our trade receivable reserve. Our inventory turnover from operations was 5.2 as of December 25, 2021 and 5.1 as of December 26, 2020. Our working capital accounts may be impacted by current and future economic conditions.
Contractual obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations related to fixed and variable rate long-term debt and finance lease obligations, including interest (assuming a weighted average interest rate of 3.2%), as well as inventory purchase commitments and operating lease obligations as of December 25, 2021:
For information relating to our debt please see Note 12 - Debt.
Leases
We have operating and finance leases for corporate offices, office space, distribution and other facilities, vehicles, and certain equipment. Our leases have remaining terms of less than one year to approximately 20 years, some of which may include options to extend the leases for up to 10 years. As of December 25, 2021, our right-of-use assets related to operating leases were $325.0 million and our current and non-current operating lease liabilities were $76.4 million and $267.8 million, respectively. Please see Note 6 - Leases for further information.
Stock Repurchases
On March 8, 2021, we announced the reinstatement of our share repurchase program, which had been temporarily suspended in April of 2020.
From June 21, 2004 through December 25, 2021, we repurchased $4.0 billion, or 81,068,993 shares, under our common stock repurchase programs, with $200.0 million available as of December 25, 2021 for future common stock share repurchases.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests
Some minority stockholders in certain of our consolidated subsidiaries have the right, at certain times, to require us to acquire their ownership interest in those entities. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480-10 is applicable for noncontrolling interests where we are or may be required to purchase all or a portion of the outstanding interest in a consolidated subsidiary from the noncontrolling interest holder under the terms of a put option contained in contractual agreements. As of December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020 our balance for redeemable noncontrolling interests was $613.3 million and $327.7 million, respectively. Please see Note 17 - Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests for further information.
Unrecognized tax benefits
As more fully disclosed in Note 13 - Income Taxes of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” we cannot reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows related to the unrecognized tax benefits, including accrued interest, of $83.5 million as of December 25, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical data, when available, experience, industry and market trends, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the combined results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. However, by their nature, estimates are subject to various assumptions and uncertainties. Therefore, reported results may differ from estimates and any such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies, which have been discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors, affect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Inventories and Reserves
Inventories consist primarily of finished goods and are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined by the first-in, first-out method for merchandise or actual cost for large equipment and high tech equipment. In estimating carrying value of inventory, we consider many factors including the condition and
salability of the inventory by reviewing on-hand quantities, historical sales, forecasted sales and market and economic trends. Certain of our products, specifically PPE and COVID-19 related items have experienced changes in net realizable value, due to volatility of pricing and changes in demand for these products.
Business Combinations
The estimated fair value of acquired identifiable intangible assets (trademarks and trade names, customer relationships and lists, non-compete agreements and product development) is based on critical estimates, judgments and assumptions derived from: analysis of market conditions; discount rates; projected cash flows; customer retention rates; and estimated useful lives. Please see Note 4 - Business Acquisitions and Divestitures for further discussion of our acquisitions.
Goodwill
Goodwill is subject to impairment analysis at least once annually as of the first day of our fourth quarter, or if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. Such impairment analyses for goodwill require a comparison of the fair value to the carrying value of reporting units. We regard our reporting units to be our operating segments: global dental, global medical, and technology and value-added services. Goodwill is allocated to such reporting units, for the purposes of preparing our impairment analyses, based on a specific identification basis.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities that are considered shared services to the reporting units, and ultimately the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is calculated by applying the discounted cash flow methodology and confirming with a market approach. There are inherent uncertainties, however, related to fair value models, the inputs and our judgments in applying them to this analysis. The most significant inputs include estimation of detailed future cash flows based on budget expectations, and determination of comparable companies to develop a weighted average cost of capital for each reporting unit.
On an annual basis, we prepare annual and medium-term financial projections. These projections are based on input from our leadership and are presented annually to our Board of Directors. Influences on this year's forecasted financial information and the fair value model include: the impact of planned strategic initiatives, the continued integration of recent acquisitions and overall market conditions. The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors.
Our third-party valuation specialists provide inputs into our determination of the discount rate. The rate is dependent on a number of underlying assumptions, including the risk-free rate, tax rate, equity risk premium, debt to equity ratio and pre-tax cost of debt.
Long-term growth rates are applied to our estimation of future cash flows. The long-term growth rates are tied to growth rates we expect to achieve beyond the years for which we have forecasted operating results. We also consider external benchmarks, and other data points which we believe are applicable to our industry and the composition of our global operations.
Based on our quantitative assessment, we believe the fair value of each of our reporting units sufficiently exceeds the carrying values. As part of our analysis, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the discount rate and long-term growth rate assumptions. The sensitivities led us to the same conclusion that no impairment exists.
Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Annually, definite-lived intangible assets such as non-compete agreements, trademarks, trade names, customer relationships and lists, and product development are reviewed for impairment indicators. If any impairment indicators exist, quantitative testing is performed on the asset.
The quantitative impairment model is a two-step test under which we first calculate the recoverability of the carrying value by comparing the undiscounted, probability-weighted value of the projected cash flows associated
with the asset or asset group, including its estimated residual value, to the carrying amount. If the cash flows associated with the asset or asset group are less than the carrying value, we would perform a fair value assessment of the asset, or asset group. If the carrying amount is found to be greater than the fair value, we record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over the fair value. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate. Although we believe our judgments, estimates and/or assumptions used in estimating cash flows and determining fair value are reasonable, making material changes to such judgments, estimates and/or assumptions could materially affect such impairment analyses and our financial results.
During the years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, we recorded total impairment charges on definite-lived intangible assets of approximately $0.7 and $20.3 million respectively, nearly all of which was recorded in our technology and value-added services segment.
Income Tax
When determining if the realization of the deferred tax asset is likely by assessing the need for a valuation allowance, estimates and judgement are required. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including estimated future taxable earnings, ongoing planning strategies, future reversals of existing temporary differences and historical operating results. Additionally, changes to tax laws and statutory tax rates can have an impact on our determination. Our intention is to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets quarterly.
ASC Topic 740 prescribes the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the financial statements in accordance with other provisions contained within this guidance. This topic prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate audit settlement. In the normal course of business, our tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Such examinations may result in future tax and interest assessments by these taxing authorities for uncertain tax positions taken in respect of certain tax matters. Please see Note 13 - Income Taxes for further discussion.
Accounting Standards Update
For a discussion of accounting standards updates that have been adopted or will be adopted in the future, please see Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies included under Item 8.