ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations as well as other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are not historical facts or guarantees of future performance, but instead represent only our beliefs, assumptions, expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. Forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of words such as "expects," "anticipates," "intends," "plans," "believes," "seeks," "estimates," “outlook,” "projects," "forecasts," and similar expressions. These statements include statements other than historical information or statements of current condition and may relate to our future plans and objectives and results. By identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ from those indicated in the forward-looking statements include, among others, those discussed under the Section heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Factors that may cause actual outcomes and results to differ materially from what is expressed, forecasted or implied in the forward-looking statements include, among other things, the impacts, direct and indirect, of the COVID-19 pandemic (including the emergence of variant strains) on our business, our consultants and employees, and the overall economy; leadership changes, our ability to attract, integrate, develop, manage and retain qualified consultants and senior leaders; our ability to prevent our consultants from taking our clients with them to another firm; our ability to maintain our professional reputation and brand name; the fact that our net revenue may be affected by adverse economic conditions; our clients’ ability to restrict us from recruiting their employees; the aggressive competition we face; our heavy reliance on information management systems; the fact that we face the risk of liability in the services we perform; the fact that data security, data privacy and data protection laws and other evolving regulations and cross-border data transfer restrictions may limit the use of our services and adversely affect our business; social, political, regulatory and legal risks in markets where we operate; any challenges to the classification of our on-demand talent as independent contractors; the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations; the fact that we may not be able to align our cost structure with net revenue; unfavorable tax law changes and tax authority rulings; our ability to realize our tax losses; the timing of the establishment or reversal of valuation allowance on deferred tax assets; any impairment of our goodwill, other intangible assets and other long-lived assets; our ability to execute and integrate future acquisitions; the fact that we have anti-takeover provisions that make an acquisition of us difficult and expensive; our ability to access additional credit; and the increased cybersecurity requirements, vulnerabilities, threats and more sophisticated and targeted cyber-related attacks that could pose a risk to our systems, networks, solutions, services and data. We caution the reader that the list of factors may not be exhaustive. The forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K speak only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
The discussion that follows includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for years 2021 and 2020. For the discussion of changes from 2019 to 2020 and other financial information related to 2019, refer to "Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 as filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Executive Overview
Our Business
We are a leadership advisory firm providing executive search, on-demand talent and consulting services. We help our clients build leadership teams by facilitating the recruitment, management and development of senior executives. We believe focusing on top-level services offers us several advantages that include access to and influence with key decision makers, increased potential for recurring search consulting engagements, higher fees per search, enhanced brand visibility and a leveraged global footprint, which create added barriers to entry for potential competitors. Working at the top of client organizations also allows us to attract and retain high-caliber consultants.
As a complement and extension of our search services, we partner with organizations through Heidrick Consulting to unlock the power of their people. Our tools and experts use data and technology to bring science to the art of human capital
development and organizational design. Our services allow our clients to accelerate their strategies and the effectiveness of individual leaders, teams and organizations as a whole.
Our On-Demand Talent business is a market-leader in sourcing high-end, on-demand independent talent and provides clients seamless on-demand access to top independent talent, including professionals with deep industry and functional expertise for interim leadership roles and critical, project-based initiatives.
We provide our services to a broad range of clients through the expertise of over 430 consultants located in major cities around the world. Our executive search services are provided on a retained basis. Revenue before reimbursements of out-of-pocket expenses (“net revenue”) consists of retainers and indirect expenses billed to clients. Typically, we are paid a retainer for our executive search services equal to approximately one-third of the estimated first-year compensation for the position to be filled. In addition, if the actual compensation of a placed candidate exceeds the estimated compensation, we often are authorized to bill the client for one-third of the excess. Indirect expenses are calculated as a percentage of the retainer with certain dollar limits per search.
The Company has five operating segments. The executive search business operates in the Americas, Europe (which includes Africa) and Asia Pacific (which includes the Middle East), and the Heidrick Consulting and On-Demand Talent businesses operate globally.
Key Performance Indicators
We manage and assess our performance through various means, with primary financial and operational measures including net revenue, operating income, operating margin, Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) and Adjusted EBITDA margin (non-GAAP). Executive Search and Heidrick Consulting performance is also measured using consultant headcount. Specific to Executive Search, confirmed search (confirmation) trends, consultant productivity and average revenue per search are used to measure performance. Productivity is as measured by annualized Executive Search net revenue per consultant.
Revenue is driven by market conditions and a combination of the number of executive search engagements and consulting projects and the average revenue per search or project. With the exception of compensation expense, incremental increases in revenue do not necessarily result in proportionate increases in costs, particularly operating and administrative expenses, thus creating the potential to improve operating margins.
The number of consultants, confirmation trends, number of searches or projects completed, productivity levels and the average revenue per search or project will vary from quarter to quarter, affecting net revenue and operating margin.
Our Compensation Model
At the consultant level, there are fixed and variable components of compensation. Individuals are rewarded for their performance based on a system that directly ties a portion of their compensation to the amount of net revenue for which they are responsible. A portion of the reward may be based upon individual performance against a series of non-financial measures. Credit towards the variable portion of a consultant’s compensation is earned by generating net revenue for winning and executing work. Each quarter, we review and update the expected annual performance of all consultants and accrue variable compensation accordingly. The amount of variable compensation that is accrued for each consultant is based on a tiered payout model. Overall Company performance determines the amount available for total variable compensation. The more net revenue that is generated by the consultant, the higher the percentage credited towards the consultant’s variable compensation and thus accrued by our Company as expense.
The mix of individual consultants who generate revenue can significantly affect the total amount of compensation expense recorded, which directly impacts operating margin. As a result, the variable portion of the compensation expense may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter. The total variable compensation is discretionary and is based on Company-wide financial targets approved by the Human Resources and Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors.
Historically, a portion of the Company’s consultants’ and management cash bonuses were deferred and paid over a three-year vesting period. The portion of the bonus is approximately 15% depending on the employee’s level or position. The compensation expense related to the amounts being deferred was recognized on a graded vesting attribution method over the requisite service period. This service period began on January 1 of the respective fiscal year and continued through the deferral date, which coincided with the Company’s bonus payments in the first quarter of the following year and for an additional three-year vesting period. The deferrals are recorded in Accrued salaries and benefits within both Current liabilities and Non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
In 2020, the Company terminated the cash bonus deferral for consultants and, in 2021, terminated the cash bonus deferral for management. The Company now pays 100% of the cash bonuses earned by consultants and management in the first quarter of the following year. Consultant and management cash bonuses earned prior to 2020 and 2021, respectively, will continue to be paid under the terms of the cash bonus deferral program. The deferrals are recorded in Accrued salaries and benefits within both Current liabilities and Non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated COVID-19 as a global pandemic. COVID-19 has significantly impacted various markets around the world, including the United States. Although vaccines are now widely available, we cannot predict the duration of the pandemic or its ongoing impact on our business. The emergence of variant strains of the COVID-19 virus has introduced additional uncertainty.
With infections reported throughout the world, certain governmental authorities have issued stay-at-home orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of the pandemic. Additional, more restrictive proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future. We temporarily closed our offices and shifted our workforce to remote operations to ensure the safety of our employees. Our offices are now accessible to our employees and we have introduced our "flexible workspace" guidance across the Americas, Europe and Asia Pacific. Under this guidance, our employees have the flexibility to work remotely several days per week, with variations depending upon location and role, and in alignment with country- or state-level guidance. In addition, we will take a phased approach to returning to offices, with the health and wellbeing of our employees as our top priority. As we plan for the future of work, we expect to provide our employees with enhanced flexibility in how and where we work while maintaining our culture of mentorship, collaboration and community. During this uncertain time, our critical priorities are:
•the health and safety of our employees, clients and their families;
•providing support to our clients; and
•helping our clients accelerate their business performance and transform with agility.
In response to working remotely, our Executive Search teams employed our robust digital search platform, Heidrick Connect, to operate effectively and efficiently while engaging virtually with our clients. Additionally, we have introduced upgrades to Heidrick Connect, resulting in greater flexibility, increased productivity and the ability to deliver more insights to our clients. Our Heidrick Consulting teams have pivoted to create new digital solutions for Leadership Assessments, Team Acceleration, and Organization and Culture Acceleration that can be delivered virtually in response to required social distancing practices.
Beginning in the 2020 second quarter, we experienced a decline in demand for our executive search and consulting services, a lengthening of the executive search process due to a slow-down in client decision making and an inability to execute in-person consulting engagements, which had a material adverse impact on our results of operations. As a result, we identified a triggering event and performed an interim goodwill impairment evaluation during the three months ended June 30, 2020 resulting in the impairment of the goodwill in our Europe and Asia Pacific reporting units. We also evaluated the recoverability our intangible and other long-lived assets and determined that no impairment was necessary. We continue to monitor our goodwill, other intangible assets and long-lived assets for potential impairment.
In the 2020 third quarter, we implemented a restructuring plan to optimize future growth and profitability. The expected annual cost savings from the restructuring ranges from $30 million to $40 million. The primary components of the restructuring included a workforce reduction, and a reduction of the firm’s real estate expenses, professional fees and the future elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
As part of this restructuring plan, we implemented several real estate initiatives including downsizing and terminating certain of our existing office leases. Our success working remotely, utilizing Heidrick Connect and our digital consulting solutions, allowed us to reevaluate how we utilize our offices and plan to use them in a post-pandemic environment. Upon the expiration of the leases included in the restructuring, we will have reduced our square footage under lease by approximately 20%.
Moving forward, we will continue with our real estate strategy, which consists of three objectives: 1) matching our real estate footprint to the new, post-pandemic office occupancy expectations; 2) creating open and collaborative environments,
including unassigned work spaces that facilitate work from anywhere; and 3) increasing our focus on reducing our carbon footprint as part of our long-term sustainability goals. We believe we have opportunity to further decrease costs primarily through lease renewals and rightsizing offices where it makes business sense.
In 2021, our results of operations were not materially impacted by the pandemic. Our business was well positioned to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic through innovation and finding new ways to serve our clients. Heidrick Connect allowed our Executive Search teams to operate effectively and efficiently while engaging virtually with our clients. Newly created digital solutions for Heidrick Consulting allowed our teams to overcome the barriers presented by an inability to conduct in-person consulting engagements. These innovations and new ways of serving our clients laid the foundation for our improved operating performance this quarter. Consolidated net revenue increased to $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $621.6 million for the year ended December 31, 20220. Profitability also increased with operating income of $98.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an operating loss of $35.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
While our 2021 results are encouraging, the extent to which the pandemic continues to impact our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including, but not limited to:
•the duration and severity of the pandemic;
•future resurgences and emergences of new variant strains of the COVID-19 virus;
•the impact of the pandemic, and actions taken in response to the pandemic, on economic activity;
•governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic;
•restrictions inhibiting our employees’ ability to access our offices;
•the effect on our clients and client demand for our services and solutions;
•our ability to sell and provide our services and solutions, including as a result of travel restrictions and people working remotely; and
•the ability of our clients to pay for our services and solutions.
We expect that all of our business segments, across all of our geographies, will continue to be impacted by the pandemic and actions taken in response to the pandemic to some extent, but the significance of the impact of the pandemic on our business and the duration for which it may have an impact cannot be determined at this time. Specific factors that may impact our business include, but are not limited to:
•a decline in demand for our executive search, consulting and on-demand services due to temporary and permanent workforce reductions, and general economic uncertainty;
•a lengthening of the executive search process due to a slow-down in client decision making;
•an increase in executive searches placed on hold due to delays in planned work by our clients;
•an inability to execute in-person consulting and on-demand engagements; and
•disruptions in business operations for offices in areas most impacted by the pandemic, including the United States, United Kingdom, Italy, Spain, China and Brazil.
2021 Overview
Consolidated net revenue increased $381.4 million, or 61.4%, to $1.0 billion in 2021 from $621.6 million in 2020. Foreign exchange rates positively impacted results by $13.3 million, or 2.1%. Executive Search net revenue was $868.8 million in 2021, an increase of $303.6 million, or 53.7%, compared to 2020. The increase in Executive Search net revenue was primarily due to a 44.6% increase in the number of confirmed searches compared to the prior year. Heidrick Consulting net revenue increased $11.2 million, or 19.8%, to $67.6 million in 2021 from $56.4 million in 2020. The increase in Heidrick Consulting revenue was
primarily due to a 48.1% increase in the number of consulting engagements compared to the prior year. The acquisition of On-Demand Talent in the second quarter of 2021 contributed $66.6 million to the increase in net revenue.
The number of Executive Search and Heidrick Consulting consultants was 365 and 69, respectively, as of December 31, 2021, compared to 361 and 65, respectively, as of December 31, 2020. Executive Search productivity, as measured by annualized net Executive Search revenue per consultant, was $2.4 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The number of confirmed searches increased 44.6%, compared to 2020. The average revenue per executive search increased to $131,000 in 2021 compared to $123,200 in 2020.
Operating income as a percentage of net revenue was 9.8% in 2021, compared to operating loss as a percentage of revenue of 5.7% in 2020. The change in operating income was primarily due to an increase in net revenue of $381.4 million, and decreases in impairment charges and restructuring charges, partially offset by increases in salaries and benefits expense, general and administrative expenses, and cost of services of $267.0 million, $13.8 million, and $48.4 million, respectively. Salaries and benefits expense as a percentage of net revenue was 71.5% in 2021, compared to 72.5% in 2020. General and administrative expense as a percentage of net revenue was 13.0% in 2021, compared to 18.8% in 2020. Cost of services expense as a percentage of net revenue was 5.3% in 2021, compared to 0.7% in 2020.
We ended the year with combined cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $545.2 million, an increase of $208.8 million compared to $336.5 million at December 31, 2020. We pay the majority of bonuses in the first quarter following the year in which they were earned. Employee bonuses are accrued throughout the year and are based on the Company’s performance and the performance of the individual employee. We expect to pay approximately $368.2 million in bonuses related to 2021 performance in March and April 2022. In January 2022, we paid approximately $14.9 million in cash bonuses deferred in prior years.
2022 First Quarter Outlook
We are currently forecasting 2022 first quarter net revenue of between $270 million and $280 million, while acknowledging the continued fluidity of the COVID-19 pandemic and instability in Ukraine and Russia that may impact quarterly results to some extent. Our 2022 first quarter guidance is based upon, among other things, management’s assumptions for the anticipated volume of new Executive Search confirmations, Heidrick Consulting assignments, On-Demand Talent projects, the current backlog, consultant productivity, consultant retention, the seasonality of our business and average currency rates in December 2021.
Our 2022 first quarter guidance is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including those disclosed under "Risk Factors" and in this "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in this Form 10-K. As such, actual results could vary from these projections.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, the results of operations (in thousands, except per share data):
(1)Includes goodwill impairment charges of $33.0 million related to Europe and Asia Pacific in 2020 (See Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets).
(2)The 2021 restructuring charges include $3.9 million in the Americas and $0.4 million in Heidrick Consulting, partially offset by restructuring reversals of $0.1 million in Europe, $0.1 million in Asia Pacific, and $0.2 million in Global Operations Support. The 2020 restructuring charges include $30.5 million in the Americas, $8.6 million in Europe, $4.6 million in Asia Pacific, $4.7 million in Heidrick Consulting, and $4.0 million in Global Operations Support. The 2019 restructuring charges include $4.1 million in the Americas and less than $0.1 million in Global Operations Support. (See Note 15, Restructuring).
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, our results of operations as a percentage of revenue before reimbursements (net revenue):
Note: Totals and subtotals may not equal the sum of individual line items due to rounding.
As a result of the BTG acquisition, the Company now has five operating segments. The executive search business operates in the Americas, Europe (which includes Africa) and Asia Pacific (which includes the Middle East), and the Heidrick Consulting and On-Demand Talent businesses operate globally (See Note 18, Segment Information).
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our revenue and operating income by segment (in thousands):
(1)Includes $3.9 million, $30.5 million and $4.1 million of restructuring charges in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)Includes a $0.1 million restructuring reversal and $8.6 million of restructuring charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $24.5 million of impairment charges in 2020.
(3)Includes a $0.1 million restructuring reversal and $4.6 million of restructuring charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $8.5 million of impairment charges in 2020.
(4)Includes an $11.4 million earnout obligation fair value adjustment in 2021.
(5)Includes $0.4 million and $4.7 million of restructuring charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(6)Includes a $0.2 million restructuring reversal, $4.0 million of restructuring charges, and less than $0.1 million of restructuring charges in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Total revenue. Consolidated total revenue increased $379.1 million, or 60.2%, to $1.0 billion in 2021 from $629.4 million in 2020. The increase in total revenue was primarily due to the increase in revenue before reimbursements (net revenue).
Revenue before reimbursements (net revenue). Consolidated net revenue increased $381.4 million, or 61.4%, to $1.0 billion in 2021 from $621.6 million in 2020. Foreign exchange rates positively impacted results by $13.3 million, or 2.1%. Executive Search net revenue was $868.8 million in 2021, an increase of $303.6 million, or 53.7%, compared to 2020. The increase in Executive Search net revenue was primarily due to a 44.6% increase in the number of confirmed searches compared to the prior year. Heidrick Consulting net revenue increased $11.2 million, or 19.8%, to $67.6 million in 2021 from $56.4 million in 2020. The increase in Heidrick Consulting revenue was primarily due to a 48.1% increase in the number of consulting engagements
compared to the prior year. The acquisition of On-Demand Talent in the second quarter of 2021 contributed $66.6 million to the increase in net revenue.
The number of Executive Search and Heidrick Consulting consultants was 365 and 69, respectively, as of December 31, 2021, compared to 361 and 65, respectively, as of December 31, 2020. Executive Search productivity, as measured by annualized net Executive Search revenue per consultant, was $2.4 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The number of confirmed searches increased 44.6%, compared to 2020. The average revenue per executive search increased to $131,000 in 2021 compared to $123,200 in 2020.
Salaries and benefits. Consolidated salaries and benefits expense increased $267.0 million, or 59.3%, to $717.4 million in 2021 from $450.4 million in 2020. The increase was due to higher fixed compensation of $23.5 million and higher variable compensation of $243.5 million. Fixed compensation increased due to base salaries and payroll taxes, stock compensation, retirement and benefits, and separation, partially offset by gains on the deferred compensation plan, and lower talent acquisition and retention costs. Variable compensation increased due to higher bonus accruals, primarily related to increased consultant productivity. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations negatively impacted salaries and benefits expenses by $10.0 million, or 2.2%.
In 2021, we had an average of 1,714 employees, compared to an average of 1,708 employees in 2020.
As a percentage of net revenue, salaries and benefits expense was 71.5% in 2021, compared to 72.5% in 2020.
General and administrative expenses. Consolidated general and administrative expenses increased $13.8 million, or 11.8%, to $130.7 million in 2021 from $117.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a one-time earnout obligation adjustment for On-Demand Talent, intangible amortization, information technology, market data analysis tools, and business development travel, partially offset by decreases in office occupancy and bad debt. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations negatively impacted general and administrative expenses by $1.2 million, or 1.0%.
As a percentage of net revenue, general and administrative expenses were 13.0% in 2021, compared to 18.8% in 2020.
Cost of services. Consolidated cost of services increased $48.4 million to $52.8 million in 2021, from $4.4 million in 2020. The increase is primarily due to the acquisition of On-Demand Talent in addition to an increased in the number of Heidrick Consulting engagements.
Impairment charges. In 2020, and as a direct result of the economic impact of COVID-19, the we experienced a decline in demand for our executive search services and a lengthening of the executive search process due to a slow-down in client decision making, which had a material adverse impact on our results of operations. As a result, we identified a triggering event and performed an interim goodwill impairment evaluation. Based on the results of the of the impairment evaluation, we recorded an impairment charge of $24.5 million in Europe and $8.5 million in Asia Pacific to write-off all of the goodwill associated with each reporting unit. The impairment was non-cash in nature and did not affect our current liquidity, cash flows, borrowing capability or operations; nor did it impact the debt covenants under our credit agreement. The impairment charges are recorded within Impairment charges in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Restructuring charges. Restructuring charges of $3.8 million and $52.4 million were incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The primary components of the restructuring included a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs. The restructuring charges are recorded within Restructuring charges in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). We do not anticipate incurring any future charges under the restructuring plan initiated in 2020.
Operating income (loss). Consolidated operating income was $98.3 million, including restructuring charges of $3.8 million and a fair value adjustment to the On-Demand Talent earnout obligation of $11.4 million, in 2021, compared to an operating loss of $35.5 million, including impairment charges of $33.0 million and restructuring charges of $52.4 million, in 2020. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations positively impacted operating income by $2.1 million, or 4.3%.
Net non-operating income. Net non-operating income was $7.8 million in 2021, compared to $4.1 million in 2020.
Interest, net was income of $0.3 million in 2021, a $0.1 million increase from $0.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily the result of interest paid on the credit facility in 2020.
Other, net was income of $7.5 million in 2021, compared to $3.9 million in 2020. The increase was primarily the result of increased gains on the deferred compensation plan assets, which are recorded within Investments in the Condensed
Consolidated Balance Sheets, and a decrease in foreign currency losses compared to the prior year. Investments held in the Company’s deferred compensation plan are recorded at fair value.
Income taxes. See Note 16, Income Taxes.
Executive Search
Americas
The Americas reported net revenue of $581.4 million in 2021, an increase of 60.9% from $361.4 million in 2020. The increase in net revenue was due to a 57.1% increase in the number of executive search confirmations and an increase in average revenue per executive search. All industry practice groups contributed to the growth in revenue. Foreign exchange fluctuations positively impacted net revenue by $0.7 million, or 0.2%. There were 193 Executive Search consultants as of December 31, 2021, compared to 190 as of December 31, 2020.
Salaries and benefits expense increased $169.4 million, or 74.8%, compared to 2020. Fixed compensation increased $0.7 million, primarily due to stock compensation, base salaries and payroll taxes, and retirement and benefits, partially offset by talent acquisition and retention costs, and gains on the deferred compensation plan. Variable compensation increased $168.7 million due to higher bonus accruals related to increased consultant productivity.
General and administrative expenses decreased $2.0 million, or 4.9%, compared to 2020 due to office occupancy, communication services, and bad debt, partially offset by increases in market data analysis tools, business development travel, marketing and hiring fees.
Restructuring charges were $3.9 million and $30.5 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The current year restructuring charges primarily relate to a reduction in the Company's real estate footprint. The restructuring charges in the prior year primarily relate to a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
The Americas reported operating income of $142.0 million, including restructuring charges of $3.9 million, in 2021, an increase of $79.2 million compared to $62.8 million, including restructuring charges of $30.5 million, in 2020.
Europe
Europe reported net revenue of $170.3 million in 2021, an increase of 37.1% from $124.2 million in 2020. The increase in net revenue was due to a 33.6% increase in the number of executive search confirmations and an increase in average revenue per executive search. All industry practice groups contributed to the growth in revenue with the exception of the Social Impact practice group. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations positively impacted net revenue by $7.8 million, or 6.3%. There were 103 Executive Search consultants as of December 31, 2021, compared to 102 as of December 31, 2020.
Salaries and benefits expense increased $38.2 million, or 42.3%, compared to 2020. Fixed compensation increased $2.2 million due to separation, retirement and benefits, talent acquisition and retention costs, and stock compensation, partially offset by a decrease in base salaries and payroll taxes. Variable compensation increased $36.0 million due to higher bonus accruals related to increased consultant productivity.
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.2 million, or 0.8%, compared to 2020, due to professional fees, intangible amortization, and communication services, partially offset by increases in hiring fees and business development travel.
Impairment charges in 2020 were $24.5 million as a result of an interim impairment evaluation on the goodwill of the Europe reporting unit. The impairment charge is recorded within Impairment charges in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
A restructuring reversal of $0.1 million was recorded in 2021 due to the settlement of estimated employee severance accruals. Restructuring charges were $8.6 million in 2020. The primary components of the restructuring include a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
Europe reported operating income of $18.4 million, including a restructuring reversal of $0.1 million, in 2021, an increase of $41.3 million compared to an operating loss of $22.8 million, including goodwill impairment charges of $24.5 million and restructuring charges of $8.6 million, in 2020.
Asia Pacific
Asia Pacific reported net revenue of $117.0 million in 2021, an increase of 47.2% compared to $79.5 million in 2020. The increase in net revenue was due to a 28.6% increase in the number of executive search confirmations and an increase in average revenue per executive search. All industry practice groups contributed to the growth in revenue with the exception of the Social Impact practice group. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations positively impacted net revenue by $3.4 million, or 4.3%. There were 69 Executive Search consultants at both December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Salaries and benefits expense increased $27.6 million, or 50.6%, compared to 2020. Fixed compensation increased $3.0 million due to base salaries and payroll taxes, retirement and benefits, stock compensation, and talent acquisition and retention costs. Variable compensation increased $24.6 million due to higher bonus accruals related to increased consultant productivity.
General and administrative expenses decreased $1.8 million, or 9.5%, compared to 2020 primarily due to bad debt, office occupancy, and professional fees, partially offset by an increase in business development travel.
Impairment charges in 2020 were $8.5 million as a result of an interim impairment evaluation on the goodwill of the Asia Pacific reporting unit. The impairment charge is recorded within Impairment charges in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
A restructuring reversal of $0.1 million was recorded in 2021 due to the settlement of estimated employee severance accruals. Restructuring charges were $4.6 million in 2020. The primary components of the restructuring include a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
Asia Pacific reported operating income of $18.2 million, including a restructuring reversal of $0.1 million, in 2021, an increase of $24.9 million compared to an operating loss of $6.7 million, including goodwill impairment charges of $8.5 million and restructuring charges of $4.6 million, in 2020.
On-Demand Talent
On-Demand Talent reported net revenue of $66.6 million in 2021 due to increases in large account penetration, project wins, and higher than anticipated average project size.
Salaries and benefits expense was $13.8 million in 2021, primarily comprised of base salaries and payroll taxes, talent acquisition and retention costs, and variable compensation.
General and administrative expenses were $16.2 million in 2021, primarily comprised of a one-time earnout obligation adjustment, intangible amortization, professional fees, information technology, and earnout accretion. In December 2021, a one-time fair value adjustment was made to the earnout liability of $11.4 million as a result of revised forecasts of future revenue that exceeded initial expectations.
Cost of services was $45.8 million in 2021, and consists of third-party contractor costs related to the delivery of various on-demand services.
On-Demand Talent reported an operating loss of $9.3 million in 2021, including a one-time earnout obligation adjustment of $11.4 million resulting from revenue exceeding expectations.
Heidrick Consulting
Heidrick Consulting reported net revenue of $67.6 million in 2021, an increase of 19.8% compared to $56.4 million in 2020. The increase in net revenue was due to a 48.1% increase in the number of consulting confirmations. Foreign exchange rate fluctuations positively impacted results by $1.4 million, or 2.4%. Heidrick Consulting's revenue reflects continued increases in confirmation values, average client value, Executive Search referred work, and the value of confirmations due to Executive Search collaborations. There were 69 Heidrick Consulting consultants as of December 31, 2021, compared to 65 as of December 31, 2020.
Salaries and benefits expense increased $3.3 million, or 5.7%, compared to 2020. Fixed compensation increased $0.7 million, due to retirement and benefits, talent acquisition and retention costs, and separation, partially offset by a decrease in base salaries and payroll taxes. Variable compensation increased $2.6 million due to higher bonus accruals related to increased consultant productivity.
General and administrative expenses decreased $2.6 million, or 15.1%, compared to 2020, due to professional fees and bad debt, partially offset by increases in other asset amortization and hiring fees.
Restructuring charges were $0.4 million and $4.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The current year restructuring charges primarily relate to a reduction in the Company's real estate footprint. The restructuring charges in the prior year primarily relate to a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
Heidrick Consulting reported an operating loss of $16.2 million, including restructuring charges of $0.4 million, in 2021, an increase of $12.2 million compared to an operating loss of $28.4, including restructuring charges of $4.7 million, in 2020. Heidrick Consulting continues to build momentum from collaboration within the Company and is a critical component of the growth strategy driving Executive Search and On-Demand Talent.
Global Operations Support
Global Operations Support expenses increased $14.5 million, or 35.9%, to $54.9 million from $40.4 million in 2020.
Salaries and benefits expenses increased $14.6 million, or 70.1%, compared to 2020 due to variable compensation, base salaries and payroll taxes, stock compensation, and retirement and benefits, partially offset by a decrease in separation.
General and administrative expenses increased $4.2 million, or 26.8%, compared to 2020 due to information technology, professional fees, insurance and bank fees, market data analysis tools, partially offset by decreases in communications services, marketing, and taxes and licenses.
A restructuring reversal of $0.2 million was recorded in 2021 due to the Company reaching an early termination agreement for one of its offices that resulted in lower future rent payments. Restructuring charges were $1.9 million in 2020. The restructuring charges in the prior year primarily relate to a workforce reduction, a reduction of the Company’s real estate expenses and professional fees, and the elimination of certain deferred compensation programs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General. We continually evaluate our liquidity requirements, capital needs and availability of capital resources based on our operating needs. We believe that our available cash balances together with the funds expected to be generated from operations and funds available under our committed revolving credit facility will be sufficient to finance our operations for the foreseeable future, as well as to finance the cash payments associated with our cash dividends and stock repurchase program.
We pay the non-deferred portion of annual bonuses in the first quarter following the year in which they are earned. Employee bonuses are accrued throughout the year and are based on our performance and the performance of the individual employee.
Lines of credit. On July 13, 2021, the Company entered into a First Amendment to the 2018 Credit Agreement (the "Amendment"). The Amendment provides the Company with a committed unsecured revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount of $200 million, increased from $175 million as set forth in the 2018 Credit Agreement, which includes a sublimit of $25 million for letters of credit and a sublimit of $10 million for swingline loans, with a $75 million expansion feature. The Amendment matures on July 13, 2026, extended from October 26, 2023 as set forth in the 2018 Credit Agreement.
Borrowings under the Amendment may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions, restricted payments and for other general corporate purposes of the Company and its subsidiaries. The obligations under the Amendment are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we borrowed $100.0 million under the 2018 Credit Agreement. We elected to draw down a portion of the available funds from our revolving line of credit as a precautionary measure to increase our cash position and further enhance our financial flexibility in light of current uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the
COVID-19 outbreak. We believed that we had more than sufficient liquidity, even prior to taking this action, but elected to draw down available funds out of an abundance of caution in this period of uncertainty. The draw-down proceeds from the revolving line of credit were invested in short-term securities and we subsequently repaid $100.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings. The Company was in compliance with the financial and other covenants under the Amendment and no event of default existed.
Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities. Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at December 31, 2021 were $545.2 million, an increase of $208.8 million compared to $336.5 million at December 31, 2020. The $545.2 million of cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities at December 31, 2021 includes $186.5 million held by our foreign subsidiaries. A portion of the $186.5 million is considered permanently reinvested in these foreign subsidiaries. If these funds were required to satisfy obligations in the United States, the repatriation of these funds could cause us to incur additional foreign withholding taxes. We expect to pay approximately $368.2 million in variable compensation and other bonuses related to 2021 performance in March and April 2022. In January 2022, we paid approximately $14.9 million in cash bonuses deferred in prior years.
Cash flows provided by operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $271.4 million, primarily reflecting net loss net of non-cash charges of $97.9 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $36.8 million, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $230.2 million. The decrease in accrued expenses primarily reflects approximately $180.4 million of 2020 bonuses paid in March 2021, offset by 2021 bonus accruals of $368.2 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $23.4 million, primarily reflecting net loss net of non-cash charges of $30.6 million and a decrease in accounts receivable of $22.6 million, partially offset by a decrease in accrued expenses of $26.5 million. The decrease in accrued expenses primarily reflects approximately $202.0 million of 2019 bonuses paid in March 2020, offset by 2020 bonus accruals of $180.4 million.
Cash flows provided by (used in) investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $21.3 million, primarily due to cash used in acquisitions net of cash acquired of of $33.5 million, capital expenditures of $6.2 million, and purchases of available for sale investments of $2.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturity and sale of available for sale investments of $20.8 million. The cash outflow for capital expenditures is primarily the result of office build-outs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided investing activities was $32.6 million, primarily due to proceeds from the maturity and sales of marketable securities and investments of $158.9 million, partially offset by purchases of marketable securities and investments of $118.9 million and capital expenditures of $7.3 million. The cash outflow for capital expenditures is primarily the result of office build-outs.
Cash flows used in financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was $15.5 million, primarily due to cash dividend payments of $12.4 million and payment of employee tax withholdings on equity transactions of $3.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities was $16.4 million, primarily due to cash dividend payments of $12.0 million, earnout payments related to the Amrop acquisitions of $2.8 million, and payment of employee tax withholdings on equity transactions of $1.6 million. Gross borrowings and payments on the line of credit were each $100.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Stock repurchase program. On February 11, 2008, we announced a Repurchase Authorization of up to $50 million. We may from time to time and as business conditions warrant purchase shares of our common stock on the open market or in negotiated or block trades. No time limit has been set for completion of this program. We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock in 2021 or 2020. The most recent purchase of shares of common stock occurred during the year ended December 31, 2012. As of December 31, 2021 we have purchased 1,038,670 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Repurchase Authorization for a total of $28.3 million and $21.7 million remains available for future purchases under the Repurchase Authorization.
Off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not have material off-balance sheet arrangements, special purpose entities, trading activities of non-exchange traded contracts or transactions with related parties.
Contractual obligations. Our lease portfolio is comprised of operating leases for office space and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we had lease payment obligations of $94.5 million, with $18.4 million payable within 12 months. Associated with our lease portfolio, we have asset retirement obligations for the retirement of tangible long-lived assets related to our obligation at the end of the lease term to return office space to the landlord in its original condition. As of December 31, 2021, we had asset retirement obligations of $3.2 million, with $0.3 million payable within 12 months.
In addition to lease related contractual obligations, we also have liabilities related to certain employee benefit plans. These liabilities are recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021. The obligations related to these employee benefit plans are described in Note 12, Employee Benefit Plans, and Note 13, Pension Plan and Life Insurance Contract, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have a liability for uncertain tax positions.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 3, Revenue, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Historically, we have not made significant changes to the methods for determining these estimates as our actual results have not differed materially from our estimates. We do not believe it is reasonably likely that the estimates and related assumptions will change materially in the foreseeable future; however, actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions. If actual amounts are ultimately different from previous estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, there are different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur periodically, that could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect its more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue recognition. In our Executive Search segment, revenue is recognized as we satisfy our performance obligations by transferring a good or service to a client. Generally, each of our executive search contracts contain one performance obligation which is the process of identifying potentially qualified candidates for a specific client position. In most contracts, the transaction price includes both fixed and variable consideration. Fixed compensation is comprised of a retainer, equal to approximately one-third of the estimated first year compensation for the position to be filled, and indirect expenses, equal to a specified percentage of the retainer, as defined in the contract. We generally bill our clients for the retainer and indirect expenses in one-third increments over a three-month period commencing in the month of a client’s acceptance of the contract. If actual compensation of a placed candidate exceeds the original compensation estimate, we are often authorized to bill the client for one-third of the excess compensation. We refer to this additional billing as uptick revenue. In most contracts, variable consideration is comprised of uptick revenue and direct expenses. We bill our clients for uptick revenue upon completion of the executive search, and direct expenses are billed as incurred.
As required under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2014-09, we now estimate uptick revenue at contract inception, based on a portfolio approach, utilizing the expected value method based on a historical analysis of uptick revenue realized in the Company’s geographic regions and industry practices, and initially record a contract’s uptick revenue in an amount that is probable not to result in a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized when the actual amount of uptick revenue for that contract is known. Differences between the estimated and actual amounts of variable consideration are recorded when known. We do not estimate revenue for direct expenses as it is not materially different than recognizing revenue as direct expenses are incurred.
Revenue from our executive search engagement performance obligation is recognized over time as our clients simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided by our performance. Revenue from executive search engagements is recognized over the expected average period of performance, in proportion to the estimated personnel time incurred to fulfill our obligations under the executive search contract. Revenue is generally recognized over a period of approximately six months.
Our executive search contracts contain a replacement guarantee which provides for an additional search to be completed, free of charge except for expense reimbursements, should the candidate presented by us be hired by the client and subsequently terminated by the client for performance reasons within a specified period of time. The replacement guarantee is an assurance warranty, which is not a performance obligation under the terms of the executive search contract, as we do not provide any services under the terms of the guarantee that transfer benefits to the client in excess of assuring that the identified candidate complies with the agreed-upon specifications. We account for the replacement guarantee under the relevant warranty guidance in ASC 460 - Guarantees.
In our On-Demand Talent segment, we enter into contracts with clients that outline the general terms and conditions of the assignment to provide on-demand consultants for various types of consulting projects, which consultants may be independent contractors or temporary employees. The consideration we expect to receive under each contract is dependent on the time-based fees specified in the contract. Revenue from on-demand engagement performance obligations is recognized over time as clients simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided by our performance. We have applied the practical expedient to recognize revenue for these services in the amount to which we have a right to invoice the client, as this amount corresponds directly with the value provided to the client for the performance completed to date. For transactions where a third-party contractor is involved in providing the services to the client, we report the revenue and the related direct costs on a gross basis as we have determined that we are the principal in the transaction. We are primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide consulting services to our clients and we have discretion in establishing the prices charged to clients for the consulting services and are able to contractually obligate the independent service provider to deliver services and deliverables that we have agreed to provide to our clients.
In our Heidrick Consulting segment, revenue is recognized as we satisfy our performance obligations by transferring a good or service to a client. Heidrick Consulting enters into contracts with clients that outline the general terms and conditions of the assignment to provide succession planning, executive assessment, top team and board effectiveness and culture shaping programs. The consideration we expect to receive under each contract is generally fixed. Most of our consulting contracts contain one performance obligation, which is the overall process of providing the consulting service requested by the client. The majority of our consulting revenue is recognized over time utilizing both input and output methods. Contracts that contain coaching sessions, training sessions or the completion of assessments are recognized using the output method as each session or assessment is delivered to the client. Contracts that contain general consulting work are recognized using the input method utilizing a measure of progress that is based on time incurred on the project.
We enter into enterprise agreements with clients to provide a license for online access, via our Culture Connect platform, to training and other proprietary material related to our culture shaping programs. The consideration we expect to receive under the terms of an enterprise agreement is comprised of a single fixed fee. Our enterprise agreements contain multiple performance obligations, the delivery of materials via Culture Connect and material rights related to options to renew enterprise agreements at a significant discount. We allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract on a stand-alone selling price basis. The stand-alone selling price for the initial term of the enterprise agreement is outlined in the contract and is equal to the price paid by the client for the agreement over the initial term of the contract. The stand-alone selling price for the options to renew, or material right, are not directly observable and must be estimated. This estimate is required to reflect the discount the client would obtain when exercising the option to renew, adjusted for the likelihood that the option will be exercised. We estimate the likelihood of renewal using a historical analysis of client renewals. Access to Culture Connect represents a right to access our intellectual property that the client simultaneously receives and consumes as we perform under the agreement, and therefore we recognize revenue over time. Given the continuous nature of this commitment, we utilize straight-line ratable revenue recognition over the estimated subscription period as our clients will receive and consume the benefits from Culture Connect equally throughout the contract period. Revenue related to client renewals of enterprise agreements is recognized over the term of the renewal, which is generally twelve months. Enterprise agreements do not comprise a significant portion of our revenue.
Each of our contracts with clients has an expected duration of one year or less. Accordingly, we have elected to utilize the available practical expedient related to the disclosure of the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations under its contracts. We have also elected the available practical expedients related to adjusting for the effects of a significant financing component and the capitalization of contract acquisition costs. We charge and collect from our clients, sales tax and value added taxes as required by certain jurisdictions. We have made an accounting policy election to exclude these items from the transaction price in our contracts.
Income taxes. Determining the consolidated provision for income tax expense, income tax liabilities and deferred tax assets and liabilities involves judgment. As a global company, we calculate and provide for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. This involves estimating current tax exposures in each jurisdiction as well as making judgments regarding the recoverability of deferred tax assets. Tax exposures can involve complex issues and may require an
extended period to resolve. Changes in the geographic mix or estimated level of annual income before taxes can affect the overall effective tax rate.
The recognition of deferred tax assets is based on management’s belief that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits associated with temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will be utilized. We assess the recoverability of the deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis. In making this assessment, we consider all positive and negative evidence, and all potential sources of taxable income including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, tax-planning strategies, projected future taxable income and recent financial performance.
Deferred taxes have been recorded for U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes related to undistributed foreign earnings that are not permanently reinvested. Annually, we assess material changes in estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in order to determine whether these earnings should be distributed. If so, an additional provision for taxes may apply, which could materially affect our future effective tax rate.
Goodwill. We perform assessments of the carrying value of goodwill at least annually and whenever events occur or circumstances indicate that a carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. These circumstances may include a significant change in business climate, attrition of key personnel, changes in financial condition or results of operations, a prolonged decline in our stock price and market capitalization, competition, and other factors.
We operate five reporting units: the Americas, Europe (which includes Africa), Asia Pacific (which includes the Middle East), On-Demand Talent, and Heidrick Consulting. The goodwill impairment test is completed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The fair value of each of our reporting units is determined using a discounted cash flow methodology. The discounted cash flow approach is dependent on a number of factors including estimates of future market growth and trends, forecasted revenue and costs, capital investments, appropriate discount rates, certain assumptions to allocate shared costs, assets and liabilities, historical and projected performance of our reporting units, the outlook for the executive search industry and the macroeconomic conditions affecting each of our reporting units. The assumptions used in the determination of fair value were (1) a forecast of growth in the near and long term; (2) the discount rate; (3) working capital investments; (4) macroeconomic conditions and (5) other factors. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. The fair value of our reporting units is also impacted by our overall market capitalization and may be impacted by volatility in our stock price and assumed control premium, among other factors. As a result, actual future results may differ from those estimates and may result in a future impairment charge. These assumptions are updated annually, at a minimum, to reflect information concerning our reportable segments. We continue to monitor potential triggering events including changes in the business climate in which it operates, our market capitalization compared to our book value, and our recent operating performance. Any changes in these factors could result in an impairment charge. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We believe that the accounting estimate related to goodwill impairment is a critical accounting estimate because the assumptions used are highly susceptible to changes in the operating results and cash flows of our reportable segments.
Other intangible assets and long-lived assets. We review our other intangible assets and long-lived assets, including property and equipment and right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of asset groups to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge, equal to the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset group, is recognized.
We believe that the accounting estimate related to other intangible and long-lived asset impairment is a critical accounting estimate because the assumptions used are highly susceptible to changes in operating results and cash flows.
Contingent Consideration. The former owners of the Company's acquisitions are generally eligible to receive additional cash consideration based on the attainment of certain operating metrics in the periods subsequent to acquisition. The fair value of these obligations is based on the present value of the expected future payments to be made to the former owners of the acquired entities in accordance with the provisions outlined in the respective purchase agreements, which is a Level 3 fair value measurement. We assess the fair value of these liabilities at each balance sheet date based on the expected performance of the associated business and any changes in fair value are recorded in General and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). In determining fair value, we estimate the acquired entity’s future performance using financial projections developed by management for the acquired entity and market participant assumptions that were
derived for revenue growth and/or profitability. We estimate future payments using the formula and performance targets specified in each purchase agreement and these financial projections. We then discount these payments to present value using a risk-adjusted rate that takes into consideration market-based rates of return that reflect the ability of the acquired entity to achieve the targets. Changes in financial projections, market participant assumptions for revenue growth and/or profitability, or the risk-adjusted discount rate, would result in a change in the fair value of recorded earnout obligations. To the extent that our estimates change in the future regarding the likelihood of achieving these targets, we may need to record material adjustments to our accrued contingent consideration.
Recently Issued and Adopted Financial Accounting Standards
The information presented in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.