Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 175 promulgated thereunder, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that involve risks and uncertainties, and can generally be identified by our use of the words "scheduled," "anticipates," "expects," "intends," "plans," "believes," "seeks," "estimates," and variations of such words and similar expressions. Such statements, which include statements concerning future revenue sources and concentration, international market expansion, gross margin, selling and marketing expenses, remaining minimum performance obligations, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, capital resources, financings or borrowings and additional losses, are subject to risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A. "Risk Factors," that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. The forward-looking statements set forth in this Form 10-K are as of the close of business on February 25, 2022, and we undertake no duty and do not intend to update this information, except as required by applicable securities laws. If we updated one or more forward looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements set forth above. See "Statement Regarding Forward Looking Statements."
On January 3, 2022, the Company acquired 100% of the equity of VetZ GmbH (“VetZ”), a European leader in veterinary practice information management software solutions (“PIMS”). Refer to Note 19 - Subsequent Events to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion of significant changes from the periods ending December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 can be found in Part II. Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We sell advanced veterinary diagnostic and specialty products. Our offerings include Point of Care laboratory instruments and consumables; Point of Care digital imaging diagnostic instruments; digital cytology services; vaccines; local and cloud-based data services; allergy testing and immunotherapy; and single-use offerings such as in-clinic diagnostic tests and heartworm preventive products. Our core focus is on supporting veterinarians in the canine and feline healthcare space.
Point of Care laboratory instruments and other sales include outright instrument sales, revenue recognized from sales-type lease treatment, and other revenue sources, such as charges for repairs and reference laboratory sales. Revenue from Point of Care laboratory consumables primarily involves placing an instrument under contract in the field and generating future revenue from testing consumables, such as cartridges and reagents, as that instrument is used. Instruments placed under subscription agreements are considered operating or sales-type leases, depending on the duration and other factors of the underlying agreement. A loss of, or disruption in, the supply of consumables we are selling to an installed base of instruments could substantially harm our business. All of our Point of Care laboratory and other non-imaging instruments and consumables are supplied by third parties, who typically own the product rights and supply the product to us under marketing and/or distribution agreements. In many cases, we have collaborated with a
third party to adapt a human instrument for veterinary use. Major products in this area include our instruments for chemistry, hematology, blood gas and immunodiagnostic testing and their affiliated operating consumable.
Radiography is the largest product offering in Point of Care imaging, which includes digital and computed radiography and ultrasound instruments. Radiography solutions typically consist of a combination of hardware and software placed with a customer, often combined with an ongoing service and support contract. Our experience has been that most of the revenue is generated at the time of sale in this area, in contrast to the Point of Care diagnostic laboratory placements discussed above where ongoing consumable revenue is often a larger component of economic value as a given instrument is used.
Pharmaceuticals, Vaccines and Diagnostic ("PVD") revenue, includes single use diagnostic and other tests, pharmaceuticals and biologicals as well as research and development, licensing and royalty revenue. Since items in this area are often single use by their nature, our typical aim is to build customer satisfaction and loyalty for each product, generate repeat annual sales from existing customers and expand our customer base in the future. Products in this area are both supplied by third parties and provided by us. Major products and services in this area include heartworm diagnostic tests and preventatives, single-use rapid assay diagnostic tests, allergy test kits, allergy immunotherapy and testing, and other diagnostic rapid tests.
Other Vaccines and Pharmaceuticals ("OVP") revenue is generated in our USDA, FDA and DEA licensed production facility in Des Moines, Iowa. We view this facility as an asset which could allow us to control our cost of goods on any pharmaceuticals and vaccines that we may commercialize in the future. We have increased integration of this facility with our operations elsewhere. For example, virtually all of our U.S. inventory, excluding our imaging products, is stored at this facility and related fulfillment logistics are managed there. Our OVP revenue includes vaccines and pharmaceuticals produced for third parties. OVP is attributable only to the North America segment.
All of our products are ultimately sold primarily to or through veterinarians. In many cases, veterinarians will mark up their costs to their customers. The acceptance of our products by veterinarians is critical to our success. These products are sold directly to end users by us as well as through distribution relationships, such as the sale of kits to conduct blood testing to third-party veterinary diagnostic laboratories and sales to independent third-party distributors. Revenue from direct sales and distribution relationships represented 72% and 28%, respectively, of revenue for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, and 64% and 36% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Segment Change
During the second quarter of 2020, following the scil acquisition, the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) changed how he assesses performance and allocates resources based on geographic regions. As a result, the Company determined it has two operating and reportable segments: North America and International. North America consists of the United States, Canada and Mexico. International consists of geographies outside of North America, primarily our operations in Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and Switzerland. The Company's core strategic focus on Point of Care laboratory and imaging products is included in both segments. The North America segment also includes the contract manufacturing of vaccines and pharmaceutical products. The Company revised prior comparative periods to conform to the current period segment presentation. Refer to Note 18 - Segment Reporting to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic and Current Economic Environment
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, to limit the spread of COVID-19, governments took various actions including the issuance of stay-at-home policies and social distancing procedures and guidelines, causing some businesses to adjust, reduce or suspend business and operating activities. Veterinary care is widely recognized as an "essential" service for pet owners, and veterinarians continued to deliver essential medical care for sick and injured pets. The stay-at-home policies deployed early in 2020 to combat the spread of COVID-19 resulted in a decrease in companion animal clinical visits, including delay of elective procedures and wellness visits and as a result, lower demand for diagnostic testing services. Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, certain local, state and federal governments began to ease the stay-at-home policies and allowed more businesses and facilities to re-open, leading to a recovery in companion animal clinical visits and associated demand for our diagnostic products. In some part, and different depending on the geography, due to the introduction and acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines, restrictions have eased in many of the countries in which we operate. Global diagnostic animal health demand continued throughout 2021. While this trend is encouraging, with the rise in COVID-19 variants, the extent to which the continuation, or another wave, of COVID-19, or an outbreak of other health epidemics could impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including the potential for write-offs or impairments of assets and suspension of capital investments, will depend on future developments. We are unable to predict with certainty the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, suppliers and vendors, as well as the actions of governments, and when and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume; these effects may differ from those assumed in our projected estimates. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business, mainly in our ability to place new capital equipment, primarily under long-term contracts, as a result of any economic impact that may occur in the future.
Due to our dependence on global suppliers, manufacturers and shipping routes, we are experiencing increased delays in receiving supply, increased shipping costs and some targeted increase in materials cost. Because our long-term subscription programs, the commercial program of our largest revenue category, Point of Care laboratory instruments and consumables, include annual price adjustments at a greater of 4% or the consumer price index, we are able to mitigate some of these costs in this highly inflationary environment.
Our financial position remains strong. On March 5, 2021, we completed a public offering of shares of common stock. As a result, we have sufficient liquidity to sustain our operations. We will continue to actively seek opportunities that are consistent with our strategic direction, which may include a need to raise additional capital.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Note 1 - Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. In each of these areas, management makes estimates based on historical results, current trends and future projections. Therefore, these are considered to be our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Deferred Tax Assets - Valuation Allowance
We evaluate our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with a deferred tax asset (“DTA”) by analyzing our forecasted taxable income using both historical and projected future operating results, the reversal of
existing temporary differences, taxable income in prior carry back years (if permitted) and the availability of tax planning strategies. A valuation allowance is required to be established unless management determines that it is more likely than not that we will ultimately realize the tax benefit associated with a deferred tax asset. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had valuation allowances of approximately $2.8 million and $6.4 million, respectively.
Business Combinations
We account for transactions that represent business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires us to allocate the total consideration paid for each acquisition to the assets we acquire and liabilities we assume based on their fair values as of the date of acquisition, including identifiable intangible assets. The allocation of the purchase price utilizes significant estimates in determining the fair values of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets. We may refine our estimates and make adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed over a measurement period, not to exceed one year.
The Company has financial liabilities resulting from our business combinations, including contingent consideration arrangements and notes payable. We estimate the fair value of these financial liabilities using Level 3 inputs that require the use of numerous assumptions and a probability-weighted outcome analysis, which may change based on the occurrence of future events and lead to increased or decreased operating income in future periods. Estimating the fair value at an acquisition date and in subsequent periods involves significant judgments, including projecting the future financial and product development performance of the acquired businesses. The Company will update its assumptions each reporting period based on new developments and record such amounts at fair value based on the revised assumptions. Changes in the fair value of these financial liabilities are recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Loss within general and administrative expenses.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles
A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is generally assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at fair value. If a quoted price in an active market for the identical asset is not readily available at the measurement date, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to Heska. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When material, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in determining the fair values of the identified intangible assets acquired in connection with a business acquisition and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair value of acquired net assets recognized and represents the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized.
We assess goodwill for impairment annually, at the reporting unit level, in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist. In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the comparison of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value. The more-likely-than-not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50 percent. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that is it more-likely-than-not that the estimated fair value of a reporting is less than its carrying amount, we would then estimate the fair value of
the reporting unit and compare it to the carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value we would recognize an impairment for the difference; otherwise, no further impairment test would be required. In contrast, we can opt to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to quantitative analysis. Doing so does not preclude us from performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period.
As part of our goodwill testing process, we evaluate factors specific to a reporting unit as well as industry and macroeconomic factors that are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the fair value of a reporting unit. Examples of the factors considered in assessing the fair value of a reporting unit include: the results of the most recent impairment test, the competitive environment, the regulatory environment, anticipated changes in product or labor costs, revenue growth trends, the consistency of operating margins and cash flows and current and long-range financial forecasts. The long-range financial forecasts of the reporting units, which are based upon management’s long-term view of our markets, are used by senior management and the Board of Directors to evaluate operating performance.
We performed qualitative assessments in the fourth quarters of 2021, 2020 and 2019 and determined that no indications of impairment existed.
We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the primary asset of the asset group and compare that value to the carrying value of the asset group. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. If the net carrying value of an intangible asset exceeds the related estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment to adjust the intangible asset to its fair value would be reported as a non-cash charge to earnings. If necessary, we would calculate the fair value of an intangible asset using the present value of the estimated future cash flows to be generated by the intangible asset, and applying a risk-adjusted discount rate. We had no impairments of our intangible assets during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
We utilize share-based compensation arrangements as part of our long-term incentive plan. Our share-based compensation programs provide for grants of many types of awards, but we currently grant stock options, including performance stock options, restricted stock awards, and restricted stock units, along with the issuance of employee stock purchase rights. The total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year.
The majority of our currently issued restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, and performance stock options are tied to Company and market-related performance metrics and generally include a time vesting component. We also grant stock options and restricted stock awards tied to time vesting to employees and directors. All significant inputs into the determination of expense as well as the related expense are discussed further in Note 12 - Capital Stock to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Restricted Stock Awards and Units (Time Vesting)
The fair value of restricted stock awards and restricted stock units with only time-based vesting terms used in our expense recognition method is measured based on the number of shares granted and the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. Such value is recognized as an expense over the corresponding requisite service period. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
Performance-Based Stock Compensation Awards
We also grant restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, and performance stock options subject to performance vesting criteria, in addition to service, to our executive officers and other key employees. This type of grant consists of the right to receive shares of, or options to purchase, common stock, subject to achievement of time-based criteria and certain Company and market performance-related goals over a specified period, as established by the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors. We recognize any related share-based compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period based on the probability assessment on the outcome of the performance condition related to company performance metrics. The fair value used in our expense recognition method is measured based on the number of shares granted and the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant for restricted stock awards and units and the Black-Scholes model for performance stock options. The amount of share-based compensation expense recognized in any one period can vary based on the attainment or expected attainment of the performance goals. If such performance goals are not ultimately met, no compensation expense is recognized and any previously recognized compensation expense is reversed. We recognize any related share-based compensation expense ratably over the service period based on the most probable outcome of the performance condition related to market performance metrics. For awards related to market performance, the fair value used in our expense recognition method is measured based on the number of shares granted, and a Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates the probability of the achievement of the market-related performance goals as part of the grant date fair value. If such performance goals are not ultimately met, the expense is not reversed.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, the FASB or other standard setting bodies issue new accounting pronouncements. Updates to the FASB ASC are communicated through issuance of an ASU. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted in the future, is not expected to have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements upon adoption.
To understand the impact of recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted, please review the information provided in Note 1 - Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Our analysis presented below is organized to provide the information we believe will facilitate an understanding of our historical performance and relevant trends going forward. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto, in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain data derived from our Consolidated Statements of Loss (in thousands):
(1) Shares used in the diluted per share calculation for diluted loss per share attributable to Heska Corporation are (in thousands) 10,015 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 8,653 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Shares used in the diluted per share calculation for non-GAAP net income per diluted share are (in thousands): 10,407 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 9,451 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, Non-GAAP net income per diluted share to Diluted loss per share attributable to Heska Corporation, and Adjusted EBITDA margin to Net margin, the closest comparable GAAP measures, for each of the periods presented.
Revenue
Total revenue increased 28.6% to $253.7 million in 2021 compared to $197.3 million in 2020. The significant increase in revenue is driven primarily by the acquisition of scil, which was completed on April 1, 2020, and which contributed $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 that was not included in the prior year period. Excluding the impacts of the acquisition of scil, revenue growth was driven by POC Lab Consumables of $14.4 million or 15.8% in the year ended December 31, 2021, recovery from COVID impacts in the prior year related to capital placements in POC Imaging products of $7.5 million and growth within our contract manufactured product for third parties, including TriHeart, and immunotherapy products
of $6.5 million. The launch of element AIM in the year ended December 31, 2021 also contributed to growth in the POC Laboratory space.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 30.1% to $105.8 million in 2021 compared to $81.3 million in 2020. Gross margin percent expanded to 41.7% in 2021 compared to 41.2% in 2020. The increase in gross profit is due mainly to the increase in revenue as well as the acquisition of scil, which was not included in the first quarter of the prior year period. The increase in gross margin percentage is due to favorable product mix, primarily as a result of POC Lab Consumables and POC Imaging.
Operating Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses increased 17.7% to $45.3 million in 2021 compared to $38.5 million in 2020. The increase is a direct result of international expansion related to recent acquisitions and is in line with management expectations. The increase is also impacted by higher stock-based compensation expenses of $1.1 million as well as other compensation-related expenses.
Research and development expenses decreased 20.4% to $7.0 million in 2021, compared to $8.8 million in 2020. The decrease is primarily related to lower spending on product development for the urine and fecal diagnostic analyzer and enhanced immunodiagnostic offerings in the current year as these products are now commercialized.
General and administrative expenses increased 29.1% to $54.5 million in 2021, compared to $42.2 million in 2020. The increase is driven primarily by incremental stock-based compensation expense of $7.4 million and other compensation-related increases of $6.0 million as well as increased costs associated with international expansion of $3.5 million, and higher consulting and other professional services of approximately $3.0 million. This is partially offset by lower one-time costs of $8.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, as there were significant costs associated with the scil acquisition in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest and other expense, net, was $2.4 million in 2021, compared to $5.6 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a change in interest expense related to the Notes. Refer to Note 16 - Convertible Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
In 2021, we had total income tax benefit of $3.6 million compared to a total income tax expense in 2020 of $0.2 million. See Note 5 - Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our income taxes.
Net (Loss) Attributable to Heska Corporation
Net loss attributable to Heska Corporation was $1.1 million in 2021, compared to net loss attributable to Heska Corporation of $14.4 million in 2020. The difference between this line item and "Net (loss) income after equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates" is the net income or loss attributable to the minority interest in our French subsidiary, Optomed (which has been merged into our French subsidiary scil animal care company sarl), which we purchased in February 2019. The difference between these line items was $0 for 2021, as the Company acquired the remaining 30% minority interest in Optomed in October 2020, and a gain of $0.4 million for 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ("EBITDA") in 2021 was $29.7 million (11.7% adjusted EBITDA margin), compared to $22.3 million (11.3% adjusted EBITDA margin) in 2020. The increase is driven by increased revenue and gross profit as discussed above. This is partially offset by an increase in operating expenses primarily as a result of the acquisition of scil and compensation-related increases. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net income and adjusted EBITDA margin to net loss margin, the closest comparable GAAP measures, for each of the periods presented.
Earnings Per Share
Diluted loss per share attributable to Heska was $0.11 in 2021 compared to loss of $1.66 per diluted share in 2020. The lower loss is primarily due to higher revenue and gross profit as discussed above, interest and amortization charges relating to the Notes, and income tax benefit.
Non-GAAP Earnings Per Share
Non-GAAP EPS was income of $1.61 per diluted share in 2021 compared to income of $0.74 per diluted share in 2020. The increase is primarily due to higher revenue and gross profit as discussed above. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of non-GAAP EPS to net (loss) income attributable to Heska per diluted share, the closest comparable U.S. GAAP measure, in each of the periods presented.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial measures presented on the basis of accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”), we also present EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, and non-GAAP net income (loss) per diluted share, which are non-GAAP measures.
These measures should be viewed as a supplement to, not substitute for, our results of operations presented under U.S. GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measures presented may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate their measures in the same manner. Management uses EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin and non-GAAP net income (loss) per diluted share as key profitability measures, which are included in our quarterly analyses of our operating results to our senior management team, our annual budget and related goal setting and other performance measurements. We believe these non-GAAP measures enhance our investors' understanding of our business performance and that not adjusting for the items included in the reconciliations below would hinder comparison of the performance of our businesses on a period-over-period basis or with other businesses.
The following tables reconcile our most directly comparable as-reported financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP to our non-GAAP financial measures (in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts):
(1) Net income (loss) used for reconciliation represents the "Net income (loss) before equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates."
(2) To exclude the effect of one-time charges of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs were incurred primarily as a result of acquisition-related charges, partially offset by a reduction of contingent consideration of $1.7 million as well as litigation settlement proceeds of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(3) Net margin and adjusted EBITDA margin are calculated as the ratio of net income (loss) and adjusted EBITDA, respectively, to revenue.
(1) To exclude the effect of one-time charges of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs were incurred primarily as a result of acquisition-related charges, partially offset by a reduction of contingent consideration of $1.7 million as well as litigation settlement proceeds of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(2) To exclude the effect of amortization of acquired intangibles of $6.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs were incurred as part of the purchase accounting adjustments for the acquisitions of scil, Optomed and CVM.
(3) To exclude the effect of purchase accounting adjustments for inventory step up amortization and depreciation related to the step-up of fixed assets of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(4) Represents income tax expense utilizing an estimated effective tax rate that adjusts for non-GAAP measures including: acquisition-related and other one-time costs (excluding benefits which are not deductible for tax of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.0 million expense for the year ended December 31, 2020), amortization of acquired intangibles, purchase accounting adjustments, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, and stock-based compensation. This incorporates the tax benefit related to stock-based compensation of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted effective tax rates are approximately 25% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Analysis by Segment
The North America segment includes sales and costs from the United States, Canada and Mexico. The International segment includes sales and costs from Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and Switzerland.
The North America segment represented 62.6% of our revenue and the International segment represented 37.4% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following sections and tables set forth, for the periods indicated, certain data derived from our Consolidated Statements of (Loss) Income (in thousands).
North America Segment
North America segment revenue increased 21.2% to $158.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $131.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 in part due to the acquisition of scil, which contributed $4.3 million that was not present in the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding this, the remaining revenue growth was driven by a 19.7% increase in POC Lab Consumables due to increased price and utilization, a 28.2% increase in sales from Point of Care Imaging as we experienced recovery from COVID-19 restrictions in the prior year, and an increase of 25.9% in PVD driven by Tri-heart and Allergy sales.
Gross profit was $74.4 million compared to $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in gross profit is primarily driven by increased revenue in the current year, specifically related POC Lab Consumables, POC Imaging and PVD sales. Gross margin was 46.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 46.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to favorable mix, specifically increased revenue and margins for consumables due mainly to utilization and price, Imaging and OVP.
North America operating income was $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an operating loss of $(5.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is driven by higher revenue and gross profit in 2021, partially offset by increased operating costs primarily related to stock based compensation in the current year.
International Segment
International revenue was $94.8 million compared to $66.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in part driven by the acquisition of scil, which contributed $18.0 million that was not present in the year ended December 31, 2020. The remaining revenue growth is driven by increased placements as a result of transitioning to the reset program in Europe, POC consumable growth of 8.5%, excluding the impact of the scil acquisition, fewer COVID-19 impacts for POC Imaging, and higher sales of single-use tests.
Gross profit was $31.4 million compared to $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margin for the International segment was 33.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 30.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit is primarily driven by increase in revenue and lower costs relating mainly to our POC Lab Consumables as we continue to rationalize the product portfolio in Europe. The increase in gross margin is driven by favorable product mix within POC Lab Consumables and POC Imaging.
International operating loss decreased $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decrease in operating loss is driven by increased revenue and gross profit, partially offset by increased operating expenses, as a result of the scil acquisition now being included for the full year and increased compensation costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Condition
We believe that adequate liquidity and cash generation is important to the execution of our strategic initiatives. Our ability to fund our operations, acquisitions, capital expenditures, and product development efforts may depend on our ability to access other forms of capital as well as our ability to generate cash from operating activities, which is subject to future operating performance, as well as general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other conditions, some of which may be beyond our control, including but not limited to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our primary source of liquidity is our available cash of $223.6 million, which includes net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $164.2 million on March 5, 2021.
A summary of our cash from operating, investing and financing activities is as follows (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flow provided by (used in) operations was $6.2 million and $(0.7) million, respectively, which was primarily the result of (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flow used in investing activities was $35.0 million and $126.6 million, respectively, which was primarily used for (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flow from financing activities was $166.4 million and $123.8 million, respectively, which was the result of (in thousands):
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, as well as the cash flows generated by our operations, will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures, including selling and marketing team expansion and product development initiatives, for at least the next 12 months. Our belief may prove to be incorrect, however, and we could utilize our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect. For example, we actively seek opportunities that are consistent with our strategic direction, which may require additional capital. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in Part I. Item 1A, "Risk Factors". We may seek additional equity or debt financing in order to meet these future capital requirements, even in the absence of any acquisitions. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Effect of currency translation on cash
Net effect of foreign currency translations on cash changed $1.2 million to a $0.4 million negative impact in 2021, compared to a $0.8 million positive impact in 2020. The net effect of foreign currency translation on cash changed to a positive $0.8 million from a $0 impact in 2019. These effects are related to changes in exchange rates between the U.S. Dollar and the Swiss Franc, Euro, Canadian Dollar, Australian Dollar, and Malaysian Ringgit which are the functional currencies of our subsidiaries.
Material Cash Requirements
The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provided financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with the Company.
Purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a fixed, minimum or range of quantities; specify a fixed, minimum, variable, or indexed price provision; and specify approximate timing of the transaction.
The following table presents certain future payments due by the Company as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Includes the principal amount of the convertible senior notes. Although the notes mature in 2026, they can be converted into cash and shares of our common stock prior to maturity if certain conditions are met. Any conversion prior to maturity can result in repayments of the principal amounts sooner than the scheduled repayments as indicated in the table. For additional information, refer to Note 16 - Convertible Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Includes interest payments for both the convertible senior notes and other long term borrowings.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had a net operating loss carryforward (“NOL”) and domestic research and development tax credit carryforward. See Note 5 - Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our carryforwards.