ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto, included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This MD&A contains forward-looking statements. Please see “FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and assumptions associated with these statements. This MD&A also uses the non-generally accepted accounting principle measure of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for EBITDA segment reconciliation information. Note that amounts within this Item shown in millions may not recalculate due to rounding.
This MD&A includes the following sections:
•Executive Overview
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Contingencies
•Critical Accounting Policies
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
•Forward-Looking Statements
Executive Overview
The Company’s strategy is to provide global RPO solutions to customers. With direct operations in fourteen countries and relationships with specialized professionals and organizations around the globe, the Company brings a strong ability to match talent with opportunities by assessing, recruiting, developing, and engaging highly successful people for the Company’s clients. The Company combines broad geographic presence, world-class talent solutions and a tailored, consultative approach to help businesses and professionals achieve maximum performance. The Company’s focus is to continually upgrade its service offerings and delivery capability tools to make candidates more successful in achieving its clients’ business requirements.
The Company’s proprietary frameworks, assessment tools, and leadership development programs, coupled with its broad geographic footprint, allow the Company to design and implement regional and global outsourced recruitment solutions that the Company believes greatly enhance the quality and efficiency of its clients’ hiring.
To accelerate the implementation of the Company’s strategy, the Company engages in the following initiatives:
•Facilitating growth and development of the global RPO business through strategic investments in people, innovation, and technology;
•Building and differentiating the Company’s brand through its unique outsourcing solutions offerings; and
•Improving the Company’s cost structure and efficiency of its support functions and infrastructure.
We continue to explore all strategic alternatives to maximize value for shareholders, including without limitation, improving the market position and profitability of our services in the marketplace, and enhancing our valuation. We may pursue our goals through organic growth, strategic initiatives, or other alternatives. Additionally, we will continue to monitor capital markets for opportunities to repurchase shares, and consider other actions designed to enhance shareholder value, as well as review information regarding potential acquisitions and provide information to third parties, from time to time.
This MD&A discusses the results of the Company’s RPO business for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
- 12 -
Current Market Conditions
After another challenging year in 2021, economic conditions in most of the world’s major markets are expected to rebound in 2022, although activity is expected to remain below pre-COVID levels. Some markets are beginning to see a potential path forward for improved economic conditions, however expectations for recovery may be hampered by new variants of the virus. Policy measures enacted by U.S. and foreign governments to combat the economic impact of the virus provided support to local economies, but many of these measures have since been discontinued. In addition, the continued uncertainty has resulted in increased inflation and volatility in global currencies. Stronger foreign currencies in other markets compared to the U.S. dollar during a reporting period cause local currency results of the Company’s foreign operations to be translated into more U.S. dollars. The Company closely monitors the economic environment and business climate in its markets and responds accordingly.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The continuing impact of COVID-19 and its variants around the world presents significant risks to the Company, which the Company is unable to fully evaluate or even to foresee at the current time. In 2021, some of our customers instituted hiring freezes, while other customers operating in the banking, pharmaceutical and technology industries, which may be considered as essential businesses in different jurisdictions, or customers that were more capable of working remotely than other industries, have been allowed to operate as usual. The inability to conduct in-person interviews also impacted our business. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted certain currencies compared to the U.S. dollar in several countries where we operate, including Australia.
The COVID-19 pandemic affected the Company’s operations in 2021 and may continue to do so in the future. The COVID-19 pandemic may impact the Company’s business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including without limitation impacts on the health of the Company’s management and employees, marketing and sales operations, customer and consumer behaviors, as well as the overall economy. The scope and nature of these impacts, most of which are beyond the Company’s control, continue to evolve and the outcomes are uncertain.
Due to the above circumstances and as described generally in this Form 10-K, the Company’s results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in future years. Management cannot predict the continued impact the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have on the Company’s sales or on economic conditions generally. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Financial Performance
Constant Currency (Non-GAAP measure)
The Company operates on a global basis, with the majority of its revenue generated outside of the U.S. Accordingly, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates can affect our results of operations. For the discussion of reportable segment results of operations, the Company uses constant currency information. Constant currency compares financial results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period-over-period. The Company defines the term “constant currency” to mean that financial data for previously reported periods are translated into U.S. dollars using the same foreign currency exchange rates that were used to translate financial data for the current period. Constant currency metrics should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported results prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the U.S. The Company’s management reviews and analyzes business results in constant currency because it believes these results better represent the Company’s underlying business trends.
The following is a summary of the highlights for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These should be considered in the context of the additional disclosures in this MD&A.
•Revenue was $169.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $101.4 million for 2020, an increase of $67.8 million, or 67%. The increase in revenue was driven by growth in Australia, Americas and the UK.
◦On a constant currency basis, revenue increased $60.4 million, or 55%. Contracting revenue increased $34.5 million (up 51% compared to 2020) and RPO recruitment revenue increased $25.9 million (up 64% compared to 2020). Revenue included an increase of $9.9 million from the acquisition of Coit Staffing, Inc.
- 13 -
(see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8), which contributed 10 percentage points to the revenue growth.
•Selling, general and administrative expenses, and other non-operating income (expense) (“SG&A and Non-Op”) was $63.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $39.8 million for 2020, for an increase of $23.5 million, or 59%.
◦On a constant currency basis, SG&A and Non-Op increased $21.7 million or 52%. SG&A and Non-Op, as a percentage of revenue, was 37% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 38% for 2020. The increase was principally due to higher staff costs of $17.4 million, prior year Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) debt extinguishment (see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information) of $1.3 million, higher marketing and advertising expenses of $1.0 million, higher travel and entertainment costs of $0.4 million, and 2020 COVID-19 foreign government assistance credits of $0.5 million.
•EBITDA was $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to EBITDA loss of $0.7 million for 2020. On a constant currency basis, EBITDA increased $5.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The acquisition of Coit Staffing, Inc. positively contributed EBITDA of $430.
•Net income was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of $1.2 million for 2020. On a constant currency basis, net income increased $4.3 million in 2021.
- 14 -
Changes in revenue, adjusted net revenue, SG&A and Non-Op, operating income (loss), net income (loss) and EBITDA (loss) include the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The tables below include a reconciliation of constant currency results to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, and summarize the impact of foreign currency exchange rate adjustments on the Company’s operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(a)Represents Revenue less the Direct contracting costs and reimbursed expenses caption on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(b)SG&A and Non-Op is a measure that management uses to evaluate the segments’ expenses, which include the following captions on the Consolidated Statements of Operations: Salaries and related, Office and general, Marketing and promotion, PPP loan forgiveness, and Other income (expense), net. Corporate management expenses are included in the segments’ other income (expense).
(c)See EBITDA reconciliation in the following section.
- 15 -
Use of EBITDA (Non-GAAP measure)
Management believes EBITDA is a meaningful indicator of the Company’s performance that provides useful information to investors regarding the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. EBITDA is also considered by management as an indicator of operating performance and the most comparable measure across the regions in which we operate. Management also uses this measurement to evaluate capital needs and working capital requirements. Similar to constant currency, EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for operating income or net income prepared in accordance with GAAP or as a measure of the Company’s profitability. EBITDA is derived from net income (loss) adjusted for the provision for (benefit from) income taxes, interest expense (income), and depreciation and amortization.
The reconciliation of EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is provided in the table below:
- 16 -
Results of Operations:
Americas (reported currency)
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, RPO recruitment revenue increased by $17.5 million, or 185%, while contracting revenue increased by $0.5 million, or 33%. The acquisitions of Coit Staffing, Inc. and Karani, LLC (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8) contributed 91 percentage points and 15 percentage points, respectively, to the revenue growth.
Adjusted net revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, RPO recruitment adjusted net revenue increased $17.5 million, or 190%, while contracting adjusted net revenue decreased slightly by 3% compared to 2020. The acquisitions of Coit Staffing, Inc. and Karani, LLC (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8) contributed 104 percentage points and 17 percentage points, respectively, to the adjusted net revenue growth.
Total adjusted net revenue, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 94% for 2021, compared to 88% for 2020, primarily attributable to the higher mix of RPO recruitment to contracting revenue in 2021 compared to 2020.
SG&A and Non-Op
For the year ended December 31, 2021, SG&A and Non-Op increased $14.6 million or 136% compared to 2020, primarily due to the acquisitions of Coit Staffing, Inc. and Karani, LLC, as well as higher staff consultant costs. The prior year PPP debt extinguishment of $1.3 million also contributed to the increase (see Note 10 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further details).
- 17 -
Operating Income and EBITDA
The operating income growth of $3.9 million was primarily due to the stronger adjusted net revenue results and lower SG&A and Non-Op as a percentage of revenue, partially offset by amortization expense of $0.4 million associated with the acquisitions of Coit Staffing, Inc. and Karani, LLC.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, EBITDA was $1.8 million, or 6% of revenue, compared to EBITDA loss of $1.0 million in 2020. The increase in EBITDA was due to the same factors noted above.
The difference between operating income (loss) and EBITDA (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the PPP debt extinguishment of $1.3 million.
Asia Pacific (constant currency)
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, contracting revenue increased by $30.5 million, or 50%, and RPO recruitment revenue increased by of $6.2 million, or 30%, compared to 2020.
In Australia, for the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue increased $35.3 million, or 48%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily in contracting revenue, which increased by $30.0 million, or 51%, while RPO recruitment revenue increased by $5.3 million, or 35%. The increase in contracting revenue primarily reflected the implementation of a new contract win, while the increase in RPO recruitment revenue was due to higher volume from existing clients.
In Asia, revenue increased $1.2 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase in revenue was due to higher demand from existing clients.
Adjusted net revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, RPO recruitment adjusted net revenue increased by $6.1 million, or 32%, while contracting adjusted net revenue increased by $1.2 million, or 59%, compared to the same period in 2020.
- 18 -
In Australia, adjusted net revenue increased by $6.1 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily reflected in RPO recruitment adjusted net revenue, which grew $5.0 million, or 34%, while contracting adjusted net revenue increase by $1.2 million, or 60%.
In Asia, adjusted net revenue increased $1.1 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase in Asia was primarily driven by Singapore.
Adjusted net revenue as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 24%, compared to 26% for 2020. The decrease in total adjusted net revenue as a percentage of revenue was attributed to the higher mix of contracting, to RPO recruitment revenue in 2021 (as contracting is generally a lower margin service offering), compared to 2020.
SG&A and Non-Op
For the year ended December 31, 2021, SG&A and Non-Op increased $5.0 million, or 28%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher consultant staff costs. SG&A and Non-Op, as a percentage of revenue, was 19% in 2021, compared to 22% in 2020. The decrease was principally due to the higher mix of contracting revenue, where the majority of costs are reflected in adjusted net revenue.
Operating Income and EBITDA
Operating income was $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.1 million for 2020. The increase in operating income was principally due to the change in adjusted net revenue, as well as lower SG&A and Non-Op as a percentage of revenue, as described above.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, EBITDA was $5.5 million, or 5% of revenue, compared to EBITDA of $3.1 million, or 4% of revenue, in 2020. The increase in EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was principally due to the factors noted above.
The difference between operating income and EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was principally due to corporate management expenses.
- 19 -
Europe (constant currency)
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, contracting and RPO recruitment revenue increased by $3.6 million and $2.3 million, or 68% and 22%, respectively, compared to 2020.
In the U.K., for the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue increased by $5.8 million, or 42%, to $19.7 million from $13.9 million in 2020. The change was driven by increases in contracting and RPO recruitment revenue of $3.6 million or 68%, and $2.3 million or 26%, respectively. The increases were due to higher demand from existing clients and the implementation of new client contracts.
In Continental Europe, for the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenue was $2.1 million, compared to $2.1 million for 2020, for a slight increase of 2%. The slight increase was due to higher demand from existing recruitment clients.
Adjusted net revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted net revenue increased by $2.2 million, or 22%, driven by an increase in RPO recruitment and contracting revenue of $2.2 million, or 22%, and $0.1 million, or 23%, respectively, compared to the same period in 2020.
In the U.K., total adjusted net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $2.4 million, or 29%, compared to the same period in 2020. The change in the U.K. was driven by an increase in RPO recruitment and contracting of $2.3 million or 29%, and $0.1 million or 23%, respectively.
In Continental Europe, for the year ended December 31, 2021, total adjusted net revenue decreased by $0.1 million, or 6%, compared to the same period in 2020.
SG&A and Non-Op
- 20 -
For the year ended December 31, 2021, SG&A and Non-Op increased $1.9 million, or 19%, compared to 2020. The increase in SG&A and Non-Op was due to higher staff consultant costs in the current year, as well as credits of $0.3 million recognized in 2020 for COVID-19 foreign government assistance programs. SG&A and Non-Op, as a percentage of revenue, was 53% in 2021 compared to 60% in 2020. The decrease in SG&A and Non-Op, as a percentage of revenue, was primarily due to the increase in revenue noted above.
Operating Income and EBITDA
Operating income was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million for 2020. The increase was principally due to the revenue gains noted above.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, EBITDA was $1.0 million, or 5% of revenue, compared to EBITDA of $0.5 million for 2020. The increase in EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was principally due to factors noted above.
The difference between operating income (loss) and EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was principally due to corporate management expenses.
The following are discussed in reported currency
Corporate expenses, net of corporate management expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, corporate expenses were $3.3 million compared to $3.0 million for 2020, an increase of $0.4 million, or 12%. The increase was primarily due to higher stock compensation expense, partially offset by higher corporate allocations.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense was $0.6 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was driven by the amortization expense associated with the acquisitions of Coit Staffing, Inc. and Karani, LLC (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8) of $0.3 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
Interest Income, Net
Net interest income was $0.0 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
PPP loan forgiveness
PPP loan forgiveness of $1.3 million recognized in 2020 consisted of the forgiveness of a loan received in early 2020 administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, in exchange for maintaining certain levels of compensation and other costs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic between April 25, 2020 and October 9, 2020.
Other income (expense), Net
Other expense was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to other income of $0.5 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease in income was primarily due to government assistance recognized and received in 2020 in exchange for maintaining certain levels of compensation and other costs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, mainly in the U.K., Hong Kong, and Singapore, (see Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further details).
- 21 -
Provision for (benefit from) Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.1 million, on $4.3 million of pre-tax income, compared to a provision from income taxes of $0.5 million on $0.7 million of pre-tax loss for 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 25.7%, compared to negative 75.5% for 2020. The change in the Company’s effective tax rate in 2020 is primarily related to the mix of income and losses in different jurisdictions taxed at different rates, as well as changes in valuation allowances in the U.S. and in our foreign subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective tax rate difference from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily attributable to the mix of income and losses in different jurisdictions taxed at different rates, as well as changes in valuations allowances in the U.S. and in our foreign subsidiaries.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss of $1.2 million for 2020, an increase in net income of $4.5 million. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $1.11 and $1.07, respectively for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to basic and diluted loss per share of $0.43 in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash totaled $22.1 million, as compared to $26.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes the cash flow activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $2.5 million, as compared to $1.4 million of net cash used in operating activities for the same period in 2020, resulting in an increase in net cash provided by operating activities of $3.9 million. The increase in net cash provided resulted principally from higher net income and by more favorable working capital comparisons to the prior year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $6.3 million, as compared to $4.0 million in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 primarily reflects the cash paid of $6.0 million on October 29, 2021 for the acquisition of Karani, LLC, while net cash used in investing activities in 2020 reflects the cash paid of $4.0 million on October 1, 2020 for the acquisition of Coit Staffing, Inc. (see Note 4 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for additional information.)
- 22 -
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $0.0 million, as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $0.9 million in 2020, resulting in a decrease in net cash used by financing activities of $0.9 million. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 consisted of shares repurchased of $2.3 million, partially offset by proceeds received in 2020 from the PPP loan of $1.3 million.
Invoice Finance Credit Facility
On April 8, 2019, the Company’s Australian subsidiary (“Australian Borrower”) entered into an invoice finance credit facility agreement (the “NAB Facility Agreement”) with National Australia Bank Limited (“NAB”). The NAB Facility Agreement provides the Australian Borrower with the ability to borrow funds based on a percentage of eligible trade receivables up to a maximum of 4 million Australian dollars. No receivables have terms greater than 90 days, and any risk of loss is retained by the Australian Borrower. The interest rate is calculated as the variable receivable finance indicator rate, plus a margin of 1.60% per annum. Borrowings under this facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Australian Borrower. The NAB Facility Agreement does not have a stated maturity date and can be terminated by either the Australian Borrower or NAB upon 90 days written notice. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the NAB Facility Agreement. Interest expense and fees incurred on the NAB Facility Agreement were $20 thousand and $19 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the NAB Facility Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity Outlook
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents on hand of $21.7 million. The Company also has the capability to borrow an additional 4 million Australian dollars under the NAB Facility Agreement. In addition, the Company issued a promissory note of $2.0 million, in connection with the acquisition of Karani, LLC. Other than as described above, the Company has no financial guarantees, outstanding debt or other lease agreements or arrangements that could trigger a requirement for an early payment or that could change the value of our assets. The Company believes that it has sufficient liquidity to satisfy its needs through at least the next 12 months, based on the Company’s financial position as of December 31, 2021. The Company’s near-term cash requirements during 2022 are primarily related to the funding of the Company’s operations. For the full year 2022, the Company expects to make capital expenditures of less than $1 million. The Company is closely managing its capital spending and will perform capital additions where economically prudent, while continuing to invest strategically for future growth.
As of December 31, 2021, $9.7 million of the Company’s cash and cash equivalents noted above was held in the U.S. and the remainder was held internationally, primarily in Australia ($4.0 million), the U.K. ($2.5 million), Hong Kong ($1.4 million), China ($1.0 million), Singapore ($0.7 million), India ($0.6 million), Belgium ($0.5 million), Switzerland ($0.4 million), and the Philippines ($0.3 million). The majority of the Company’s offshore cash is available to it as a source of funds, net of any tax obligations or assessments.
The Company believes that future external market conditions remain uncertain, particularly access to credit, rates of near-term projected economic growth, and levels of unemployment in the markets in which the Company operates. Due to these uncertain external market conditions, the Company cannot provide assurance that its actual cash requirements will not be greater in the future than those currently expected, especially if market conditions deteriorate substantially. If sources of liquidity are not available or if the Company cannot generate sufficient cash flow from operations, the Company could be required to obtain additional sources of funds through additional operating improvements, capital market transactions, asset sales or financing from third parties, or a combination of these sources. The Company cannot provide assurance that these additional sources of funds will be available or, if available, would have reasonable terms.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
- 23 -
Contingencies
From time to time in the ordinary course of business, the Company is subject to compliance audits by U.S. federal, state, local, and foreign government regulatory, tax, and other authorities relating to a variety of regulations, including wage and hour laws, unemployment taxes, workers’ compensation, immigration, and income, value-added, and sales taxes. The Company is also subject to, from time to time in the ordinary course of business, various claims, lawsuits, and other complaints from, for example, clients, candidates, suppliers, landlords for both leased and subleased properties, former and current employees, and regulators or tax authorities. Periodic events and management actions such as business reorganization initiatives can change the number and types of audits, claims, lawsuits, contract disputes, or complaints asserted against the Company. Such events can also change the likelihood of assertion and the behavior of third parties to reach resolution regarding such matters.
The economic conditions in the recent past have given rise to many news reports and bulletins from clients, tax authorities and other parties about changes in their procedures for audits, payment, plans to challenge existing contracts and other such matters aimed at being more aggressive in the resolution of such matters in their own favor. The Company believes that it has appropriate procedures in place for identifying and communicating any matters of this type, whether asserted or likely to be asserted, and it evaluates its liabilities in light of the prevailing circumstances. Changes in the behavior of third parties could cause the Company to change its view of the likelihood of a claim and what might constitute a trend. Employment laws vary in the markets in which we operate, and in some cases, employees and former employees have extended periods during which they may bring claims against the Company.
For matters that reach the threshold of probable and estimable, the Company establishes reserves for legal, regulatory, and other contingent liabilities. The Company’s reserves were $0.0 million as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020. Although the outcome of these matters cannot be determined, the Company believes that none of the currently pending matters, individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity.
Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. GAAP provides the framework from which to make these estimates, assumptions and disclosures. We choose accounting policies within GAAP that our management believes are appropriate to accurately and fairly report our operating results and financial position in a consistent manner. Our management regularly assesses these policies in light of current and forecasted economic conditions. Our accounting policies are stated in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. We believe the following accounting policies are critical to understanding our results of operations and affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue for our RPO recruitment over time in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to and have an enforceable right to payment in exchange for our services. The client simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services as they are provided. The transaction prices contain both fixed fee and variable usage-based consideration. Variable usage-based consideration is constrained by candidates accepting offers of permanent employment. We recognized revenue on the fixed fee as the performance obligations are satisfied and usage-based fees as the constraint is lifted. We do not incur incremental costs to obtain our RPO recruitment contracts. The costs to fulfill these contracts are expensed as incurred.
The Company recognizes revenue for our contracting services over time as services are performed in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to and have an enforceable right to payment in exchange for our services, which is generally calculated as hours worked multiplied by the agreed-upon hourly bill rate. The client simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services as they are provided. We do not incur incremental costs to obtain our contracting contracts. The costs incurred to fulfill these contracts are expensed as incurred.
As a practical expedient, we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an expected original duration of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which we recognize revenue at the amount to which we have the right to invoice for services performed.
- 24 -
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, “Income Taxes.” This standard establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effects of income taxes that result from an enterprise’s activities. It requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes.
The calculation of net deferred tax assets assumes sufficient future earnings for the realization of such assets as well as the continued application of currently anticipated tax rates. Included in net deferred tax assets is a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets where management believes it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized in the relevant jurisdiction. If we determine that a deferred tax asset will not be realizable, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset will result in a reduction of earnings at that time. Our assessment includes an analysis of whether deferred tax assets will be realized in the ordinary course of operations based on the available positive and negative evidence, including the scheduling of deferred tax liabilities and forecasted income from operations. The underlying assumptions we use in forecasting future taxable income require significant judgment. In the event that actual income from operations differs from forecasted amounts, or if we change our estimates of forecasted income from operations, we could record additional charges or reduce allowances in order to adjust the carrying value of deferred tax assets to their realizable amount. Such adjustments could be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information regarding deferred tax assets and valuation allowances.
ASC 740-10-55-3, “Recognition and Measurement of Tax Positions - a Two Step Process,” provides implementation guidance related to the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a two-step evaluation process for a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The first step is recognition and the second is measurement. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, measurement, classification, disclosures, transition and accounting for interim periods. In addition, ASC 740-10-25-9 provides guidance on how to determine whether a tax position is effectively settled for the purpose of recognizing previously unrecognized tax benefits. As of December 31, 2021, the Company's gross liability for income taxes associated with uncertain tax positions was $0.5 million.
The Company’s unrecognized tax benefits, if recognized in the future, would affect the Company's annual effective income tax rate. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information regarding unrecognized tax benefits. We elected to continue our historical practice of classifying applicable interest and penalties as a component of the provision for income taxes.
We provide tax reserves for federal, state, local and international exposures relating to periods subject to audit. The development of reserves for these exposures requires judgments about tax issues, potential outcomes and timing, and is a subjective critical estimate. We assess our tax positions and record tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon management’s evaluation of the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting dates. For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we have recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with a tax authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. For those tax positions where it is not more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit has been recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Where applicable, associated interest and penalties have also been recognized. Although the outcome relating to these exposures are uncertain, we believe that our reserves reflect the probable outcome of known tax contingencies. In certain circumstances, the ultimate outcome of exposures and risks involves significant uncertainties which render them inestimable. If actual outcomes differ materially from these estimates, including those that cannot be quantified, they could have a material impact on our results of operations.
The Company has provided tax on all unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries taking into consideration all expected future events based on presently existing tax laws and rates.
The Company has elected to recognize the tax on Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (“GILTI”) as a period expense in the year the tax is incurred.
Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions
Business Combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method in accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations.” The acquisition method requires identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the business acquired to be recognized and measured at fair value on the acquisition date, which is the date that the acquirer obtains control of the acquired business. The amount by which the fair value of consideration transferred as the purchase price exceeds the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Acquisitions that do
- 25 -
not meet the definition of a business under the ASC are accounted for as asset acquisitions. Asset acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the cost of the acquisition to the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis. Goodwill is not recognized in an asset acquisition with any consideration in excess of net assets acquired allocated to acquired assets on a relative fair value basis. Transaction costs are expensed in a business combination and are considered a component of the cost of the acquisition in an asset acquisition.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 regarding the impact or potential impact of recent accounting pronouncements upon our financial position and results of operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains statements that the Company believes to be “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K, including statements regarding the Company’s future financial condition, results of operations, business operations and business prospects, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “predict,” “believe,” and similar words, expressions, and variations of these words and expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements are subject to important factors, risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, including industry and economic conditions that could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements. Such factors, risks, uncertainties, and assumptions include, but are not limited to, (1) global economic fluctuations, (2) the adverse impacts of the coronavirus, or COVID-19 pandemic, (3) the Company’s ability to successfully achieve its strategic initiatives, (4) risks related to potential acquisitions or dispositions of businesses by the Company, (5) the Company’s ability to operate successfully as a company focused on its RPO business, (6) risks related to fluctuations in the Company’s operating results from quarter to quarter, (7) the loss of or material reduction in our business with any of the Company’s largest customers, (8) the ability of clients to terminate their relationship with the Company at any time, (9) competition in the Company’s markets, (10) the negative cash flows and operating losses that may recur in the future, (11) risks relating to how future credit facilities may affect or restrict our operating flexibility, (12) risks associated with the Company’s investment strategy, (13) risks related to international operations, including foreign currency fluctuations, political events, natural disasters or health crises, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, (14) the Company’s dependence on key management personnel, (15) the Company’s ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, management, and advisors, (16) the Company’s ability to collect accounts receivable, (17) the Company’s ability to maintain costs at an acceptable level, (18) the Company’s heavy reliance on information systems and the impact of potentially losing or failing to develop technology, (19) risks related to providing uninterrupted service to clients, (20) the Company’s exposure to employment-related claims from clients, employers and regulatory authorities, current and former employees in connection with the Company’s business reorganization initiatives, and limits on related insurance coverage, (21) the Company’s ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards, (22) volatility of the Company’s stock price, (23) the impact of government regulations, and (24) restrictions imposed by blocking arrangements. The foregoing list should not be construed to be exhaustive. Actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this Form 10-K. In view of these uncertainties, you should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which are based on our current expectations. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K. The Company assumes no obligation, and expressly disclaims any obligation, to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
- 26 -