ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements about our future expectations are "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of applicable Federal Securities Laws, and are not guarantees of future performance. When used herein, the words "may," "will," "should," "anticipate," "believe," "appear," "intend," "plan," "expect," "estimate," "approximate," and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements involve risks and uncertainties inherent in our business, including those set forth under the caption "Risk Factors" in other filings with the SEC, and are subject to change at any time. Our actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statement.
Overview
HST Global, Inc. was founded as an Integrated Health and Wellness Biotechnology company with a plan to develop and /or acquire a network of Wellness Centers worldwide that would be primarily focused on the homeopathic and alternative treatment of late stage cancer.
To date we have been unable to initiate our original business plan. While we are continuing to seek opportunities to do so, we are also seeking other opportunities to integrate assets, rights, or other potential revenue streams.
Plan of Operation
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs, professional fees, business insurance, rent, general legal activities, and other corporate expenses.
We have never been profitable and do not anticipate having net income unless and until we develop and/or acquire our wellness centers and/or develop new channels of distribution. With respect to our current activities, this is not likely to occur until we obtain significant additional funding. We cannot provide any assurance that we will be able to achieve profitability on a sustained basis, if at all, obtain the required funding, obtain, or complete additional corporate partnering or acquisition transactions.
Accordingly, we will need to raise additional funds or pursue strategic transactions or other strategic alternatives. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through private sales of our equity securities, and we expect to continue obtaining required capital in a similar manner.
Results of Operations
The Company had no revenues and no cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company incurred operating expenses of $145,718 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $207,978 in 2020. The decrease in expenses in 2021 was primarily a result of an elimination of Stock Holder Compensation to Related Parties, We do not believe these costs are indicative of future years, and we cannot at this time predict our costs if and when we begin earning revenues and exit the start-up stage.
The Company had a net loss of $148,360 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $208,992 in 2020. This is primarily a result of the elimination of Stock Holder Compensation to Related Parties in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our capital requirements are principally related to our efforts to implement our business plan. Our cash balance as of December 31, 2021 was $225.
Cash Flows
Year Ended
Year Ended
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities
$(29,836)
$(26,971)
Net cash used in investing activities
-
-
Net cash provided by financing activities
29,401
25,676
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$(435)
$(1,295)
The Company does not currently have sufficient capital in its accounts, nor sufficient firm commitments for capital to assure its ability to meet its current obligations or to continue its planned operations. The Company is continuing to pursue working capital and additional revenue through the seeking of the capital it needs to carry on its planned operations. There is no assurance that any of the planned activities will be successful.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.