Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2021. As further described in Note 1 and Note 7 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, Private Histogen was determined to be the accounting acquirer in the Merger. Accordingly, the pre-Merger historical financial information presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflects the standalone consolidated financial statements of Private Histogen and, therefore, period-over-period comparisons may not be meaningful. In addition, references to the Company’s operating results prior to the Merger will refer to the operating results of Private Histogen. Except as otherwise indicated herein or as the context otherwise requires, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “Histogen” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Histogen Inc., a Delaware corporation, on a post-Merger basis, and the term “Private Histogen” refers to the business of privately-held Histogen Inc. prior to completion of the Merger.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage therapeutics company focused on developing our proprietary hypoxia-generated growth factor technology platform and stem cell-free biologic products as potential first-in-class restorative therapeutics that ignite the body’s natural process to repair and maintain healthy biological function.
We also have a pipeline of clinical and preclinical small molecule pan caspase and caspase selective inhibitors focused on treatments for infectious and inflammatory diseases that we intend to develop. We previously entered into a collaboration with Amerimmune LLC (“Amerimmune”) to lead the development activities for emricasan, a pan-caspase inhibitor, for the treatment of COVID-19. However, we believe that Amerimmune has breached its obligations under the Collaborative Development and Commercialization Agreement (“the Collaborative Agreement”) and have initiated an arbitration proceeding seeking a declaratory judgment that entitles us, amongst other remedies, to terminate the Collaborative Agreement (the “Arbitration”). In the event that we are successful in having the Collaborative Agreement terminated for material breach, all rights and licenses granted to Amerimmune shall terminate, and all rights granted by us to Amerimmune revert back to us. In such event, we intend to independently develop emricasan for the treatment of COVID-19, and other infectious and inflammatory diseases. In the event that the Collaborative Agreement is not terminated as a result of the Arbitration, then we expect that we will continue to collaborate with Amerimmune pursuant to the terms of the Collaborative Agreement. We also intend to independently evaluate the use of the caspase selective inhibitors for inflammatory diseases.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenues to date have been generated primarily from the sale of cosmetic ingredient products (“CCM”), license fees, professional services revenue, and a National Science Foundation grant award.
License, Product and Professional Services Revenue
Our license, product and professional services revenue to date has been generated primarily from payments received under the Allergan Agreements.
Grant Revenue
In March 2017, the National Science Foundation (“NSF”), a government agency, awarded us a research and development grant to develop a novel wound dressing for infection control and tissue regeneration. As of March 31, 2021, we completed all obligations under the NSF grant and, as such, no longer generate any revenue in connection with the research and development grant.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of product revenue represents direct and indirect costs incurred to bring the product to saleable condition, including write-offs of inventory.
Cost of professional services revenue represents costs for full-time employee equivalents and actual out-of-pocket costs.
In-Process Research and Development
In-process research and development expenses represent costs incurred for acquisitions of technologies for which regulatory approval had not yet been obtained.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, which include:
•
expenses under agreements with third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf, and consultants;
•
costs related to develop and manufacture preclinical study and clinical trial material;
•
salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation;
•
costs incurred and reimbursed under our grant awarded by the U.S. Department of Defense (“DoD”) to partially fund our planned Phase 1/2 clinical trial of HST-003 for regeneration of cartilage in the knee;
•
costs incurred for IND enabling activities for HST-004 for spinal disc repair;
•
costs incurred under our collaboration and third-party licensing agreements; and
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials.
We accrue all research and development costs in the period for which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators and third-party service providers. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and then expensed as the related goods are delivered and as services are performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we: (i) invest in additional operational personnel to support our planned product development efforts, and (ii) continue to invest in developing our product candidates as our product candidates advance into later stages of development, and as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked by product candidate and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid under third-party license agreements and to outside consultants, contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract manufacturing organizations and research laboratories in connection with our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. We do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. These employees work across multiple programs and, therefore, we do not track our costs by product candidate unless such costs are
includable as subaward costs. The following table shows our research and development expenses by type of activity (in thousands):
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, including any potential expanded dosing beyond the original protocols based in part on ongoing clinical success. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, insurance costs, facility costs and professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. Personnel-related costs consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially as we: (i) incur additional costs associated with being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs, (ii) hire additional personnel, and (iii) protect our intellectual property.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents, which consist of money market funds. Our interest income has not been significant due to low interest earned on invested balances.
Other Income
Other income primarily consists of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan forgiven by the Small Business Administration on May 21, 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our selected statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized license revenues of $27 thousand and $0.9 million, respectively. The revenue recognized in both periods is associated with the Allergan Agreements. During the period ended December 31, 2021, $19 thousand of deferred revenue was recognized in relation to the Potential Future Improvements remaining performance obligation currently being amortized over the remaining 9-year patent life. The year-over-year decrease is primarily attributable to the recognition of the allocated proceeds received upon the transfer of the expanded license to Allergan in January 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized product revenues of $0.9 million and $0.8 million, respectively. The increase of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a larger quantity of CCM sales to Allergan.
Grant revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.1 million and $0, respectively, all of which was related to an NSF research grant awarded to us in 2017. In March 2021, the Company completed all obligations under the NSF development grant and, as such, no longer generates any revenues in connection with the research and development grant.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized professional services revenue of $0.3 million, related to the transfer of certain technology and know-how, which was completed during 2020. As such, no additional professional services revenue was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Total Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $0.2 million and $0.7 million, respectively. The decrease of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the sale of CCM to Allergan in September 2021 that was originally designated for research and development purposes and therefore had no cost of goods associated with it, and costs related to scrapped inventory.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized costs of professional services of $0 and $0.3 million, respectively, related to the completion of technology transfer obligations of Histogen under the Allergan Agreements.
Acquired In-process Research and Development Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $7.1 million for in-process research and development acquired in connection with the Merger.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $8.5 million and $6.2 million, respectively. The increase of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increases in development costs of our clinical and pre-clinical product candidates and personnel related expenses, partially offset by $0.7 million in qualifying reimbursable expenses in connection with the DoD grant.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $7.8 million and $6.6 million, respectively. This increase of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increases in personnel related expenses, legal fees and insurance costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have an accumulated deficit of $77.7 million and expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $18.7 million in cash and cash equivalents.
We have not yet established ongoing sources of revenues sufficient to cover our operating costs and will need to continue to raise additional capital to support our future operating activities, including progression of our development programs, preparation for potential commercialization, and other operating costs. Our plans with regard to these matters include entering into a combination of additional debt or equity financing arrangements, strategic partnerships, collaboration and licensing arrangements, or other similar arrangements. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Exchange Act.
Common Stock
November 2020 Common Stock Offering
In November 2020, the Company completed a registered direct offering (the “November 2020 Offering”) of an aggregate of 2,522,784 shares of common stock, together with accompanying warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,892,088 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $1.78375 per share and accompanying warrant. The common stock was sold in the offering with a warrant that permits the investor to purchase 75% of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock purchased by the investor. The warrants have an exercise price of $1.70 per share, are immediately exercisable, and expire five and a half (5.5) years following the date of issuance. Placement agent warrants were issued to purchase up to 126,139 shares of common stock, are immediately exercisable for an exercise price of $2.2297, and expire on November 11, 2025. The Company received gross proceeds of $4.5 million and incurred placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses of approximately $0.9 million.
As of December 31, 2021, no warrants associated with the November 2020 Offering have been exercised.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 1,892,088 shares and 126,139 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to the warrants and placement agent’s warrants, respectively, issued by the Company in the November 2020 Offering, at an exercise price of $1.78375 per share and $2.2297 per share, respectively.
January 2021 Common Stock Offering
In January 2021, the Company completed an S-1 offering (the “January 2021 Offering”) of an aggregate of 11,600,000 shares of common stock, prefunded warrants to purchase up to 2,400,000 shares of its common stock, and common stock warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 14,000,000 shares of common stock. To the extent that an investor determines, at their sole discretion, that they would beneficially own in excess of the Beneficial Ownership Limitations (or as such investor may otherwise choose), in lieu of purchasing shares of Common Stock and Common Warrants, such investor may elect to purchase Pre-Funded Warrants and Common Warrants at the Pre-Funded Purchase Price in lieu of the shares of Common Stock and Common Warrants in such a manner to result in the same aggregate purchase price being paid by such investor to the Company. The combined purchase price of one share of common stock and the accompanying common stock warrant was $1.00, and the combined purchase price of one pre-funded warrant and accompanying common stock warrant was $0.9999. The common stock warrants are exercisable for five years at an exercise price of $1.00 per share. The pre-funded warrants are immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $0.0001 per share and may be exercised at any time until all of the prefunded warrants are exercised in full. Placement agent warrants were issued to purchase up to 700,000 shares of common stock, are immediately exercisable for an exercise price of $1.25, and are exercisable for five years following the date of issuance. The Company received gross proceeds of $14.0 million and incurred placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses of approximately $1.9 million.
As of December 31, 2021, a total of 6,721,200 warrants issued in the January 2021 Offering to purchase shares of common stock have been exercised and the Company issued 6,721,200 shares of its common stock. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $6.8 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 7,751,300 shares and 227,500 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to the warrants and placement agent’s warrants, respectively, issued by the Company in the January 2021 Offering, at an exercise price of $1.00 per share and $1.25 per share, respectively.
June 2021 Common Stock Offering
In June 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering (the “June 2021 Offering”) of an aggregate of 5,977,300 shares of common stock, together with accompanying warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 4,781,840 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $1.10 per share. The accompanying warrants permit the investor to purchase additional shares equal to 80% of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock purchased by the investor. The warrants have an exercise price of $1.00 per share, are immediately exercisable, and expire five and a half (5.5) years following the date of issuance. In addition, the Company’s placement agent was issued compensatory warrants equal to 5.0%, or 298,865 shares, of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold in the offering, which are immediately exercisable for an exercise price of $1.375 and expire five (5) years following the date of issuance on June 7, 2026. The Company received gross proceeds of $6.6 million and incurred cash-based placement agent fees and other offering expenses of approximately $0.9 million.
As of December 31, 2021, no warrants associated with the June 2021 Offering have been exercised.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 4,781,840 shares and 298,865 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to the warrants and placement agent’s warrants, respectively, issued by the Company in the June 2021 Offering, at an exercise price of $1.00 per share and $1.375 per share, respectively.
December 2021 Common Stock Offering
In December 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering (the “December 2021 Offering”) of an aggregate of 8,235,297 shares of common stock and 8,235,297 warrants to purchase up to 8,235,297 shares of Common Stock, at a public offering price of $0.425 per share. The accompanying warrants permit the investor to
purchase additional shares equal to 100% of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock purchased by the investor. The warrants have an exercise price of $0.425 per share, may be exercised any time on or after 6 months and one (1) day after the issuance date, and expire five and a half (5.5) years following the date of issuance. In addition, the Company’s placement agent was issued compensatory warrants equal to 5.0%, or 411,765 shares, of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold in the offering, which are immediately exercisable for an exercise price of $0.5313 and expire five and a half (5.5) years following the date of issuance on June 21, 2027. The Company received gross proceeds of $3.5 million and incurred cash-based placement agent fees and other offering expenses of approximately $0.5 million.
As of December 31, 2021, no warrants associated with the December 2021 Offering have been exercised.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 8,235,297 shares and 411,765 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to the warrants and placement agent’s warrants, respectively, issued by the Company in the December 2021 Offering, at an exercise price of $0.425 per share and $0.5313 per share, respectively.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park
In July 2020, the Company entered into a common stock purchase agreement (the “2020 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations in the 2020 Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $10.0 million of shares of the Company’s common stock at the Company’s request from time to time during a 24 month period that began in July 2020 and at prices based on the market price of the Company’s common stock at the time of each sale. Upon execution of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, the Company sold 328,516 shares of common stock at $3.04399 per share to Lincoln Park for gross proceeds of $1.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold an additional 300,000 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park for gross proceeds of approximately $0.5 million. In addition, in consideration for entering into the 2020 Purchase Agreement and concurrently with the execution of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, the Company issued 66,964 shares of its common stock to Lincoln Park. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not sell any shares of common stock to Lincoln Park and approximately $8.5 million, or 1.6 million shares of common stock, remains available for sale under the 2020 Purchase Agreement, subject to limitations on the amount of securities the Company may sell under its effective registration statement on Form S-3 within any 12-month period.
Common Stock Warrants
In 2016, Private Histogen issued warrants to purchase common stock as consideration for settlement of prior liability claims. The warrants for the purchase of up to 3,583 common shares at an exercise price of $23.08 per share expired on July 31, 2021.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, warrants to purchase 1,346 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $74.30 per share remain outstanding that were issued by Conatus in connection with obtaining financing in 2016. These warrants expire on July 3, 2023.
Cash Flow Summary for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from our net loss of $15.0 million, which included non-cash charges of $0.4 million related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program Loan, coupled with a $0.1 million net increase in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our net loss of $18.8 million, which included non-cash charges of $8.1 million primarily related to the acquired in-process research and development in connection with the Merger and stock-based compensation, and a $1.3 million net increase in operating assets and liabilities.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of payments for purchases of property and equipment. Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of cash of $12.8 million received in connection with the Merger, partially offset by payments for acquisition related costs and purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $27.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from sales of our common stock in registered direct offerings and the exercise of warrants. Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from sales of our common stock in a registered direct offering and to Lincoln Park under the 2020 Purchase Agreement and proceeds from our PPP Loan.
Funding Requirements
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of 2023. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress, potential dose expansions beyond our planned study protocols based in part on our clinical progress, and expenses in these trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of our preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•
the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•
our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•
the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•
the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•
our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, adequate coverage and reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•
the impact of any natural disasters or public health crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•
costs associated with any products or technologies that it may in-license or acquire.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our losses from operations and capital funding needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding and other sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. To the extent we raise additional capital through the sale of convertible debt or equity securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates by ourselves. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any sources of financing on acceptable terms, or at all.
We may be unable to raise additional funds on acceptable terms or at all. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have recently experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. If we are unable to raise additional funds, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
PUR
PUR was formed to develop and market applications along with products in the surgical/orthopedic and device markets. In April 2019, Histogen entered into a Settlement, Release and Termination Agreement with PUR and its members (“PUR Settlement”) which terminated the License, Supply and Operating Agreements between Histogen and PUR, eliminated Histogen’s membership interest in PUR and returned all in-process research and development assets to Histogen (the “Development Assets”). The agreement also provided indemnifications and complete releases by and among the parties. The acquisition of the Development Assets was accounted for as an asset acquisition in accordance with ASC 805-50-50, Acquisition of Assets Rather than a Business.
As consideration for the reacquisition of the Development Assets, Histogen compensated PUR with both equity and cash components, including 1,166,667 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock with a fair value of $1.75 million and a potential cash payout of up to $6.25 million (the “Cap Amount”). Histogen paid PUR $0.5 million in upfront cash, forgave approximately $22 thousand of accounts receivable owed by PUR to Histogen, and settled an outstanding payable of PUR of approximately $23 thousand owed to a third party. Histogen is also obligated to make milestone and royalty payments, including (a) $0.4 million upon the unconditional acceptance and approval of a New Drug Application or Pre-Market Approval Application by the US FDA related to the Development Assets, (b) a $0.4 million commercialization milestone upon reaching gross sales (by Histogen or licensee) of the $0.5 million of products incorporating the Development Assets, and (c) a five percent (5%) royalty on net revenues collected by Histogen from commercial sales (by Histogen or licensee) of products incorporating the Development Assets, limited to orthopedic product candidates developed using our biologics technology platform, including HST-003 and HST-
004. The aforementioned cash payments, along with any future milestone and royalty payments, are all applied against the Cap Amount. In accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, amounts for the milestone and royalty payments will be recognized when it is probable that the related contingent liability has been incurred and the amount owed is reasonably estimated. No amounts for the milestone and royalty payments have been recorded through December 31, 2021 under this agreement.
Allergan License and Supply Agreements
In July 2017, Histogen and Allergan entered into a letter agreement to transfer Suneva Medical, Inc.’s Amended and Restated License and Supply Agreements (collectively the “Allergan Agreements”) to Allergan, which grants exclusive rights including the right to sublicense to third parties, to use and commercialize our CCM skin care ingredient in the medical aesthetics market on a worldwide basis, excluding South Korea, China and India, in exchange for royalty payments to us based on Allergan’s sales of product including the licensed ingredient. Through December 31, 2020, we entered into several amendments to the Allergan Agreements to, among other things, expand Allergan’s license rights to certain sales channels where its products containing the CCM ingredient can be sold, identify exclusive and non-exclusive fields of use and clarify responsibilities with response to regulatory filings. For these amendments to the License Agreements, Histogen received cash payments of $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 and cash payments of $7.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Allergan Agreements also include a potential future milestone payment of $5.5 million if Allergan’s net sales of products containing Histogen’s CCM skin care ingredient exceeds $60 million in any calendar year through December 31, 2027.
From time to time, Histogen may improve its CCM skin care ingredient, and to the extent that these are within the field of use in the Allergan Agreements, Histogen will provide the improvements to Allergan. The remaining performance obligations related to the Allergan Agreements from 2017 were our obligations to supply CCM and provide potential future improvements to Allergan, for which our obligation to supply CCM was satisfied during the fourth quarter of 2019.
On January 17, 2020, the Company and Allergan amended the Allergan Agreements, further clarifying the fields of use, the product definition, and rights to certain improvements, as well as us agreeing to supply additional CCM in 2020 and provide further technical assistance to Allergan (the cost of which was reimbursed to the Company), for a one-time payment of $1.0 million. Our obligation to supply additional CCM to Allergan was satisfied during the first quarter of 2021.
Allergan may terminate the agreement for convenience upon one business days’ notice to us. Under the Amended and Restated License Agreement, as amended, Allergan will indemnify the Company for third-party claims arising from Allergan’s breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct, or the exploitation of products by Allergan or its sublicensees. We will indemnify Allergan for third-party claims arising from our breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct, or the exploitation of products by us prior to the effective date.
Amerimmune Collaborative Development and Commercialization Agreement
In October 2020, we entered into a Collaborative Agreement with Amerimmune to jointly develop emricasan for the potential treatment of COVID-19. The FDA approved an investigational new drug application (IND) to initiate a Phase 1 study of emricasan in mild COVID-19 patients to assess safety and tolerability in 2020. Under the Collaborative Agreement, during the agreed upon research term, Amerimmune, at its own expense and in collaboration with us, is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to lead the development activities for emricasan, limited to the treatment of COVID-19. We believe that, for numerous reasons set forth in our arbitration demand, Amerimmune has failed to undertake commercially reasonable efforts towards the development of emricasan as required by the Collaborative Agreement. Therefore, we are currently seeking to terminate the Collaborative Agreement and independently proceed with the development of emricasan for the treatment of COVID-19 and other infectious and inflammatory diseases. At this time, we continue to operate under the terms of the existing Collaborative Agreement for the joint development of emricasan for the treatment of COVID-19.
Pursuant to the terms of the Collaborative Agreement, each party shall retain ownership of their legacy intellectual property and responsibility for ongoing patent application prosecution and maintenance costs, and will jointly own any intellectual property developed during the term of the agreement. In addition, we granted Amerimmune an exclusive option, subject to terms and conditions including completion of a Phase 2 clinical trial by Amerimmune during the research term, to obtain an exclusive license that, if granted by us, allows Amerimmune alone, or in conjunction with one or more strategic partners, to use its commercially reasonable efforts to develop, manufacture, and commercialize emricasan and other caspase modulators, including CTS-2090 and CTS-2096, and we will share the profits equally with Amerimmune. No consideration will be transferred to us until profits, as defined in the Amerimmune Agreement, are generated by Amerimmune from developing or commercializing products.
On January 19, 2022, we provided a notice of material breach in connection with Amerimmune’s non-performance under the Collaborative Development and, on March 3, 2022, we filed the Arbitration Demand. During the arbitration, both Amerimmune and us continue to support planning of a Phase 2 trial of emricasan for the treatment of COVID-19. As part of our Arbitration Demand, we have requested that the Collaborative Agreement be terminated. We further brought the Arbitration Demand for breach of contract, seeking an award of specific performance requiring Amerimmune to comply with the terms of the Agreement, which provide that, in the event of termination for material breach, all rights and licenses granted to Amerimmune by us shall terminate, and any and all rights granted by us to Amerimmune revert to Histogen. If we are successful, we would regain full rights to emricasan and other caspase modulators, including CTS-2090 and CTS-2096. In that case, we intend to develop emricasan for COVID-19 and other infectious and inflammatory diseases independently. There can be no assurances that the Arbitration Demand will result in our favor and terminate the Collaborative Agreement. If the Collaborative Agreement is not terminated, we will likely continue to jointly develop emricasan pursuant to the terms of the Collaborative Agreement.
We have identified multiple promises to deliver goods and services, which include at the inception of the agreement: (i) a license to technology and patents, information, and know-how; (ii) supply of emricasan and (iii) collaboration, including our participation in a Joint Development Committee and Joint Partnering Committee. At inception and through December 31, 2021, we have identified one performance obligation for all the deliverables under the Amerimmune Agreement since the delivered elements are either not capable of being distinct or are not distinct within the context of the contract. No upfront consideration was exchanged between the parties and any consideration received will be dependent on the successful execution of a qualifying strategic partnership, as defined, on the successful commercialization of emricasan, or upon a change in control of Amerimmune, as defined. Although we will recognize revenue upon the occurrence of one of these events, no such events have occurred as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Our estimates are based on historical trends and other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We consider our critical accounting policies and estimates to be related to accrued research and development expenses and revenue recognition. Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 in the notes to consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.