Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements due to various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report are based on information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements. In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain.
In November 2020, we completed a reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock pursuant to which every fifteen (15) shares of issued and outstanding common stock were exchanged for one share of common stock. All share and per share amounts within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations have been adjusted to reflect the reverse stock split for all periods and dates presented.
Overview
We are a life sciences company advancing precision medicine through our innovative transcriptome-wide profiling technology. Building on more than a decade of pioneering innovation and partnerships with biopharma leaders and major academic institutes, our proprietary HTG EdgeSeq RNA platform technology is designed to make the development of life science tools and diagnostics more effective and efficient and to unlock a differentiated and disruptive approach to drug discovery.
Our product and service solutions enable targeted RNA profiling using a small amount of biological sample, in liquid or solid forms. Our menu of HTG EdgeSeq assays is automated on our HTG EdgeSeq system, which applies genomic sequencing tools that generate gene expression data in a timely manner utilizing a simplified workflow for customers. We seek to leverage key business drivers in molecular profiling for biomarker analysis and diagnostics, including the acceleration of precision medicine, the migration of molecular testing to NGS-based applications, the movement to smaller and less invasive biopsies, the need for greater diagnostic sensitivity, the need to conform to challenging healthcare economics and the need for automation and an easily deployable workflow, including simplified bioinformatics. These capabilities enable customers to extend the use of limited biological samples for retrospective analysis, gaining further understanding of the molecular drivers of disease with the goal of developing biomarker-driven targeted therapies. We also believe our HTG EdgeSeq technology can be used as a platform technology in clinical applications that will simplify, consolidate and reduce the cost of NGS-based diagnostic workflows and in commercialized CDx tests.
Our existing products include instruments, consumables, including assay kits, and software that, as an integrated platform, automate sample processing and can quickly, robustly and simultaneously profile tens, hundreds or thousands of molecular targets from samples a fraction of the size required by many prevailing technologies. We believe that our target customers and collaborators desire high quality molecular profiling data in a multiplexed panel format from increasingly smaller and less invasive samples, providing our customers and collaborators with the option to analyze such data locally to minimize turnaround time and cost.
Biopharmaceutical companies are continually working to improve their drug development processes and the efficacy and safety of their drugs. We believe that our technology can support these initiatives by providing a seamless solution from biomarker discovery to a commercialized companion diagnostic test that can be used to assist clinicians in confidently prescribing these drugs to their patients. Our products and service solutions allow us to partner with our biopharmaceutical company customers to identify molecular biomarkers that can help determine which patients are most likely to benefit from a particular drug, validate these biomarkers in clinical trials and partner to commercialize the validated CDx assay. Customers can access our technology by purchasing our platform and assays for their internal use or by engaging us to perform certain services, including molecular profiling of respective cohorts in our VERI/O laboratory and development of custom RUO panels to support early-stage clinical programs, investigational-use-only assays for clinical trials or companion diagnostic assays for approved drugs. Our product and service solutions have provided us with a number of early-stage biomarker discovery programs and new opportunities to collaborate with biopharmaceutical companies in their drug development programs.
In addition, we believe that our newly formed drug discovery business unit will allow us to leverage our HTP and epitranscriptome profiling technologies and apply them early in the drug discovery process in conjunction with our machine learning-based chemical library design platform, to ultimately yield de-risked drug candidate molecules with greater potential for clinical success.
We believe our future financial performance will be driven by continued adoption and utilization of our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables, and an overall increase in the number and type of customers using our technology. As such, today we believe the primary measures of adoption for our technology are the number of total active customers, the number of active programs in our biopharmaceutical company customer pipeline, the number of instruments actively producing revenue in our installed base and revenue growth relating to new and existing customers. Total active customers and active installed base reflect customers and instruments that have generated revenue for the Company within the last 12 months. To be included in our active programs metric, a program needs to be associated with a pharma sponsored clinical trial, be traceable to a program on clinicaltrials.gov and have generated revenue for the Company within the last 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, we had 82 active customers, 62 active programs and 51 instruments actively producing revenue in our installed base.
Our ability to increase instrument and consumable revenue depends on several factors, including (i) adoption of our HTG EdgeSeq platform by our expanding customer base, including increasing market share for our proprietary panels for the research market; (ii) the efforts of our sales and marketing teams to demonstrate the utility of our products and technology; (iii) our ability to develop and market novel molecular profiling panels designed to meet customer needs, including unmet medical needs; (iv) our ability to demonstrate the benefits of our products to key opinion leaders so they publish information supporting those benefits; (v) pricing and reimbursement; (vi) our ability to expand the addressable market of our HTG EdgeSeq platform through the development of new applications; (vii) our product capabilities compared with competition; and (viii) successful outcomes to our companion diagnostic collaborations. Given the length of the sales cycle we have experienced historically, we expect fluctuations in our instrument and consumables sales on a period-to-period basis.
2021 Highlights and Recent Developments
Our development efforts over the past 18 months have been primarily focused on completing feasibility and development of the HTG Transcriptome Panel, including supporting our Early Adopter Program (EAP), where approximately 30 scientific collaborators throughout the U.S. and EU have partnered with us to explore potential applications of the HTG Transcriptome Panel in their research and clinical programs. We expect our EAP collaborators to assist us with customer testimonials, white papers, technical notes and peer-reviewed publications highlighting their use of the HTG Transcriptome Panel and overall experience relative to alternative technologies. The release of the HTG Transcriptome Panel, coupled with our existing whole transcriptome miRNA panel, is expected to allow us to not only continue to expand our position within oncology, but to diversify the use of our panels in other critical markets such as immunology, infectious disease, diabetes, cardiology and neurology. We also expect to focus our future development efforts on the expansion of the sample types available for use with both of these assays, with an initial focus on liquid biopsies.
In the future, we expect to grow our active installed base and drive larger consumable annuities as customer demand for our menu of proprietary panels, including HTP increases, as we add to the utility of existing panels by expanding applications on our HTG EdgeSeq Reveal software and as European customers implement our existing or custom assays for use in clinical diagnostic testing as LDT’s under CLIA regulations. We remain focused on high quality instrument placements and consumable pull through as the primary indicators of future commercial adoption and success in our business.
We also announced the formation of our new drug discovery business unit, HTG Therapeutics, in June 2021 with the addition of several highly experienced drug development professionals to our leadership team. HTG Therapeutics intends to utilize our HTP and epitranscriptome profiling technologies, integrated with a machine learning-based chemical library design platform to better-inform the design and selection of drug candidate molecules. Working with our Tucson-based research and development teams, HTG Therapeutics has engaged several external collaborators who are expected to contribute meaningful sample cohorts across multiple disease and therapy areas to identify early candidate molecules with therapeutic promise. These efforts are aimed at the generation of high-quality primary data that we believe could lead to new pharma partnerships in drug discovery and early development by the second half of 2022 and beyond.
COVID-19 and international efforts to control its spread have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods and services worldwide, including in regions where we sell our products and services and conduct our business over the past year. We experienced a significant slowing in our product and product-related services revenue beginning in March 2020 and throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 due to continued disruptions to our customers’ businesses from the pandemic and, in many instances, their prioritization of projects in areas related to COVID-19. In addition, we have experienced extended shipment times and increases in cost of product as ongoing supply chain disruptions have impacted the ability of certain suppliers to produce the materials necessary to build our product and perform our testing services. Despite the impacts of COVID-19 on our revenue and operations, we met all of our key development milestones throughout 2020 and 2021 and have not experienced any substantive manufacturing delays from raw material shortages. While most of our customers have now reopened their facilities, at least on a limited basis, it remains unknown whether COVID-19 will continue to materially impact our financial condition, liquidity and results of operations in future periods due to further shutdowns, social distancing measures or illness.
In March 2022, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “March 2022 Purchase Agreement”) with a single investor pursuant to which we agreed to issue to the investor 3,244,987 units at a price of $2.312 per unit (less $0.001 for each pre-funded warrant purchased in lieu of a share of common stock) for gross proceeds, before deducting the placement agent fees and other estimated fees and expenses, of approximately $7.5 million. Each unit consists of one share of common stock (or one pre-funded warrant in lieu thereof), a common warrant to purchase one share of our common stock with a term of 24 months from the issuance date, and a common warrant to purchase one share of our common stock with a term of 66 months from the issuance date. Each of the common warrants is exercisable six months following the closing date and has an exercise price of $2.062 per share. Each pre-funded warrant has an exercise price of $0.001 per share and does not expire until exercised in full.
Financial Operations Overview and Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Our product and product-related services revenue is generated through the sale of our profiling instruments and consumables, sample processing services and custom assay design services to biopharmaceutical companies, academic research centers and molecular testing laboratories.
RUO profiling is currently made available to our customers through product sales and service offerings. Customers can purchase our HTG EdgeSeq instrument and related consumables, which consist primarily of our proprietary molecular profiling panels and other assay components. Customers can also access our technology through contracted services. We perform these services using our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and RUO consumables to process samples in our VERI/O laboratory. Our proprietary technology is also used to develop custom RUO panels which are expected to generate future sample processing or RUO consumables revenue.
We have also previously generated collaborative development services revenue through three statements of work entered into under our prior Master Assay Development, Commercialization and Manufacturing Agreement (the “Governing Agreement”) with QIAGEN Manchester Limited (“QML”). Under these agreements, we and QML combined our technological and commercial strengths to offer biopharmaceutical companies a complete NGS-based solution for the development, manufacture and commercialization of companion diagnostic assays in support of and in conjunction with, biopharmaceutical companies’ drug development programs. Remaining agreed upon procedures associated with these statements of work were completed in the prior year and no additional collaborative development services programs have been entered into as of December 31, 2021. Although we continue to seek potential, new customer collaborations, we currently do not anticipate additional revenue from existing or new collaborative development services programs in 2022.
Total revenue increased by 4% to $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with total revenue of $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. While we continued to experience slowing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic throughout the first half of 2021, we began to see the majority of our customers resume planned studies in the second half of the year.
Product and product-related services revenue
Product and product-related services revenue, which includes revenue generated through the sale of our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables and from services performed for customers using our proprietary RUO technology, increased by 13% to $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and was comprised of the following:
Product revenue, which includes gene expression profiling revenue generated through the sale of our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables, increased by 33% to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase primarily reflects additional instrument placements made during the year with biopharmaceutical companies and academic medical centers when compared to the prior year, when most of our customers had closed their laboratories due to COVID-19. In addition, consumables product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 included revenue recognized from the sale of HTG Transcriptome Panel consumables. Revenue from the sale of the HTG Transcriptome Panel represented 34% of our consumables revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. Product revenue represented 58% and 46% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Product-related services revenue, consisting of RUO sample processing using HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables in our VERI/O laboratory and custom RUO assay development services, decreased by 6% to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in product-related service revenue is a result of an increase in RUO sample processing revenue of 42% to $3.7 million compared to $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, offset by a 97% decrease in custom RUO assay design services to $48,000 compared to $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Product-related services revenue represented 42% and 47% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of product and product-related services revenue
Cost of product and product-related services revenue includes product-related and services-related costs. Product-related costs include the aggregate costs incurred in manufacturing, delivering, installing and servicing instruments and consumables. The components of our product-related costs of revenue include consumables and lab supplies, subcomponent and servicing costs, manufacturing costs incurred internally (which include direct labor costs), and equipment and infrastructure expenses associated with the manufacturing and distribution of our products. Due to the fixed nature of certain of these expenses, such as overhead, equipment and infrastructure, associated with our regulated industry and our expectations for further growth in customer demand, we expect our cost of product and product-related services revenue as a percentage to decrease over time as our product and product-related services revenue increases, further absorbing these fixed costs.
Cost of product and product-related services revenue increased by 3% to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cost of product and product-related services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the same period in 2020 primarily reflects an increase in product and product-related services revenue offset by a reduction of compensation expense in our cost of product and product-related services from Employee Retention Credits (“ERC”) secured in the first three quarters of 2021 in accordance with the Federal Consolidated Appropriations Act.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our sales and marketing, regulatory, legal, executive management, finance and accounting functions. The expenses also include third-party professional and consulting fees incurred by these functions, promotional expenses and facility and overhead costs for our administrative offices. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by 8% to $16.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the same period in 2020 reflects a decrease in stock-based and other compensation-related expense items, as well as ERC benefits secured in the first three quarters of 2021. Offsetting the reduction in compensation-related expense items, was an increase in legal costs related to protecting our intellectual property. We anticipate these higher legal costs to protect and defend our intellectual property will continue into 2022.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs to develop new proprietary panels and technologies, including the technology related to our HTG Therapeutics business unit, costs to continue improving and expanding the utility of our HTG EdgeSeq technology, and amounts incurred to perform collaborative development services. These expenses include payroll and related expenses, consulting expenses, laboratory supplies, facilities and equipment. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses were $6.1 million for both of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and included $0 and $0.5 million of costs relating to our collaborative development services revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Despite the decrease in collaborative development services expense year over year, research and development expense remained consistent with prior year as a result of approximately $1.4 million of technology, consulting and personnel investments made for the year ended December 31, 2021 relating to HTG Therapeutics.
Other income (expense)
In addition to interest expense and income related to our debt, contractual obligations and available-for-sale securities investments, we have recorded other non-operating activities in our consolidated statements of operations for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Upon receipt in of the notification that the PPP Loan and related accrued interest had been forgiven by the U.S. Small Business Administration and that the PPP Loan note had been cancelled in May 2021, we reversed the liabilities related to the PPP Loan and recorded a gain on forgiveness of PPP Loan of approximately $1.7 million. In 2020, as a result of the repayment of all amounts and fees outstanding under the MidCap Credit Facility and the QNAH Convertible Note with proceeds from the SVB Term Loan, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of MidCap Credit Facility and QNAH Convertible Note of approximately $0.5 million.
As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding obligations due to NuvoGen under an asset purchase agreement and an SVB Term Loan obligation. Interest expense and non-cash interest expense recognized for discount, deferred financing fee amortization and final fee premium amounts relating to these obligations was $1.0 million for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Interest income related to our available-for-sale debt securities investments included in other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations decreased by 88% to $30,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a decrease of maturities of available-for-sale securities combined with lower interest rates in 2021.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 1% to $16.5 million compared with $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected (i) the net loss of $17.1 million and (ii) net non-cash items of $1.6 million consisting primarily of the gain on the forgiveness of our PPP loan of $1.7 million, stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $0.7 million, amortization of loan discount and issuance costs of $0.5 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.5 million and loss on abandonment and disposal of assets of $0.2 million; and (iii) a net cash outflow from changes in balances of operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.3 million and reflected (i) the net loss of $20.9 million and (ii) net non-cash items of $4.7 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation of $1.6 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.6 million and loss on extinguishment of the Midcap Credit Facility and QNAH Convertible Note of $0.5 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 136% to $6.7 million compared with net cash provided by investing activities of $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of purchases of available-for-sale securities of $18.6 million, partially offset by the maturity of $12.6 million of the available-for-sale securities and the purchase of $0.6 million of laboratory equipment and other fixed assets during the year.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of purchases of available-for-sale securities of $12.5 million, partially offset by the maturity of $31.7 million of the available-for-sale securities and the purchase of $0.5 million of laboratory equipment and other fixed assets during the year.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 15% to $10.4 million compared with $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $10.7 million in net proceeds from sales of our common stock in an “at the market offering” and $0.9 million in proceeds from our stock purchase agreement (the “LP Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), partially offset by $0.5 million of payments made on our outstanding NuvoGen obligation, and $0.7 million of payments made on our 2020 and 2021 Insurance Notes.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.0 million. This activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $7.5 million in net proceeds from our underwritten public and private offerings, $1.7 million in proceeds from our PPP Loan and $0.6 million in payments on our NuvoGen obligation
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have primarily been financed through the issuance of our common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, the incurrence of debt and cash received from product sales, services revenue and other income. As of December 31, 2021, we had $21.9 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments in short-term available-for-sale securities, and current liabilities of $9.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, we also had approximately $10.1 million of long-term liabilities outstanding, relating to our SVB Term Loan, our NuvoGen obligation, and our financing and operating leases.
In February 2020, we issued 41,100 shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock (“Series A Preferred”) to accredited investors, in exchange for the investors surrendering to us for cancellation an aggregate of 274,000 shares of our common stock. In addition, we sold an aggregate of 10,170 additional shares of our Series A Preferred to the accredited investors for aggregate gross proceeds of $0.6 million, and transaction costs of approximately $37,000. Each share of Series A Preferred is convertible into 6.67 shares of our common stock, subject to proportional adjustment and beneficial ownership limitations. In June 2020, the investors elected to convert 27,500 shares of Series A Preferred to common stock, resulting in the issuance of 183,333 shares of the Company’s common stock. The remaining 23,770 shares of Series A Preferred remain outstanding as of December 31, 2021. In the event of our liquidation, dissolution or winding up, holders of Series A Preferred will participate pari passu with any distribution of proceeds to holders of our common stock. Holders of Series A Preferred are entitled to receive dividends on shares of Series A Preferred equal (on an as converted to common stock basis) to and in the same form as dividends actually paid on our common stock. Shares of Series A Preferred generally have no voting rights, except as required by law.
In March 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (“LP Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to $20.0 million of shares of our common stock (“Purchase Shares”) from time to time over the 36-month term of the LP Purchase Agreement. The purchase price of the Purchase Shares will be based on recent closing prices of our common stock at the time of sale. We issued Lincoln Park an aggregate of 41,026 shares of our common stock as consideration for their purchase commitment pursuant to the LP Purchase Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, 352,004 shares of our common stock have been sold to Lincoln Park under the LP Purchase Agreement for aggregate proceeds of $1.9 million. Pursuant to the March 2022 Purchase Agreement, we may not sell any shares under the LP Purchase Agreement for the remainder of the 36-month term of the LP Purchase Agreement.
In April 2020, we received the proceeds from the PPP Loan in the amount of $1.7 million from SVB, as lender, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. In May 2021, we received notification from SVB that the PPP Loan and related accrued interest, totaling $1,735,792, was forgiven in full by the U.S. Small Business Administration, and the PPP Loan note was canceled.
In June 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) for an asset-secured loan in the principal amount of $10.0 million with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”), as lender (the “SVB Term Loan”). The proceeds from the SVB Term Loan were fully funded on June 25, 2020. The proceeds from the SVB Term Loan, together with cash on hand, were used to repay in full all outstanding amounts and fees due under our MidCap Credit Facility and the QNAH Convertible Note. Our SVB Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate equal to the greater of 2.50% above the Prime Rate (as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement) and 5.75% and originally required interest-only payments payable monthly in arrears through June 30, 2021. This interest-only period has been extended for an additional six months as a result of the Company’s achievement of the equity milestone defined in the Loan Agreement. The extended interest-only period will be followed by equal monthly payments of principal and interest through the maturity date of December 1, 2023. In addition, we must comply with a financial covenant requiring that we maintain a certain amount of unrestricted cash, including investments in short term available-for-sale securities, under the Loan Agreement (see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report). We expect that we could be out of compliance with this unrestricted minimum cash covenant as early as mid-2022 unless we are successful in raising additional equity capital or are able to amend the covenant with the bank. If sufficient additional capital is not available as and when needed, we may have to delay, scale back or discontinue one or more product development programs, curtail our commercial activities, significantly reduce expenses, sell assets (potentially at a discount to their fair value or carrying value), enter into relationships with third parties to develop or commercialize products or technologies that we otherwise would have sought to develop or commercialize independently, ceases altogether, pursue a sale of the Company at a price that may result in a significant loss on investment for our stockholders, file for bankruptcy or seek other protection from creditors, or liquidate all assets. In addition, if we default under the Loan Agreement, SVB could accelerate the payment of the SVB Term Loan and ultimately foreclose on our assets.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Material Cash Requirements
We have had recurring operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and have an accumulated deficit of $208.3 million as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments in short-term available-for-sale securities of $21.9 million and had current liabilities of $9.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, we also had approximately $10.1 million of long-term liabilities outstanding, relating to our SVB Term Loan, our NuvoGen obligation, and our financing and operating leases.
We cannot be certain that our existing resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations and expenditures for at least the next 12 months from issuance of these consolidated financial statements. Potentially changing circumstances, including those related to COVID-19, may also result in the depletion of our capital resources more rapidly than we currently anticipate. These circumstances raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our primary capital needs, including contractual obligations and commitments, which are subject to change, include:
•
Debt Obligations - As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding debt balance was $10.3 million. See Note 8, “Debt Obligations” within our consolidated financial statements for further detail of our debt and the timing of expected future payments.
•
NuvoGen Obligation - As of December 31, 2021, our NuvoGen obligation balance was $4.4 million. See Note 10, “Other Agreements” within our consolidated financial statements for further detail and the timing of expected future payments.
•
Operating Leases - As of December 31, 2021, our contractual commitment for operating leases was $1.5 million. See Note 11, “Leases” within our consolidated financial statements for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of expected future payments, including a four-year maturity schedule.
•
Planned costs to operating our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures;
•
Support of commercialization efforts related to our current and future products; and
•
Continued advancement of research and development efforts, including those related to our planned transcriptome panel.
Until our revenue reaches a level sufficient to support self-sustaining cash flows, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, or other capital sources which may include strategic collaborations, licensing arrangements or other arrangements with third parties. Future funding requirements will depend on a number of factors, including our ability to generate significant revenue, our ability to repay our debt obligations as they become due, the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, the ongoing cost of research and development activities, the cost and timing of regulatory clearances and approvals, the effect of competing technology and market developments, the nature and timing of companion diagnostic development collaborations we may establish and the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies.
Additional capital may not be available at such times or in amounts needed by us. Even if sufficient capital is available to us, it might be available only on unfavorable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital in the future when required and in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to delay, scale back or discontinue one or more product development programs, curtail our commercialization activities, significantly reduce expenses, sell assets (potentially at a discount to their fair value or carrying value), enter into relationships with third parties to develop or commercialize products or technologies that we otherwise would have sought to develop or commercialize independently, cease operations altogether, pursue an acquisition of our company at a price that may result in a significant loss on investment to our stockholders, file for bankruptcy, seek other protection from creditors, or liquidate all of our assets. In addition, if we default under our SVB Term Loan agreement, our lender could foreclose on our assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting policies and estimates include those related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation expense, inventory valuation, fair value measurements and income taxes. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates and such differences could affect the results of operations in future periods.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized when, or as, we satisfy our performance obligations by delivering the promised goods or service deliverables to our customers. A good or service deliverable is transferred to a customer when, or as, the customer obtains control of that good or service deliverable. A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is recognized by measuring our progress in satisfying the performance obligation in a manner that depicts the transfer of the goods or services to the customer. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time that we determine the customer obtains control over the promised good or service deliverable. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those promised goods or services (i.e., the “transaction price”). In determining the transaction price, we consider multiple factors, including the effects of variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainties with respect to the amount are resolved. In determining when to include variable consideration in the transaction price, we consider the range of possible outcomes, the predictive value of our past experiences, the time period of when uncertainties expect to be resolved and the amount of consideration that is susceptible to factors outside of our influence, such as the judgment and actions of third parties.
For contracts where the period between when we transfer a promised good or service to the customer and when the customer pays is one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient to not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component.
We have made a policy election to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by a government authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue producing transaction and collected from a customer. Such taxes may include but are not limited to sales, use, value added and certain excise taxes.
Product and Product-related Services Revenue
Sale of instruments and consumables
The delivery of each instrument and related installation and calibration are considered to be a single performance obligation, as the HTG EdgeSeq instrument must be professionally installed and calibrated prior to use. Instrument product revenue is generally recognized upon installation and calibration of the instrument by field service engineers, which represents the point at which the customer has the ability to use the instrument and has accepted the asset. Installation generally occurs within one month of instrument shipment.
The delivery of each consumable is a separate performance obligation. Consumables revenue is recognized upon transfer of control, which represents the point when the customer has legal title and the significant risks of ownership of the asset. Our standard terms and conditions provide that no right of return exists for instruments and consumables, unless replacement is necessary due to delivery of defective or damaged product. Customer payment terms vary but are typically between 30 and 90 days of revenue being earned from shipment or delivery, as applicable.
Shipping and handling fees charged to customers for instruments shipped are included in the consolidated statements of operations as part of product and product-related services revenue. Shipping and handling costs for products shipped to customers are included in the consolidated statements of operations as part of cost of product and product-related services revenue.
For sales of consumables in the United States, standard delivery terms are FOB shipping point, unless otherwise specified in the customer contract, reflecting transfer of control to the customer upon shipment. Standard delivery terms for sales to customers outside of the United States are FOB delivery point, unless otherwise specified in the customer contract. We have elected the practical expedient to account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the consumables.
We provide instruments to certain customers under reagent rental agreements. Under these agreements, an instrument is installed in the customer’s facility without a fee and the customer agrees to purchase consumable products at a stated price over the term of the agreement; in some instances, the agreements do not contain a minimum purchase requirement. Terms range from several months to multiple years and may automatically renew in several month or multiple year increments unless either party notifies the other in advance that the agreement will not renew. We measure progress toward complete satisfaction of this performance obligation to provide the instrument and deliver the consumables using an output method based on the number of consumables delivered in relation to the total consumables to be provided under the reagent rental agreement. This is considered to be representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangement and the best measure of progress because the customer benefits from the instrument only in conjunction with the consumables. We expect to recover the cost of the instrument under the agreement through the fees charged for consumables, to the extent sold, over the term of the agreement.
In reagent rental agreements, we retain title to the instrument and title is transferred to the customer at no additional charge at the conclusion of the initial arrangement. The cost of the instrument is amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the arrangement, unless there is no minimum consumable product purchase, in which case the instrument would be expensed as cost of product and product-related services revenue upon installation. Cost to maintain the instrument while we hold title is charged to selling, general and administrative expense as incurred.
Service revenue
Sample Processing Services
We also provide sample preparation and processing services and molecular profiling of retrospective cohorts for our customers through our VERI/O laboratory, whereby the customer provides samples to be processed using HTG EdgeSeq technology specified in the order. Customers are charged a per sample fee for sample processing services which is recognized as revenue upon delivery of a data file to the customer showing the results of testing and completing delivery of the agreed upon service. This is when the customer can use and benefit from the results of testing and we have the present right to payment.
Custom RUO Assay Development
We enter into custom RUO assay design agreements that may generate up-front fees and subsequent payments that might be earned upon completion of design process phases. Progress is measured toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation to perform custom RUO assay design using an output method based on the costs incurred to date compared with total expected costs, as this is representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangements and the best measure of progress. However, because in most instances the assay development fees are contingent upon completion of each phase of the design project and the decision of the customer to proceed to the next phase, the amount to be included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue is limited to that which the customer is contractually obligated to pay upon completion of that phase, which is when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Changes in estimates of total expected costs are accounted for prospectively as a change in estimate. From period to period, custom RUO assay design service revenue can fluctuate substantially based on the completion of design-related phases.
Collaborative Development Services
We follow ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements to determine the appropriate recognition of revenue under our collaborative research, development and commercialization agreements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, collaborative development services revenue was generated from our Governing Agreement with QML. We have determined that the statements of work signed under the Governing Agreement are collaborative arrangements and that QML meets the definition of a customer under ASC 606. Additionally, each SOW is a separate contract with a single performance obligation to provide development services. Under each SOW, QML pays a monthly fee for development work performed by us and our subcontractors. The monthly fee is based on the employee and materials costs incurred during the month, which is subject to significant variability from period to period and unknown until the costs are incurred. Therefore, the monthly fee, which is based on use of hours and costs as a measure of progress, is included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue over time when the costs are incurred and the monthly fee is billed to QML. As we have the right to consideration from the customer in an amount that corresponds directly to the value to the customer of our performance completed to date, we recognize revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. It is at this time that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We also share any net profits resulting from performance of the development work with QML as determined pursuant to the Governing Agreement. Such profit-sharing payment(s) is deemed to be variable consideration using the expected value method and is included in the transaction price upon completion of the respective SOW deliverables, acceptance of corresponding deliverables, and the mutual agreement by both parties on the calculation of net profit, which is when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
Because each SOW has an expected duration of one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-50-14(a) to not disclose information about its remaining performance obligations for each SOW.
Fair Value Measurements
We establish the fair value of all of our financial assets and liabilities, which are recognized and disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements, using the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a financial liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A fair value hierarchy is used to measure fair value. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2 - Pricing inputs are based on quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets.
Level 3 - Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable and include situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the investment.
Our portfolio of securities comprises high credit quality corporate debt securities classified as available-for-sale securities.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory consists of raw materials and finished goods which are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. We reserve or write down inventory for estimated obsolescence, inventory in excess of reasonably expected near term sales or unmarketable inventory, in an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value, based upon assumption about future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional inventory adjustments may be required. Inventory impairment charges establish a new cost basis for inventory and charges are not reversed subsequently to income, even if circumstances later suggest that increased carrying amounts are recoverable.
Leases
We account for our leases under ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”). Under this guidance, arrangements meeting the definition of a lease are classified as operating or financing leases and are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets as both a right-of-use asset and lease liability, calculated by discounting fixed lease payments over the lease term at the rate implicit in the lease or our incremental borrowing rate. Lease liabilities are increased by interest and reduced by payments each period, and the right-of-use asset is amortized over the lease term. For operating leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right-of-use asset result in straight-line rent expense over the lease term. For financing leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right-of-use asset results in front-loaded expense over the lease term. Variable lease expenses are recorded to rent expense as incurred.
In calculating the right-of-use asset and lease liability, we have elected to combine lease and non-lease components for all classes of assets currently under lease, including facilities and computer equipment. We have also excluded short-term leases having initial terms of 12 months or less from the new guidance as an accounting policy election and recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term for these leases.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based payments to employees, including grants under our equity incentive plans of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock purchase rights granted under our ESPP, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of RSUs is based on the quoted market price of our common stock on the date of grant. We do not estimate the number of awards expected to be forfeited but instead we account for them as they occur. The fair value of ESPP rights and stock options granted pursuant to our equity incentive plans is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by the fair value of our common stock and several assumptions, including volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. Generally, these assumptions are based on historical information and judgment is required to determine if historical trends may be indicators of future outcomes. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties. Changes to the assumptions that we have used in the Black-Sholes option pricing model could significantly impact the compensation expense that has been recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different.