Item 7.
Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to USHG Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking
statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible Business Combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 4, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt, or a combination of cash, equity, and debt. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our Sponsor is USHG Investments, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on February 24, 2021. On March 1, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 28,750,000 Units, including 3,750,000 over-allotment Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $833,316, inclusive of approximately $15.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 1,333,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $2.0 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $287.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering was held in the Trust Account located in the United States with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC acting as trustee, and invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 180 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 1, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our Board, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Recent Developments
On November 8, 2021, the Company entered into the Investment Agreement with Panera and Merger Sub, pursuant to which Merger Sub will merge with and into the Company, with the Company surviving the Merger.
Upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Investment Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), each issued and outstanding share of the Company’s Class A common stock and each issued and outstanding share of the Company’s Class B common stock will be converted into the right to receive a number of shares of Panera Common Stock at an exchange ratio of $10.00 divided by the public offering price per share in the Panera IPO). In addition, at the Effective Time, each issued and outstanding warrant of the Company will be assumed by Panera and will relate to Panera Common Stock (each, a “Warrant”) (with the number of shares of Panera Common Stock underlying each Warrant adjusted in accordance with the terms of the Investment Agreement).
The consummation of the proposed Transactions is subject to the receipt of the requisite approval of the stockholders of the Company (such approval, the “HUGS stockholder approval”) and the fulfillment of certain other conditions, including the consummation of the Panera IPO.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a Business Combination after the Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting, and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $6,970,265, which consists of formation and operating costs of $1,836,359, unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $16,155, transaction costs allocated to derivative warrant liability of $757,984, change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $4,392,077.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $10,000, which consists of formation and operating costs of $10,000.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On December 29, 2020, our Sponsor paid $24,120, or approximately $0.003 per share, to cover certain of our offering and formation costs in consideration of 6,934,500 shares of Class B common stock, par value $0.0001. In January 2021, our Sponsor made a charitable contribution of 115,000 of those shares to Share Our Strength. The number of Founder Shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such Founder Shares would represent 21.714% of the issued and outstanding shares upon completion of the Initial Public Offering. Following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and prior to or in connection with our initial Business Combination, we may issue up to an additional 253,000 shares of Class B common stock to the service providers. The Founder Shares and the Discretionary Allocation Shares (including the shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise thereof) may not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by the holder.
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of:
(A) one year after the completion of our initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to our initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share
(as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading
day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial Business Combination (provided that the 30-trading
day must be completed prior to any such transfer, assignment or sale), or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our public stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of our Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 1,333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $2.0 million.
Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. Except as set forth below, the Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable
for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or their permitted transferees.
The purchasers of the Private Placement Warrants agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants (except to permitted transferees) until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
Affiliates of our Sponsor have agreed to loan us up to $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the Initial Public Offering. As of February 4, 2021, we have borrowed all $300,000 available under the promissory note with affiliates of our Sponsor. These loans are non-interest
bearing, unsecured and were due at the earlier of December 31, 2021 and the closing of our Initial Public Offering. The loan was repaid in full on February 26, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $2.0 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private
Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into prior to the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities may at any time, and from time to time, request in writing that the Company register the resale of any or all of these securities on Form S-3
or any similar short form registration statement that may be available at such time; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to effect such request through an underwritten offering. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.55 per Unit, or $15,812,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that the Company does not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Administrative Services Agreement
We have entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which the Company paid and will pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services. We will make payments to the Sponsor until the earlier of the completion of the Initial Business Combination or the liquidation of the trust assets. We paid $110,000 for the services provided through the Administrative Services Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Independent Financial Advisory Services
Piper Sandler & Co. is acting as our independent financial advisor as defined under Financial Industry Regulatory Authority Rule 5110(j)(9), to provide independent financial consulting services, consisting of a review of deal structure and terms and related structuring advice in connection with our proposed initial Business Combination with Panera. We will pay Piper Sandler & Co. a financial advisory fee of $3,000,000 if we consummate the initial Business Combination with Panera by May 5, 2022 or one year following the termination of the agreement with Piper Sandler & Co.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income from investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 28,750,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet. The Class A common stock subject to possible redemption reflected on the balance sheet as December 31, 2021 are reconciled in the following table:
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement in the calculation of diluted income per share, because the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D
and 7F under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The Private Placement Warrants are valued using a Modified Black Scholes Option Pricing Model.
Recent accounting standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope
exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. Management is currently evaluating the new guidance but does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.