Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context indicates otherwise, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the “Company,” “Humacyte,” “we,” “us,” “our” and similar terms refer to Humacyte, Inc. (formerly known as Alpha Healthcare Acquisition Corp.) and its consolidated subsidiaries (including Humacyte Global, Inc.) following the Company’s merger with Alpha Healthcare Acquisition Corp (the “Merger”); references to “Legacy Humacyte” refer to Humacyte, Inc. prior to the Merger; and references to “AHAC” refer to Alpha Healthcare Acquisition Corp. prior to the Merger.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are pioneering the development and manufacture of off-the-shelf, universally implantable, bioengineered human tissues with the goal of improving the lives of patients and transforming the practice of medicine. We believe our technology has the potential to overcome limitations in existing standards of care and address the lack of significant innovation in products that support tissue repair, reconstruction and replacement. We are leveraging our novel, scalable technology platform to develop proprietary, bioengineered, acellular human tissues for use in the treatment of diseases and conditions across a range of anatomic locations in multiple therapeutic areas.
We are initially using our proprietary, scientific technology platform to engineer and manufacture Human Acellular Vessels (“HAVs”). Our investigational HAVs are designed to be easily implanted into any patient without inducing a foreign body response or leading to immune rejection. We are developing a portfolio, or “cabinet”, of HAVs with varying diameters and lengths. The HAV cabinet would initially target the vascular repair, reconstruction and replacement market, including vascular trauma; AV access for hemodialysis; PAD; and CABG. In addition, we are developing our HAVs for pediatric heart surgery and the delivery of cellular therapies, including pancreatic islet cell transplantation to treat Type 1 diabetes. We will continue to explore the application of our technology across a broad range of markets and indications, including the development of urinary conduit, trachea, esophagus and other novel cell delivery systems.
We believe there is substantial clinical demand for safe and effective vascular conduits to replace and repair blood vessels throughout the body. Vascular injuries resulting from trauma are common in civilian and military populations, frequently resulting in the loss of either life or limb. Existing treatment options in the vascular repair, reconstruction and replacement market include the use of autologous vessels and synthetic grafts, which we believe suffer from significant limitations. For example, the use of autologous veins to repair traumatic vascular injuries can lead to significant morbidity associated with the surgical wounds created for vein harvest and prolonged times to restore blood flow to injured limbs leading to an increased risk of amputation and infection. Synthetic grafts are often contraindicated in the setting of vascular trauma due to higher infection risk that can lead to prolonged hospitalization and limb loss. Given the competitive advantages our HAVs are designed to have over existing vascular substitutes, we believe that HAVs have the potential to become the standard of care and lead to improved patient outcomes and lower healthcare costs.
We have generated no product revenue and incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations in each year since our inception in 2004. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $414.6 million and $388.1 million, respectively, and working capital of $218.3 million and $30.2 million, respectively. Our net losses were approximately $26.5 million and $66.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash flows used in operating activities were $81.2 million and $55.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to incur substantial operating losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $225.5 million. We believe our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments on hand will be sufficient to fund operations, including clinical trial expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 1 - Organization and Description of Business in the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding this assessment.
Our need for additional capital will depend in part on the scope and costs of our development and commercial manufacturing activities. To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of commercialized products. Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Until such time, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the use of existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, sale of equity or debt, borrowings under credit facilities, or through potential collaborations, other strategic transactions or government and other grants. Adequate capital may not be available to us when needed or on acceptable terms. If we are unable to raise capital, we could be forced to delay, reduce, suspend or cease our research and development programs or any future commercialization efforts, which would have a negative impact on our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. See “Risk Factors” for additional information.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and to increase operating losses for at least the next several years. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we seek to:
•obtain marketing approval for our 6 millimeter HAV for vascular repair, reconstruction and replacement, including for vascular trauma and AV access for hemodialysis;
•commercialize the HAV via U.S. market launches in vascular trauma and hemodialysis AV access;
•scale out our manufacturing facility to the extent required to satisfy potential demand following any receipt of marketing approval;
•continue our preclinical and clinical development efforts;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel to support, among other things, our product development and commercialization efforts and operations; and
•operate as a public company, which includes higher costs associated with hiring additional personnel, director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees and expenses for compliance with public company reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC and The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”).
Recent Developments
Closing of Merger
On August 26, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Legacy Humacyte and AHAC consummated a merger pursuant to that certain Business Combination Agreement, dated as of February 17, 2021 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Legacy Humacyte, AHAC and Hunter Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”). As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Humacyte, with Legacy Humacyte continuing as the surviving corporation and as a wholly owned subsidiary of AHAC (the “Merger”). As a result of the Merger, AHAC was renamed Humacyte, Inc. and Legacy Humacyte was renamed Humacyte Global, Inc. Operations prior to the Merger included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are those of Legacy Humacyte.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), (1) each outstanding share of common stock of Legacy Humacyte (“Legacy Humacyte common stock”) was cancelled and converted into the right to receive approximately 0.26260 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Common Stock”), and (2) each outstanding share of preferred stock of Legacy Humacyte (“Legacy Humacyte preferred stock”) was cancelled and converted into the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock that would be issued upon conversion of the shares of Legacy Humacyte preferred stock based on the applicable conversion ratio immediately prior to the Effective Time, multiplied by approximately 0.26260, resulting in the issuance of a total of 75,656,935 shares of Common Stock. Prior holders of shares of Legacy Humacyte common stock and Legacy Humacyte preferred stock also received the contingent right to receive certain Contingent Earnout Shares (as defined below), for each share owned by each such Legacy Humacyte stockholder that was outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger (the “Closing”). In addition, certain investors purchased an aggregate of 17,500,000 shares of Common Stock (such investors, the “PIPE Investors”) in a private placement that closed concurrently with the Closing for an aggregate purchase price of $175 million (the “PIPE Financing”). Additionally, at the Closing, 2,500,000 shares of AHAC’s Class B common stock (“Founder Shares”) automatically converted into shares of Common Stock on a one-for-one basis.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the Effective Time of the Merger, (1) warrants to purchase shares of Legacy Humacyte common stock were converted into warrants to purchase an aggregate of 287,704 shares of Common Stock, and (2) options to purchase shares of Legacy Humacyte common stock were converted into options to purchase an aggregate of 6,405,138 shares of Common Stock.
Following the Closing Date, former holders of Legacy Humacyte common stock and Legacy Humacyte preferred stock may receive up to 15,000,000 additional shares of Common Stock (“Contingent Earnout Shares”) in the aggregate in two equal tranches if the volume-weighted average closing sale price of our Common Stock is greater than or equal to $15.00 and $20.00, respectively, for any 20 trading days within any 30 consecutive trading day period.
Unless otherwise noted, the Company has retroactively adjusted all common and preferred share and related price information to give effect to the Exchange Ratio established in the Merger Agreement.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic, which began in December 2019 and has spread worldwide, has caused many governments to implement measures to slow the spread of the outbreak, including shelter-in-place orders and the mandatory shutdown of certain businesses. The outbreak and government measures taken in response have had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on our business, as supply chains have been disrupted, and facilities and production have been suspended. The future progression of the COVID-19 pandemic, including any existing or potential variants of the virus which causes COVID-19, and its effects on our business and operations are uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, delay our clinical trials or future clinical trials, disrupt regulatory activities, or have other adverse effects on our business and operations. The pandemic has already caused significant disruptions in the financial markets, and may continue to cause such disruptions, which could impact our ability to raise additional funds to support our operations. Moreover, the pandemic has significantly impacted economies worldwide and could result in adverse effects on our business and operations.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not resulted in material financial impacts or impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets and we are not aware of any specific related event or circumstance that would require us to revise the estimates reflected in our financial statements. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including current and future clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new
information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain or treat it, and the duration and intensity of the related economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated revenue from the sale of any products. All of our revenue has been derived from government and other grants. Since inception we have been awarded grants from the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine (“CIRM”), NIH, and the DoD, to support our development, production scaling and clinical trials of our product candidates. We may generate revenue in the future from government and other grants, payments from future license or collaboration agreements and, if any of our product candidates receive marketing approval, from product sales. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter. If we fail to complete the development of, or obtain marketing approval for, our product candidates in a timely manner, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused our resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, developing our manufacturing process and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related overhead expenses for personnel in research and development functions, including stock-based compensation and benefits;
•fees paid to consultants and CROs, including in connection with our clinical trials, and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work and statistical compilation and analysis;
•allocation of facility lease and maintenance costs;
•depreciation of leasehold improvements, laboratory equipment and computers;
•costs related to purchasing raw materials for and producing our product candidates for clinical trials;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements;
•costs related to our manufacturing development and expanded-capabilities initiatives; and
•license fees related to in-licensed technologies.
The majority of our research and development resources are currently focused on our Phase III clinical trials for our 6 millimeter HAV and other work needed to obtain marketing approval for our 6 millimeter HAV for use for vascular repair, reconstruction and replacement, including vascular trauma and AV access in hemodialysis in the United States and Europe. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with these and our other clinical development efforts, including expenses related to regulatory filings, trial enrollment and conduct, data analysis, patient follow up and study report generation for our Phase II and Phase III clinical trials. We do not allocate all of our costs by each research and development program for which we are developing our cabinet of HAVs, as a significant amount of our development activities broadly support multiple programs that use our technology platform. We plan to further increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our proprietary scientific technology platform and our novel manufacturing paradigm.
The successful development of our preclinical and clinical product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot estimate with any reasonable certainty the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of any of our preclinical or clinical product candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our product candidates, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of our preclinical development activities, our ongoing clinical trials and any additional clinical trials that we may conduct, and other research and development activities;
•successful patient enrollment in and the initiation and completion of clinical trials;
•the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities including the FDA and non-U.S. regulators;
•the extent of any required post-marketing approval commitments to applicable regulatory authorities;
•development of clinical and commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers in order to ensure that it or its third-party manufacturers are able to successfully manufacture our product;
•obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•significant and changing government regulations;
•launching commercial sales of our product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•the degree of market acceptance of any product candidates that obtain marketing approval; and
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile following approval, if any, of our product candidates.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables could lead to significant changes in the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate being required to conduct in order to complete the clinical development of any of our product candidates, or if we experience significant delays in the enrollment or the conduct of any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance, human resources, commercialization, and administrative support functions, which also include stock-based compensation expenses and benefits for such employees. Other significant general and administrative expenses include facilities costs, professional fees for accounting and legal services and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase for the foreseeable future to support our expanded infrastructure and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases are expected to include increased employee-related expenses and increased director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees and expenses for compliance with public company reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC, as well as Nasdaq rules.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
Total other income (expenses), net consists of (i) the change in fair value of the contingent earnout liability that was accounted for as a liability as of the date of the Merger, and is remeasured to fair value at each reporting period, resulting in a non-cash gain or loss, (ii) a gain on Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness, (iii) a change in fair value of private placement common stock warrant liabilities related to the Private Placement Warrants, which we assumed in connection with the Merger, and which are subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date resulting in a non-cash gain or loss, (iv) interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, (v) interest expense incurred on the Loan Agreement, finance leases, and our PPP loan during the periods each were outstanding, and (vi) legal, accounting, and investment banking fees and other costs directly related to the consummation of the Merger that were associated with the aforementioned warrant liabilities. See Note 8 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of the leases.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
* Not meaningful
Grant Revenue
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated $1.3 million and $1.5 million of revenue, respectively, related to the reimbursement of qualifying expenses incurred in connection with our grants from DoD and NIH. The decrease in revenue of $0.2 million, or 15%, was primarily driven by $0.3 million of revenue recognized during 2020 related to our grant from NIH before the program ended in 2020, partially offset by $0.1 million related to the timing of reimbursement of certain allowable costs related to our grant from DoD in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table discloses the breakdown of research and development expenses:
Research and development expenses increased from $54.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase of $7.3 million, or 13%, was primarily driven by a $5.3 million increase in payroll and personnel expenses to support our expanding research and development initiatives, including a $3.2 million increase in salaries and benefits and a $2.1 million increase in non-cash stock compensation expense. Other components of the current-year increase included a $1.1 million increase in external services and a $1.1 million increase in the purchase of lab supplies to be used in the development of our commercial-scale manufacturing process and other research and development initiatives, including the support of clinical studies.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $21.1 million and $12.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses during this period of $9.1 million, or 76%, was driven by (i) increases in non-cash stock compensation expense of $3.4 million primarily related to stock option grants associated with the appointment of our Chief Executive Officer in November 2020 and our Chief Financial Officer in May
2021, (ii) professional fees of $2.2 million related to the completion of the PIPE Financing and the Merger, (iii) $1.3 million in salaries and benefits and $0.7 million in recruiting costs primarily due to headcount added during 2021 and (iv) $0.6 million in insurance costs driven by the purchase of directors and officers insurance in 2021 related to the transition to being a public company.
Total Other Income (Expenses)
Total other income (expenses) was $54.7 million and $(1.9) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $56.7 million in income resulted from a $55.8 million non-cash gain related to the remeasurement of the contingent earnout liability as of December 31, 2021 and a $3.3 million gain on PPP loan forgiveness, partially offset by a $2.1 million increase in interest expense related to our loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank which commenced in March 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities and convertible debt, proceeds from the Merger and related PIPE Financing, borrowings under loan facilities and, to a lesser extent, through grants from governmental and other agencies. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $414.6 million and $388.1 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $225.5 million and $39.9 million, respectively. We believe our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund operations, including clinical trial expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 1 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our assessment. We believe that our longer-term working capital, planned research and development, capital expenditures and other general corporate funding requirements will be satisfied through the sale of equity, debt, borrowings under credit facilities or through potential collaborations with other companies, other strategic transactions or government or other grants. Our liquidity plans are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including those described in the sections entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had working capital of $218.3 million and $30.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we have $30.0 million outstanding principal and $20.0 million of contingent borrowing capacity under our Loan Agreement as defined below. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds beyond the Loan Agreement.
Material Cash Requirements
Our known material cash requirements include: (1) the purchase of supplies and services that are primarily for research and development; (2) debt repayments (for additional information, see below and Note 7 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K); (3) employee wages, benefits, and incentives; and (4) financing and operating lease payments (for additional information see below and Note 8 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). We have also entered into contracts with CROs primarily for clinical trials. These contracts generally provide for termination upon limited notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancellable obligations under these agreements are not material. Moreover, we may be subject to additional material cash requirements that are contingent upon the occurrence of certain events, e.g., legal contingencies, uncertain tax positions, and other matters.
As of December 31, 2021, we had non-cancellable purchase commitments of $12.8 million for supplies and services that are primarily for research and development. We have entered into license agreements with Duke University and Yale University and have a distribution agreement with Fresenius Medical Care Holdings, Inc. The amount and timing of any potential milestone payments, license fee payments, royalties and other payments that we may be required to make under these agreements are unknown or uncertain at December 31, 2021. For additional information regarding these agreements and the nature of payments that could become due thereunder, see “Business - Distribution” and “Business - Intellectual Property,” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Debt
In April 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $3.3 million under the PPP established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). The loan and accrued interest were forgivable after a 24-week period as long as we used the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintained its payroll levels. On May 25, 2021, the Small Business Administration approved the forgiveness of the outstanding amount of the PPP loan and we recognized a gain from loan extinguishment in the amount of $3.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
In March 2021, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank and SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII, L.P., as amended in June and September 2021, which provides a term loan facility of up to $50.0 million, with a maturity date of March 1, 2025. The initial term loan tranche of $20.0 million was funded upon the closing of the Loan Agreement, and on October 13, 2021, we borrowed an additional $10.0 million under the Loan Agreement. The additional $20.0 million becomes accessible in two tranches of $10.0 million each contingent on the achievement of certain business and clinical development milestones. As a result of the additional borrowing in October 2021, the commencement of repayment of principal was deferred until no earlier than July 2023 and potentially later if the remaining tranches are drawn. As of December 31, 2021, principal of $30.0 million was outstanding under the Loan Agreement and we were in compliance with all covenants in all material respects. Assuming no additional borrowings under the Loan Agreement, we expect to make interest payments of approximately $5.5 million under the Loan Agreement from January 1, 2022 through March 1, 2025, approximately $2.3 million of which we expect to pay during the year ended December 31, 2022.
Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets, except for our intellectual property. The Loan Agreement contains certain customary covenants, including, but not limited to, those relating to additional indebtedness, liens, asset divestitures, and affiliate transactions. We may use the proceeds of borrowings under the Loan Agreement as working capital and to fund our general business requirements.
Borrowings under the Loan Agreement bear interest at a rate of 7.5% or the sum of the Wall Street Journal Prime Rate plus 4.25%, whichever is greater. In addition, the lenders were granted warrants to purchase common stock. Interest-only payments on the principal amount outstanding are due monthly beginning in the first month after the loan is dispersed. We are required to repay principal beginning on July 1, 2023, unless we draw the remaining two loan tranches, in which case repayment of the outstanding principal amount will begin no later than April 1, 2024. Additionally, we are obligated to pay to the lenders a final payment fee of $1.5 million upon the maturity of the loan.
Our contractual obligations under the Loan Agreement as of December 31, 2021, include no cash payments related to principal within one year, $27.1 million within one to three years, and $2.9 million within three to five years.
Leases
Our finance lease relates to our headquarters facility containing our manufacturing, research and development and general and administrative functions, which was substantially completed in June 2018 and leased through May 2033, and our operating lease relates to the land lease associated with our headquarters. See Note 8 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our leases. Our future contractual obligations under our lease agreements as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Future Funding Requirements
We expect to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities as we seek to (i) continue clinical development of our 6 millimeter HAV for use in vascular trauma and dialysis AV access and submit biologics license applications for FDA approval, (ii) if marketing approval is obtained, to launch and commercialize our HAVs for dialysis AV access and vascular repair in the U.S. market, including subsequent launches in key international markets, (iii) advance our pipeline in major markets, including PAD Phase III trials and continue preclinical development and advance to planned clinical studies in CABG and biovascular pancreas for diabetes, and (iv) scale out our manufacturing facility as required to satisfy potential demand if our HAVs receive marketing approval. We will need additional funding in connection with these activities.
Our future funding requirements, both short-term and long-term, will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress and results of our clinical trials and interpretation of those results by the FDA and other regulatory authorities;
•the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates, particularly for marketing approval of our HAVs in the United States;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our additional product candidates;
•the cost and timing of our future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing and distribution for our HAVs if approved by the FDA, and any other product candidate for which we receive marketing approval in the future;
•the amount and timing of revenues, if any, that we receive from commercial sales of any product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims; and
•the costs of operating as a public company, including hiring additional personnel as well as increased director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees and expenses for compliance with public company reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC and Nasdaq.
Until such time, if ever, as we are able to successfully develop and commercialize one or more of our product candidates, we expect to continue financing our operations through the sale of equity, debt, borrowings under credit facilities or through potential collaborations with other companies, other strategic transactions or government or other grants. Adequate capital may not be available to us when needed or on acceptable terms. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds beyond the Loan Agreement. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures. Debt financing would also result in fixed payment obligations. If we are unable to raise capital, we could be forced to delay, reduce, suspend or cease our research and development programs or any future commercialization efforts, which would have a negative impact on our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition.
Humacyte’s principal use of cash in recent periods has been primarily to fund its operations, including the clinical and preclinical development of its product candidates. Humacyte’s future capital requirements, both short-term and long-term, will depend on many factors, including the progress and results of our clinical trials and preclinical development, timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, cost and timing of future commercialization activities, and the amount and timing of revenues, if any, that we receive from commercial sales. See “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for each of the periods shown below:
___________________________
(1) Includes depreciation, amortization related to our leases and our debt discount, stock-based compensation expense, and in 2021 includes the change in fair value of our contingent earnout liability and our common stock warrant liabilities and a gain on PPP loan forgiveness.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
The increase in net cash used in operating activities from 2020 to 2021 was primarily due to $14.5 million in payments of liabilities acquired in the Merger as well as increased payroll and personnel expenses and spending on pre-clinical, clinical and pre-commercial activities.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used in investing activities from 2020 to 2021 was primarily due to our $8.0 million investment in certificates of deposit classified as short-term investments on our consolidated balance sheet.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to $242.4 million of proceeds in connection with the Merger, including proceeds from the trust account that we obtained in connection with the closing of the Merger, as well as from the PIPE Financing. We also received $29.7 million of net proceeds in connection with draws under our loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in SEC rules and regulations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and disclosure of contingent liabilities. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
An accounting estimate or assumption is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption involves a significant level of estimation uncertainty, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to our financial condition. Our critical accounting policies are summarized below.
Common Stock Warrants
Under the Merger, we assumed 5,000,000 publicly-traded warrants (“Public Warrants”) and 177,500 private placement warrants issued to AHAC in connection with AHAC’s initial public offering (“Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the Public Warrants, the “Common Stock Warrants”). We account for the Common Stock Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”).
We account for the Private Placement Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. As the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815, we recorded these warrants as liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at fair value, with subsequent changes in their respective fair values recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss at each reporting date. The fair value of the warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation value model utilizing assumptions including our current common stock price, expected volatility, risk-free rate, expected term and expected dividend yield. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants is based on significant unobservable inputs, which represent Level 3 fair value measurements within the fair value hierarchy (see “Fair Value of Financial Instruments” accounting policy described in Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Determining the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants involves certain assumptions requiring significant judgment and actual results can differ from assumed and estimated amounts.
The Public Warrants are considered to be “indexed to the Company’s own stock” and as we have a single class of common stock, a qualifying cash tender offer of more than 50% of the Company’s common stock will always result in a change-in-control and would not preclude permanent equity classification of the Public Warrants. Based on this evaluation, we concluded that the Public Warrants meet the criteria to be classified within stockholders’ equity.
Contingent Earnout Liability
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, Legacy Humacyte equity holders are entitled to receive as additional merger consideration of up to 15,000,000 shares of our common stock in the aggregate, in two equal tranches of 7,500,000 shares of common stock per tranche, for no consideration upon the occurrence of certain triggering events, including a change of control event that is not solely indexed to the common stock. In accordance with ASC 815-40, as the Contingent Earnout Shares were not indexed to the common stock, they were accounted for as a liability at the Reverse Recapitalization date and subsequently remeasured at each reporting date with changes in fair value recorded as a component of other (expense) income, net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The estimated fair value of the Contingent Earnout Shares was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model using a distribution of potential outcomes on a monthly basis over a 10-year period prioritizing the most reliable information available. The assumptions utilized in the calculation were based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones, including our current common stock price, expected volatility, risk-free rate, expected term and expected dividend yield. See Note 9 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the assumptions used in the valuation at the Closing Date and December 31, 2021.
The Contingent Earnout Shares are categorized as a Level 3 fair value measurement (see “Fair Value of Financial Instruments” accounting policy described in Note 2 to our financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) because we estimated projections over a ten-year period utilizing unobservable inputs. Contingent earnout payments involve certain assumptions requiring significant judgment and actual results can differ from assumed and estimated amounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all options based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of option awards. The fair value is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option pricing model is affected principally by our estimated fair value of shares of our common stock and requires management to make a number of other assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the volatility of the underlying shares, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent management’s good faith estimates
at the time of measurement. These estimates are complex, involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management’s judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. As our common stock was not publicly traded prior to the Merger, the fair value of the shares of our common stock underlying the options has historically been determined by our board of directors with input from management, after considering independent third-party valuation reports. See “-Fair Value of Common Stock” and “-Common Stock Valuation Methodology.”
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that stock options are expected to be outstanding. We calculated the expected term using the simplified method for options, which is available where there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant, or for each vesting-tranche for awards with graded vesting. The mid-point between the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method. For awards with multiple vesting-tranches, the times from grant until the mid-points for each of the tranches may be averaged to provide an overall expected term.
•Expected Volatility. The expected volatility was based on the historical share volatility of several publicly traded peer companies over a period of time equal to the expected term of the options, as we have limited trading history to use to determine the volatility of our common stock. For purposes of identifying these peer companies, we considered the industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate was based on the yields of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon securities with maturities similar in duration to the expected term of the options.
•Expected Dividend Yield. We have not paid dividends on our common stock nor do we expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Historically, for all periods prior to the Merger, the fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our options were determined on each grant date by our board of directors with input from management. In order to determine the fair value, our board of directors considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock and preferred stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “Practice Aid”). Given the absence of a public trading market of our capital stock, the assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock are based on a number of objective and subjective factors, including:
•our stage of development and business strategy;
•the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock;
•our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions and outlook.
Common Stock Valuation Methodology
The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating enterprise value across classes and series of capital stock to determine the estimated fair value of common stock at each valuation date. In accordance with the Practice Aid, we considered the following methods:
•Option Pricing Method. Under the option pricing method (“OPM”), shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The estimated fair values of the preferred and common stock are inferred by analyzing these options.
•Probability-Weighted Expected Return Method. The probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”) is a scenario-based analysis that estimates value per share based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns, assuming various outcomes, as well as the economic and control rights of each share class.
Based on our early stage of development, we determined that the PWERM method, incorporating the OPM as one of several scenarios, was the most appropriate method for allocating our enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock for valuations performed as of November 13, 2020 and October 23, 2019, which resulted in common stock valuations of $10.28 and $8.48 per share, respectively. In January, February, March and June 2021, stock options were granted at fair market value with an exercise price of $10.28, consistent with the fair market value determined two months earlier in November 2020. The $10.28 exercise price is greater than the public trading price of the AHAC Class A common stock as of the date of grant and also greater than the share price reflected in the $800 million equity value agreed upon in connection with the Merger. We also utilized the PWERM method for our valuation as of June 25, 2018, which resulted in a common stock valuation of $8.48 per share. In determining the estimated fair value of our common stock, our board of directors also considered the fact that our stockholders could not freely trade our common stock in the public markets. Accordingly, we applied discounts to reflect the lack of marketability of our common stock based on the weighted-average expected time to liquidity. The estimated fair value of our common stock at each grant date reflected a non-marketability discount partially based on the anticipated likelihood and timing of a future liquidity event.
Following the closing of the Merger, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the closing price of our common stock on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded on the date stock options or other awards are granted under the 2021 Plan.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are computed using the asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements. In estimating future tax consequences, we consider all expected future events other than enactment of changes in tax laws or rates. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce net deferred tax assets to their realizable values if management does not believe it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets will be realized. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets.
We recognize the benefit of an income tax position only if it is more likely than not (greater than 50%) that the tax position will be sustained upon tax examination, based solely on the technical merits of the tax position. Otherwise, no benefit can be recognized. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the sustainability of the position and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed. Additionally, we must accrue interest and related penalties, if applicable, on all tax exposures for which reserves have been established consistent with jurisdictional tax laws. We have not identified any uncertain tax positions for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We have analyzed our filing positions in all significant Federal and state jurisdictions where we are required to file income tax returns, as well as open tax years in these jurisdictions. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have determined that no uncertain tax positions would have a material impact on our financial statements. We are no longer subject to U.S. Federal, state, and local tax examinations by tax authorities for years before 2018 although carry-forward attributes that were generated prior to 2018 may still be adjusted upon examination by the taxing authorities if they either have been or will be used in a future period. No income tax returns are currently under examination by taxing authorities.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had not recorded any amounts for unrecognized tax benefits. Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in the provision for income taxes, if any. As of December
31, 2021 and 2020, we had no accrued interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions, and no amounts had been recognized in our statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
The Company is an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies until it is no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We expect to use the extended transition period and, therefore, while the Company is an emerging growth company it will not be subject to new or revised accounting standards at the same time that they become applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, unless it chooses to early adopt a new or revised accounting standard. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare the Company’s financial results with the financial results of another public company because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Additionally, the Company is a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K under the Exchange Act (“Regulation S-K”). Smaller reporting companies may take advantage of certain reduced disclosure obligations, including, among other things, providing only two years of audited financial statements. The Company will remain a smaller reporting company if (1) the market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter, or (2) the Company’s annual revenues in its most recent fiscal year completed before the last business day of its second fiscal quarter are less than $100 million and the market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter.