Item 7.MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Hurco Companies, Inc. is an international, industrial technology company operating in a single segment. We design, manufacture and sell computerized (i.e., CNC) machine tools, consisting primarily of vertical machining centers (mills) and turning centers (lathes), to companies in the metal cutting industry through a worldwide sales, service and distribution network. Although the majority of our computer control systems and software products are proprietary, they predominantly use industry standard personal computer components. Our computer control systems and software products are primarily sold as integral components of our computerized machine tool products. We also provide machine tool components, automation integration equipment and solutions for job shops, software options, control upgrades, accessories and replacement parts for our products, as well as customer service, training and applications support.
The following overview is intended to provide a brief explanation of the principal factors that have contributed to our recent financial performance. This overview is intended to be read in conjunction with the more detailed information included in our financial statements that appear elsewhere in this report.
The market for machine tools is international in scope. We have both significant foreign sales and significant foreign manufacturing operations. During fiscal 2021, approximately 50% of our revenues were attributable to customers in Europe, where we typically sell more of our higher-performance, higher-priced VMX series machines. Additionally, approximately 13% of our revenues were attributable to customers in the Asia Pacific region, where we encounter greater pricing pressures.
We have three brands of CNC machine tools in our product portfolio. Hurco is the technology innovation brand for customers who want to increase productivity and profitability by selecting a brand with the latest software and motion technology. Milltronics is the value-based brand for shops that want easy-to-use machines at competitive prices. The Takumi brand is for customers that need very high speed, high efficiency performance, such as that required in the production, die and mold, aerospace, and medical industries. Takumi machines are equipped with industry standard controls instead of the proprietary controls found on Hurco and Milltronics machines. These three brands of CNC machine tools are responsible for the vast majority of our revenue. However, we have added other non-Hurco branded products to our product portfolio that have contributed product diversity and market penetration opportunity. These non-Hurco branded products are sold by our wholly-owned distributors and are comprised primarily of other general-purpose vertical milling centers and lathes, laser cutting machines, waterjet cutting machines, CNC grinders, compact horizontal machines, metal cutting saws and CNC swill lathes. ProCobots is our wholly-owned subsidiary that provides automation solutions. In addition, through our wholly-owned subsidiary LCM, we produce high value machine tool components and accessories.
We principally sell our products through more than 180 independent agents and distributors throughout the Americas, Europe, and Asia. Although some distributors carry competitive products, we are the primary line for the majority of our distributors globally. We also have our own direct sales and service organizations in China, France, Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Singapore, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, and certain parts of the United States, which are among the world's principal machine tool consuming markets. The vast majority of our machine tools are manufactured to our specifications primarily by our wholly-owned subsidiary in Taiwan, HML. Machine castings to support HML’s production are manufactured at our wholly-owned subsidiary in Ningbo, China, NHML. Components to support our SRT line of five-axis machining centers, such as the direct drive spindle, swivel head, and rotary table, are manufactured by our wholly-owned subsidiary in Italy, LCM.
Our sales to foreign customers are denominated, and payments by those customers are made, in the prevailing currencies in the countries in which those customers are located (primarily the Euro, Pound Sterling, and Chinese Yuan). Our product costs are incurred and paid primarily in the New Taiwan Dollar and the U.S. Dollar. Changes in currency exchange rates may have a material effect on our operating results and consolidated financial statements as reported under U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. For example, when the U.S. Dollar weakens in value relative to a foreign currency, sales made, and expenses incurred, in that currency when translated to U.S. Dollars for reporting in our financial statements, are higher than would be the case when the U.S. Dollar is stronger. In the comparison of our period-to-period results, we discuss the effect of currency translation on those results, which reflect translation to U.S. Dollars at exchange rates prevailing during the period covered by those financial statements.
Our high levels of foreign manufacturing and sales also expose us to cash flow risks due to fluctuating currency exchange rates. We seek to mitigate those risks through the use of derivative instruments - principally foreign currency forward exchange contracts.
We operate in the industrial equipment industry and have a global footprint that subjects us to various business risks in many different countries. The COVID-19 pandemic has not had as a significant impact on our business and industry during fiscal 2021 as it did in fiscal 2020. Beginning in early 2020, governmental authorities in many of the major global machine tool markets implemented mandatory stay-at-home or shelter orders requiring most businesses to close or to significantly limit operations, resulting in a sudden decrease in demand for many goods and services. Although the mandatory stay-at-home or shelter orders in many jurisdictions permitted our local operations to continue as an essential business or a supplier to critical infrastructure industries or otherwise with remote work capabilities, many of our customers experienced, and continue to experience, significant disruptions in their business operations and normal purchasing cycles. We cannot predict the duration or scope of impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the negative financial impact to our results cannot be reasonably estimated, but we believe the impact has been material thus far with regard to revenues, income from operations, and cash flow from operations and could continue to be material in the near future. To date, we have experienced some delays in our supply chain and have not completely ceased operations at any of our global facilities, but have implemented remote working capabilities, as appropriate or otherwise required under local law. We have also implemented adjustments in headcount and discretionary spending, delayed capital expenditures, and monitored production activities closely in an effort to weather the adverse business climate. We have also received stimulus in various countries to support operations and implemented tax deferrals and provisions that were available to us. More recently, we have begun to see inflationary pressures and input cost increases imposed in our supply chains on components for our products. We have also seen capacity for transportation and freight services limited significantly by container or vessel availability and delays at departing and receiving ports, all of which have contributed to significantly increased costs and prices associated with the global shipment of our products.
We will continue to evaluate and disclose any trends and uncertainties that have had or are reasonably expected to have, a material effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for and at the end of each interim period.
Results of Operations
The following table presents, for the fiscal years indicated, selected items from the Consolidated Statements of Operations expressed as a percentage of our worldwide sales and service fees and the year-to-year percentage changes in the dollar amounts of those items.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Sales and Service Fees. Sales and service fees for fiscal 2021 were $235.2 million, an increase of $64.6 million, or 38%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of $7.7 million, or 5%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. During fiscal 2021, sales increased year-over-year for all product brands and in all regions as countries began to lift the government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home orders or other similar operating restrictions put in place in fiscal 2020.
Net Sales and Service Fees by Geographic Region
The following table sets forth net sales and service fees by geographic region for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Sales in the Americas for fiscal 2021 increased by 28%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in sales in the Americas for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an increased volume of shipments of Hurco, Takumi and Milltronics machines, and an increase in sales of ProCobots automation solutions. The improved sales volume of machines primarily reflected increased shipments of Hurco lathes, VM and VMX machines, as well as Milltronics lathes and toolroom machines.
European sales for fiscal 2021 increased by 51%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of 8%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. The year-over-year increase in European sales was primarily attributable to an increased volume of shipments of Hurco and Takumi machines in Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy, as well as increased shipments of machine tool components and accessories manufactured by our wholly owned subsidiary, LCM. The improved sales volume of machines was primarily attributable to increased shipments of Hurco Lathes, VM and VMX machines.
Asian Pacific sales for fiscal 2021 increased by 25%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of 6%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. The year-over-year increase in Asian Pacific sales for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to increased volume of shipments of Hurco machines in Southeast Asia and China and Takumi machines in Taiwan.
Net Sales and Service Fees by Product Category
The following table sets forth net sales and service fees by product group and services for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
† Amounts shown do not include computer control systems and software sold as an integrated component of computerized machine systems.
Sales of computerized machine tools and computer control systems and software for fiscal 2021 increased by 42% and 49%, respectively, compared to fiscal 2020, and each included a favorable currency impact of 5%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. Sales of service parts and service fees increased by 18% and 11%, respectively, during fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020, and each included a favorable currency impact of 5%. During fiscal 2021, sales increased year-over-year for all product categories as countries began to lift the government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home orders or other similar operating restrictions put in place in fiscal 2020.
Orders and Backlog. Orders for fiscal 2021 were $265.4 million, an increase of $98.5 million, or 59%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of $8.4 million, or 5%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars. Similar to sales, orders increased year-over-year for all product brands and in all regions.
The following table sets forth new orders booked by geographic region for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Orders in the Americas for fiscal 2021 increased by 42%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increased order level reflected a higher demand for all categories of Hurco, Takumi, and Milltronics machines as well as increased demand for ProCobots automation solutions.
European orders for fiscal 2021 increased by 74%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of 9%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars. The year-over-year increase in orders was driven primarily by increased customer demand for Hurco and Takumi machines in Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and Italy, as well as increased demand for LCM machine tool components and accessories.
Asian Pacific orders for fiscal 2021 increased by 61%, compared to fiscal 2020, and included a favorable currency impact of 8%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars. The year-over-year increase in Asian Pacific orders for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to increased customer demand for Hurco vertical milling machines in Southeast Asia, China and India, as well as increased customer demand for Takumi machines in Taiwan.
Backlog at October 31, 2021 increased to $60.0 million from $29.9 million at October 31, 2020, primarily due to increased customer demand during fiscal 2021 for all product brands and in all regions. We do not believe backlog is a useful measure of past performance or indicative of future performance. Backlog orders as of October 31, 2021 are expected to be fulfilled in fiscal 2022.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for fiscal 2021 was $56.2 million, or 24% of sales, compared to $36.5 million, or 21% of sales, for fiscal 2020. The year-over-year increase in gross profit as a percentage of sales for fiscal 2021 reflected improved leverage of fixed overhead costs through higher levels of machine sales, improved pricing due to changes in demand and more normalized inventory levels, and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation compared fiscal 2020. Additionally, approximately $1.2 million of the gross profit improvement for fiscal 2021 was a result of recording the employee retention credit extended to Hurco under the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act and the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the “employee retention credit”). The improvement in gross profit as a percentage of sales in fiscal 2021 was partially offset by inflationary increases in cost of materials and higher costs associated with transporting finished goods on a global basis.
Operating Expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 were $46.0 million, or 20% of sales, compared to $41.4 million, or 24% of sales, for fiscal 2020, and included an unfavorable currency impact of $1.2 million, when translating foreign expenses to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 trended downward as a percentage of sales from fiscal 2020 as a result of the cost management plans implemented during fiscal 2020 and continued during fiscal 2021. Additionally, approximately $1.7 million of the selling, general, and administrative expense reduction for fiscal 2021 was a result of recording the employee retention credit.
Operating Income (Loss). Operating income for fiscal 2021 was $10.2 million, or 4% of sales, compared to an operating loss of $9.9 million, or (6%) of sales, for fiscal 2020. The year-over-year increase in operating income for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an increase in the sales volume of Hurco, Takumi and Milltronics machines, LCM components and accessories and ProCobots automation solutions. Operating income for fiscal 2021 included a benefit of $2.9 million related to the employee retention credit recorded during fiscal 2021. The operating loss for fiscal 2020 included a one-time $4.9 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge attributable primarily to the then prolonged ongoing uncertainty in the global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net for fiscal 2021 decreased by $0.8 million from fiscal 2020, due mainly to a reduction in foreign currency exchange losses in fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes. We recorded an income tax expense of $3.4 million for fiscal 2021, compared to income tax benefit of $4.6 million for fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 33%, compared to 42% for fiscal 2020. The year-over-year change in the effective tax rate was primarily due to changes in geographic mix of income and loss that included jurisdictions with differing tax rates, various discrete income tax expense items, and more specifically related to fiscal 2020, changes in income tax laws to address the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net Income (Loss). Net income for fiscal 2021 was $6.8 million, or $1.01 per diluted share, an increase of $13.0 million from the fiscal 2020 net loss of $6.2 million, or $(0.93) per diluted share. The year-over-year increase from net loss to net income was primarily due to increased sales volume for all product brands and in all regions as countries began to lift the government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home orders or other similar operating restrictions put in place in fiscal 2020. The net loss for fiscal 2020 included a one-time $4.9 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge attributable primarily to the then prolonged ongoing uncertainty in the global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Sales and Service Fees. Sales and service fees for fiscal 2020 were $170.6 million, a decrease of $92.8 million, or 35%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of $0.6 million, or less than 1%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes.
Net Sales and Service Fees by Geographic Region
The following table sets forth net sales and service fees by geographic region for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Sales in the Americas for fiscal 2020 decreased by 32%, compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to a reduced volume of shipments of Hurco, Milltronics, and Takumi machines. The reduction in shipment volume was mainly attributable to government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home or shelter orders imposed across the region during portions of fiscal 2020. Additionally, sales in the Americas in the first half of fiscal 2019 benefitted from strong demand and backlog generated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2018.
European sales for fiscal 2020 decreased by 42%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. The decrease in European sales for fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to a reduced volume of shipments of Hurco and Takumi machines and a decrease in sales of electro-mechanical components and accessories manufactured by our wholly-owned Italian subsidiary, LCM. Like the Americas, the reduction in shipment volume was mainly driven by government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home or shelter orders or other similar operating restrictions imposed across the region during portions of fiscal 2020. Additionally, sales in Europe during the first half of fiscal 2019 benefitted from higher demand and backlog coming off fiscal 2018, the recent peak of the European market, particularly for Germany.
Asian Pacific sales for fiscal 2020 decreased by 18%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%, when translating foreign sales to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. The year-over-year decrease in Asian Pacific sales resulted primarily from a reduction in the volume of shipments of Hurco and Takumi machines in all Asian Pacific regions, where our customers are located, as many customers were negatively impacted by government-mandated COVID-19 stay-at-home orders or similar operating restrictions during the first six months of fiscal 2020.
Net Sales and Service Fees by Product Category
The following table sets forth net sales and service fees by product group and services for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
† Amounts shown do not include computer control systems and software sold as an integrated component of computerized machine systems.
Sales of computerized machine tools and computer control systems and software for fiscal 2020 decreased by 38% and 40%, respectively, compared to fiscal 2019, and each included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%. Sales of service parts and service fees decreased by 19% and 23%, respectively, during fiscal 2020, compared to fiscal 2019, and each included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%. The decreases in all product categories were primarily due to a reduced volume of shipments of Hurco, Milltronics and Takumi machines, parts, and services provided, as well as the impact of government- mandated COVID-19 restrictions across all regions.
Orders and Backlog. Orders for fiscal 2020 were $166.9 million, a decrease of $74.2 million, or 31%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of $1.2 million, or less than 1%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars.
The following table sets forth new orders booked by geographic region for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Orders in the Americas for fiscal 2020 decreased by 24%, compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to decreased customer demand for Hurco, Milltronics and Takumi machines during the COVID-19 pandemic. Orders in the Americas of $17.2 million for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 reflected a slight improvement over orders in the second and third quarters of fiscal 2020 of $15.9 million and $16.3 million, respectively, but fell short of pre-pandemic order levels in the first quarter of $18.2 million.
European orders for fiscal 2020 decreased by 36%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars. The year-over-year decrease in orders was driven primarily by decreased customer demand for Hurco and Takumi machines, and a decrease in sales of electro-mechanical components and accessories manufactured by LCM, during the COVID-19 pandemic. European orders for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 were the highest quarter of the fiscal year at $25.6 million, rebounding from the fiscal year low third quarter orders of $14.2 million, second quarter orders of $15.6 million, and first quarter pre-pandemic orders of $21.7 million.
Asian Pacific orders for fiscal 2020 decreased by 30%, compared to fiscal 2019, and included a favorable currency impact of less than 1%, when translating foreign orders to U.S. Dollars. The year-over-year decrease in Asian Pacific orders was driven primarily by a reduction in customer demand for Hurco and Takumi machines during the COVID-19 pandemic throughout the Asian Pacific region where our customers are located. Asian Pacific orders for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 reflected the same trend as the European orders, marking the highest quarter of orders of fiscal 2020 at $5.9 million, outpacing the third quarter orders of $5.6 million, second quarter orders of $5.1 million, and first quarter orders of $5.7 million.
Backlog at October 31, 2020 decreased to $29.9 million from $32.7 million at October 31, 2019, primarily due to a reduction in customer demand during fiscal 2020. We do not believe backlog is a useful measure of past performance or indicative of future performance.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for fiscal 2020 was $36.5 million, or 21% of sales, compared to $77.2 million, or 29% of sales, for fiscal 2019. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales was primarily due to lower sales across all sales regions, particularly the European sales region where we typically sell higher-priced, higher-performance machines, competitive pricing pressures on a global basis, and the negative impact of fixed costs leveraged against lower sales and production volumes.
Operating Expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses for fiscal 2020 were $41.4 million, or 24% of sales, compared to $54.7 million, or 21% of sales, for fiscal 2019, and included an unfavorable currency impact of $0.3 million, when translating foreign expenses to U.S. Dollars for financial reporting purposes. Selling, general, and administrative expenses for fiscal 2020 trended downward as a percentage of sales from the first half of fiscal 2020 to the second half of fiscal 2020 by approximately 5% due to the implementation of cost reduction plans, including changes in employee headcount, decreases in incentive and performance compensation, and reductions in other discretionary spending, partially offset by increased operating expenses associated with ProCobots, the U.S.-based automation integration business acquired by Hurco in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, and the unfavorable currency impact when translating foreign expenses to U.S Dollars for financial reporting purposes.
Operating Income (Loss). The operating loss for fiscal 2020 was $9.9 million, or (6%) of sales, compared to operating income of $22.5 million, or 9% of sales, for fiscal 2019. The year-over-year decrease from operating income to operating loss was primarily due to reduced sales volume that resulted from government-mandated stay-at-home or shelter orders imposed across the globe during 2020. The operating loss for fiscal 2020 included a one-time $4.9 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge attributable primarily to the prolonged ongoing uncertainty in the global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net for fiscal 2020 increased by $0.6 million from fiscal 2019, due mainly to a reduction in foreign currency exchange losses in fiscal 2020, compared to fiscal 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes. We recorded an income tax benefit of $4.6 million for fiscal 2020, compared to income tax expense of $5.8 million for fiscal 2019. During the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020, we assessed and recorded the year-to-date impact of recent changes in income tax laws to address the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law in the U.S. on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act included economic relief and modifications, most notably the net operating loss carryback provisions. In addition, the year-over-year changes in our income tax benefits and expenses reflected the shift in the geographic mix of income and loss among international tax jurisdictions, which resulted in changes in foreign tax credits, deductions for foreign derived intangible income, and recording of a provision for global intangible low taxed income.
Net Income (Loss). Net loss for fiscal 2020 was $6.2 million, or $(0.93) per diluted share, a decrease of $23.7 million, or 136%, from fiscal 2019 net income of $17.5 million, or $2.55 per diluted share. The year-over-year decrease from net income to net loss was primarily due to reduced sales volume that resulted from government-mandated stay-at-home or shelter orders imposed across the globe during 2020. The net loss for fiscal 2020 included a one-time $4.9 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge attributable primarily to the prolonged ongoing uncertainty in the global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At October 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $84.1 million, compared to $57.9 million at October 31, 2020. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily a result of increases in accounts payable, accrued payroll and employee benefits and customer deposits, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable. Approximately 34% of our $84.1 million of cash and cash equivalents is held in the U.S. The balance is attributable to our foreign operations and is held in the local currencies of our various foreign entities, subject to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. We do not believe that the indefinite reinvestment of these funds offshore impairs our ability to meet our domestic working capital needs.
Working capital (including cash and cash equivalents) was $208.7 million at October 31, 2021, compared to $201.0 million at October 31, 2020. The increase in working capital was primarily driven by increases in cash and accounts receivable, partially offset by increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and customer deposits. Inventories, net were $148.2 million at October 31, 2021, compared to $149.9 million at October 31, 2020. Inventory turns at October 31, 2021 were 1.2, compared to 0.9 turns at October 31, 2020.
Capital expenditures were $2.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $1.7 million in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 were primarily for software development costs, purchases of factory equipment for production facilities, and purchases of general software and equipment for sales and service divisions. We funded these expenditures with cash flows from operations.
On March 12, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program in an aggregate amount of up to $7.0 million. Repurchases under the program may be made in the open market or through privately-negotiated transactions from time to time through March 10, 2023, subject to applicable laws, regulations and contractual provisions. The program may be amended, suspended or discontinued at any time and does not commit us to repurchase any shares of our common stock. We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under this program during fiscal 2021.
In addition, during fiscal 2021, we paid cash dividends to our shareholders of $3.7 million. Future dividends are subject to approval of our Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements, regulatory and contractual restrictions, our business strategy and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors from time to time.
On December 31, 2018, we and our subsidiary Hurco B.V. entered into a credit agreement with Bank of America, N.A., as the lender, which was subsequently amended on each of March 13, 2020, December 23, 2020 and December 17, 2021 (as amended, the “2018 Credit Agreement”). The 2018 Credit Agreement provides for an unsecured revolving credit and letter of credit facility in a maximum aggregate amount of $40.0 million. The 2018 Credit Agreement provides that the maximum amount of outstanding letters of credit at any one time may not exceed $10.0 million, the maximum amount of outstanding loans made to our subsidiary Hurco B.V. at any one time may not exceed $20.0 million, and the maximum amount of all outstanding loans denominated in alternative currencies at any one time may not exceed $20.0 million. Under the 2018 Credit Agreement, we and Hurco B.V. are borrowers, and certain of our other subsidiaries are guarantors. The scheduled maturity date of the 2018 Credit Agreement is December 31, 2023.
Borrowings under the 2018 Credit Agreement bear interest at floating rates based on, at our option, either (i) a rate based upon the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”), the Sterling Overnight Index Average Reference Rate, the Euro Interbank Offering Rate, or another alternative currency-based rate approved by the lender, depending on the term of the loan and the currency in which such loan is denominated, plus 1.00% per annum, or (ii) a base rate (which is the highest of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (b) the prime rate or (c) the one month SOFR-based rate plus 1.00%), plus 0.00% per annum. Outstanding letters of credit will carry an annual rate of 1.00%.
The 2018 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default, including covenants (1) restricting us from making certain investments, loans, advances and acquisitions (but permitting us to make investments in subsidiaries of up to $10.0 million); (2) restricting us from making certain payments, including (a) cash dividends, except that we may pay cash dividends as long as immediately before and after giving effect to such payment, the sum of the unused amount of the commitments under the 2018 Credit Agreement plus our cash on hand is not less than $10.0 million, and as long as we are not in default before and after giving effect to such dividend payments and (b) payments made to repurchase shares of our common stock, except that we may repurchase shares of our common stock as long as we are not in default before and after giving effect to such repurchases and the aggregate amount of payments made by us for all such repurchases during any fiscal year does not exceed $10.0 million; (3) requiring that we maintain a minimum working capital of $125.0 million; and (4) requiring that we maintain a minimum tangible net worth of $176.5 million. We may use the proceeds from advances under the 2018 Credit Agreement for general corporate purposes.
In March 2019, our wholly-owned subsidiaries in Taiwan, HML, and China, NHML, closed on uncommitted revolving credit facilities with maximum aggregate amounts of 150 million New Taiwan Dollars and 32.5 million Chinese Yuan, respectively. As uncommitted facilities, both the Taiwan and China credit facilities are subject to review and termination by the respective underlying lending institution from time to time.
As of October 31, 2021, our existing credit facilities consisted of the €1.5 million revolving credit facility in Germany, the 150 million New Taiwan Dollars Taiwan credit facility, the 32.5 million Chinese Yuan China credit facility and the $40.0 million revolving credit facility under the 2018 Credit Agreement. We had no debt or borrowings under any of our credit facilities at October 31, 2021.
At October 31, 2021, we had an aggregate of approximately $52.2 million available for borrowing under our credit facilities and were in compliance with all covenants relating thereto.
We have an international cash pooling strategy that generally provides access to available cash deposits and credit facilities when needed in the U.S., Europe or Asia Pacific. We believe our access to cash pooling and our borrowing capacity under our credit facilities provide adequate liquidity to fund our global operations over the next twelve months and beyond and allow us to remain committed to our strategic plan of product innovation, acquisitions, targeted penetration of developing markets, payment of dividends and our stock repurchase program.
We continue to receive and review information on businesses and assets for potential acquisition, including intellectual property assets that are available for purchase.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following is a table of contractual obligations and commitments as of October 31, 2021 (in thousands):
In addition to the contractual obligations and commitments disclosed above, we also have a variety of other obligations for the procurement of materials and services, none of which subject us to any material non-cancelable commitments. While some of these obligations arise under long-term supply agreements, we are not committed under these agreements to accept or pay for requirements that are not needed to meet our production needs. We have no material minimum purchase commitments or “take-or-pay” type agreements or arrangements. Unrecognized tax benefits in the amount of approximately $0.2 million, excluding any interest and penalties, have been excluded from the table above because we are unable to determine a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payment.
We expect capital spending in fiscal 2022 to be approximately $5.8 million, which includes investments for real estate development, software development, factory equipment and production facilities, as well as general software and equipment for selling facilities. We expect to fund these commitments with cash on hand and cash generated from operations.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, our subsidiaries guarantee third party payment obligations in connection with the sale of machines to customers that use financing. We follow Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance for accounting for guarantees (codified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 460). As of October 31, 2021, we had eight outstanding third party payment guarantees totaling approximately $0.9 million. The terms of these guarantees are consistent with the underlying customer financing terms. Upon shipment of a machine, the customer assumes the risk of ownership. The customer does not obtain title, however, until the customer has paid for the machine. A retention of title clause allows us to recover the machine if the customer defaults on the financing. We accrue liabilities under these guarantees at fair value, which amounts are insignificant.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with those accounting principles requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Those judgments and estimates have a significant effect on the financial statements because they result primarily from the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our accounting policies, including those described below, are frequently evaluated as our judgment and estimates are based upon historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Revenue Recognition - We recognize revenues from the sale of machine tools, components and accessories, and services and reflect the consideration to which we expect to be entitled. We record revenues based on a five-step model in accordance with FASB guidance codified in ASC 606. In accordance with ASC 606, we have defined contracts as agreements with our customers and distributors in the form of purchase orders, packing or shipping documents, invoices, and, periodically, verbal requests for components and accessories. For each contract, we identify our performance obligations, which is delivering goods or services, determine the transaction price, allocate the contract transaction price to each of the performance obligations (when applicable), and recognize the revenue when (or as) the performance obligation to the customer is fulfilled.
A good or service is transferred when the customer obtains control of that good or service. Our computerized machine tools are general purpose computer-controlled machine tools that are typically used in stand-alone operations. Prior to shipment, we test each machine to ensure the machine’s compliance with standard operating specifications. We deem that the customer obtains control upon delivery of the product and that obtaining control is not contingent upon contractual customer acceptance. Therefore, we recognize revenue from sales of our machine tool systems upon delivery of the product to the customer or distributor, which is normally at the time of shipment.
Depending upon geographic location, after shipment, a machine may be installed at the customer’s facility by a distributor, independent contractor, or by one of our service technicians. In most instances, where a machine is sold through a distributor, we have no installation involvement. If sales are direct or through sales agents, we will typically complete the machine installation, which consists of the reassembly of certain parts that were removed for shipping and the re-testing of the machine to ensure that it is performing within the standard specifications. We consider the machine installation process for our three-axis machines to be inconsequential and immaterial within the context of the contract. For our five-axis machines that we install, we estimate the fair value of the installation performance obligation and recognize that installation revenue on a prorata basis over the period of the installation process.
From time to time, and depending upon geographic location, we may provide training or freight services. We consider these services to be immaterial within the context of the contract, as the value of these services typically does not rise to a material level as a component of the total contract value. Service fees from maintenance contracts are deferred and recognized in earnings on a prorata basis over the term of the contract and are generally sold on a stand-alone basis. Customer discounts and estimated product returns are considered variable consideration and are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the same period that the related sales are recorded. We have reviewed the overall sales transactions for variable consideration and have determined that these amounts are not significant.
Inventories - We determine at each balance sheet date how much, if any, of our inventory may ultimately prove to be either unsalable or unsalable at its carrying cost. Reserves are established to effectively adjust the carrying value of such inventory to lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. To determine the appropriate level of valuation reserves, we evaluate current stock levels in relation to historical and expected patterns of demand for all of our products. We evaluate the need for changes to valuation reserves based on market conditions, competitive offerings, and other factors on a regular basis.
Income Taxes - We account for income taxes and the related accounts under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted income tax rates in each jurisdiction in effect for the year in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. These deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, which is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Net deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified as non-current in the consolidated financial statements. Our judgment regarding the realization of deferred tax assets may change due to future profitability and market conditions, changes in U.S. or foreign tax laws, and other factors. These changes, if any, may require material adjustments to these deferred tax assets and an accompanying reduction or increase in net income in the period when such determinations are made.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex federal, state and foreign tax laws. Our provision for income taxes reflects a combination of income earned and taxed at the federal and state level in the U.S., as well as in various foreign jurisdictions.
In addition to the risks to the effective tax rate described above, the future effective tax rate reflected in forward-looking statements is based on currently effective tax laws. Significant changes in those laws could materially affect these estimates.
We operate in multiple jurisdictions through wholly-owned subsidiaries, and our global structure is complex. The estimates of our uncertain tax positions involve judgments and assessment of the potential tax implications. We recognize uncertain tax positions when it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination by relevant taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Our tax positions are subject to audit by taxing authorities across multiple global jurisdictions, and the resolution of such audits may span multiple years. Tax law is complex and often subject to varied interpretations. Accordingly, the ultimate outcome with respect to taxes we may owe may differ from the amounts recognized.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles arising from a business combination are not amortized and charged to expense over time. Instead, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles must be reviewed for impairment annually as of the last day of our third fiscal quarter, or more frequently, if circumstances arise indicating potential impairment. For goodwill, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit containing the goodwill exceeds the fair value of that reporting unit, an impairment loss is recognized for that excess, but only to the extent of the goodwill amount allocated to that reporting unit. For indefinite-lived intangible assets, if the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Intangible assets that are determined to have a finite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives and are also subject to review for impairment, if indicators of impairment are identified.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - We are required periodically to review the recoverability of certain assets, including property, plant, and equipment, intangible assets, and goodwill, based on projections of anticipated future cash flows, including future profitability assessments of various product lines. We estimate cash flows using internal budgets based on recent sales data.
Capitalized Software Development Costs - Costs incurred to develop computer software products and significant enhancements to software features of existing products are capitalized as required by FASB guidance relating to accounting for the costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed, and such capitalized costs are amortized over the estimated product life of the related software. The determination as to when in the product development cycle technological feasibility has been established, and the expected product life, require judgments and estimates by management and can be affected by technological developments, innovations by competitors, and changes in market conditions affecting demand. We periodically review the carrying values of these assets and make judgments as to ultimate realization considering the above-mentioned risk factors.
Derivative Financial Instruments - Critical aspects of our accounting policy for derivative financial instruments that we designate as hedging instruments include conditions that require that critical terms of a hedging instrument are essentially the same as a hedged forecasted transaction. Another important element of our policy demands that formal documentation be maintained as required by FASB guidance relating to accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities. Failure to comply with these conditions would result in a requirement to recognize changes in market value of hedge instruments in earnings. We routinely monitor significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments associated with derivative instruments, and compliance with formal documentation requirements.
Stock Compensation - We account for share-based compensation according to FASB guidance relating to share-based payments, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values on the grant date. This guidance requires that we estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant and recognize as expense the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest over the requisite service period.