Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements, including the related notes, contained in this Annual Report. This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 2, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering that occurred on August 5, 2021, (the “Initial Public Offering”) and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after our Initial Public Offering, identifying target companies for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $4,490,977, which resulted from a gain on change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,666,000, unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account of $18,824, and realized gain on investments held in Trust Account of $18,126, offset in part by expensed offering costs of $1,020,874, formation and operating costs of $552,633, change in fair value of derivative liability-forward purchase agreement of $456,000, and franchise tax expense of $182,466.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 5, 2021, we consummated an initial public offering of 25,000,000 units generating gross proceeds to the Company of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 7,700,000 warrants to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant (the “Private Placement Warrants”), generating gross proceeds of $7,700,000. The proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the initial public offering held in a trust account (the “Trust Account”). If we do not complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
For the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,212,918, which was due to a non-cash
gain on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,666,000, changes in working capital of $477,819, unrealized gain on investments in the Trust Account of $18,824 and realized gain on investments in the Trust Account of $18,126, offset in part by our net income of $4,490,977, expensed offering costs added back to net income of $1,020,874, and change in fair value of derivative liability-forward purchase agreement of $456,000.
For the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $250,000,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering being deposited to the Trust Account.
For the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 net cash provided by financing activities of $251,962,174 was comprised of $245,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of units in the Initial Public Offering net of underwriter’s discount paid, $7,700,000 in proceeds from the issuance of warrants in a private placement to our sponsor, proceeds from the promissory note-related party of $350,000 and proceeds from the sale of Class B common stock to our sponsor of $25,000, offset in part by the payment of $762,826 for offering costs associated with the initial public offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our sponsor of $350,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $749,256 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. We also incur expenses as a result of being a public company for legal, financial reporting, accounting and compliance. We will also have obligations to pay Delaware state franchise taxes with the funds held outside of the Trust Account to the extent that interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to cover this tax.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account., including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account. (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes, if any. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of the Initial Public Offering, to be $182,466 to date, which we may pay from funds held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. To the extent that our common stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following this offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to the completion of our initial business combination, other than funds available from loans from our sponsor, members of our management team or any of their affiliates. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a prospective partner business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to the completion of our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing to complete our initial business combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our Trust Account, or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required on a non-interest
basis. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop”
provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop”
provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than described below.
Promissory Note-Related Party
On February 10, 2021, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note, as amended on July 6, 2021, to our sponsor (the “Promissory Note”), pursuant to which the Company could borrow up to an aggregate of $350,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering. The Promissory Note was non-interest
bearing and was payable on the earlier of (i) June 30, 2022 or (ii) the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2021, there was no borrowings outstanding under the Promissory Note. On August 5, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding balance under the Promissory Note of $350,000 that was borrowed prior to the Initial Public Offering.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day
option to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On September 11, 2021, the over-allotment option expired.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $5,000,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $8,750,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Deferred Fees
The underwriters of the initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee $8,750,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. Significant estimates included in the financial statements include warrant liabilities and derivative financial instruments.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
(“ASC 480”) and Topic ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging
(“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in
capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statement of operations. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments required that the Company record the warrants as derivative liabilities at fair value upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2021, the Company estimated the fair value of the warrant derivative liabilities to be $11,918,000. The Public Warrants were allocated a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Units equal to its fair value.
Common stock subject to possible redemption
All of the 25,000,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the units in the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Shares”) contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with our initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99,
redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Public Shares have been classified outside of permanent equity.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from net income per share as the redemption value approximates fair value. Therefore, the earnings per share calculation allocates income and losses shared pro rata between Class A and Class B common stock. As a result, the calculated net income per share is the same for Class A and Class B shares of common stock. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 20,200,000 shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 in 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have a material impact on the financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.