ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of its management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors known to us could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that its assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations and the business and operations of our company. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from its assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for our services, fluctuations in pricing for materials, and competition.
Basis of Presentation
Our consolidated financial statements are stated in United States dollars ($) and are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this prospectus. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars. All references to “$” refer to United States dollars and all references to “common stock” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
Unless specifically set forth to the contrary, when used in this report the terms “we”, “our”, the “Company” and similar terms refer to High Wire Networks, Inc., a Nevada corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The information that appears on our websites at www.HighWireNetworks.com and www.SpectrumGlobalSolutions.com is not part of this report.
Description of Business
Business Overview
Telecommunications
Telecommunications providers, technology and enterprise customers continue to seek and outsource solutions in order to reduce their investment in capital equipment, provide flexibility in workforce sizing and expand product offerings without large increases in incremental hiring. As a result, we believe there is significant opportunity to expand both our United States and international telecommunications solutions services and staffing services capabilities. As we continue to expand our presence in the marketplace, we will target those customers going through new network deployments and wireless service upgrades.
We expect to continue to increase our gross margins by leveraging our single-source end-to-end network to efficiently provide a full spectrum of end-to-end next-generation network solutions and staffing services to our customers. We believe our solutions and services offerings can alleviate some of the inefficiencies typically present in our industry, which result, in part, from the highly fragmented nature of the telecommunications industry, limited access to skilled labor and the difficulty industry participants have in managing multiple specialty-service providers to address their needs. As a result, we believe we can provide superior service to our customers and eliminate certain redundancies and costs for them. We believe our ability to address a wide range of end-to-end solutions, network infrastructure and project-staffing service needs of our telecommunications industry clients is a key competitive advantage. Our ability to offer diverse technical capabilities (including design, engineering, construction, deployment, and installation and integration services) allows customers to turn to a single source for those specific specialty services, as well as to entrust us with the execution of entire turn-key solutions.
We have become a multi-faceted company with an international presence. We believe this platform will allow us to leverage our corporate and other fixed costs and capture gross margin benefits. Our platform is highly scalable. We typically hire workers to staff projects on a project-by-project basis and our other operating expenses are primarily fixed. Accordingly, we are generally able to deploy personnel to infrastructure projects in the United States and beyond without incremental increases in operating costs, allowing us to achieve greater margins. We believe this business model enables us to staff our business efficiently to meet changes in demand.
Finally, given the worldwide popularity of telecommunications and wireless products and services, we will selectively pursue international expansion, which we believe represents a compelling opportunity for additional long-term growth.
Our planned expansion will place increased demands on our operational, managerial, administrative and other resources. Managing our growth effectively will require us to continue to enhance our operations management systems, financial and management controls and information systems and to hire, train and retain skilled telecommunications personnel. The timing and amount of investments in our expansion could affect the comparability of our results of operations in future periods.
Our planned acquisitions will be timed with additions to our management team of skilled professionals with deep industry knowledge and a strong track record of execution. Our senior management team brings an average of over 30 years of individual experience across a broad range of disciplines. We believe our senior management team is a key driver of our success and is well-positioned to execute our strategy.
High Wire was incorporated in 2007 and functioned as a development stage company with limited activities through 2017.
HWN, Inc. incorporated in Delaware on January 20, 2017. Our principal offices are located at 980 N. Federal Highway, Suite 304, Boca Raton, Florida 33432. Our telephone number is (407) 512-9102. We are a global provider of managed security, professional services and commercial/industrial electrical solutions delivered exclusively through a channel sales model. Our Overwatch managed security platform-as-a-service offers organizations end-to-end protection for networks, data, endpoints and users via multiyear recurring revenue contracts in this fast-growing technology segment.
On February 7, 2019, High Wire and JTM Electrical Contractors, Inc. (“JTM”), an Illinois Corporation, entered into an operating agreement through which High Wire owned 50% of JTM.
On June 16, 2021, HWN completed a merger with High Wire. The merger was accounted for as a reverse merger. At the time of the reverse merger, High Wire’s subsidiaries included ADEX Corporation, ADEX Puerto Rico LLC, and ADEX Telecom, Inc., (collectively “ADEX”), AW Solutions Puerto Rico, LLC (“AWS PR”), and Tropical Communications, Inc. (“Tropical”).
On November 4, 2021, we closed on our acquisition of Secure Voice Corp (“SVC”).
On February 15, 2022, High Wire sold its 50% interest in JTM.
We provide the following categories of offerings to our customers:
● Technology Solutions: We provide a comprehensive technology platform and array of professional services and solutions to our clients that are applicable across multiple platforms and technologies to include but not limited to: Wi-Fi, Wi-Max and wide-area networks, fiber networks (ISP/OSP), DAS networks (iDAS/oDAS), small cell distributed networks, public safety networks and enterprise networks for incumbent local exchange carriers (ILECs), telecommunications original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), cable broadband multiple system operators (MSOs), tower and network aggregators, utility entities, government and enterprise customers. Our services teams support the deployment of new networks and technologies, as well as expand, maintain and decommission existing networks.
● Construction Solutions: We are also a global provider of managed security, professional services and commercial/industrial electrical solutions delivered exclusively through a channel sales model.
● Security: High Wire’s Overwatch managed security platform-as-a-service offers organizations end-to-end protection for networks, data, endpoints and users via multiyear recurring revenue contracts in this fast-growing technology segment.
The Technology Solutions division offers carriers, service providers and enterprise customers professional contracting services, to include: infrastructure audits; site acquisition; architectural, structural and civil design and analysis; construction management; construction; installation; warehousing and logistics; maintenance services, that support the build-out and upgrade and operation of some of the most advanced networks, small cell, Wi-Fi, fiber and distributed antenna system (DAS) networks. We believe the expansion and migration of these next-generation networks, our long-term relationships supported by multiyear Master Service Agreements (MSA) and multi-year service contracts with major wireless, commercial wireline and wireless operators, DAS operators, tower companies, original equipment manufacturers (OEM’s) and prime contractor/project management organization provides us a significant opportunity as a long term leading and well respected industry leader in this marketplace.
Our Technology Solutions division is supported by our subsidiaries: AW Solutions Puerto Rico, LLC and Tropical Communications, Inc. (collectively known as “AWS” or the “AWS Entities”), ADEX CORP, ADEX Puerto Rico LLC, and ADEX Canada (collectively known as “ADEX” or the “ADEX Entities”), and SVC. The AWS Entities provide a broad range of professional services and solutions to top tier communication carriers and Fortune 1000 enterprise customers.
Our Operating Units
Our company is comprised of the following:
● Technology Solutions: The Technology Solutions group is composed of the following: High Wire is a global provider of managed security, professional services delivered exclusively through a channel sales model. ADEX is a leading outsource provider of engineering and installation services, staffing solutions and other services which include consulting to the telecommunications and technology industry, service providers and enterprise customers domestically and internationally.
● High Wire’s Overwatch managed security platform-as-a-service offers organizations end-to-end protection for networks, data, endpoints and users via multiyear recurring revenue contracts in this fast-growing technology segment.
● Construction Solutions: Tropical provides fiber and DAS deployments for facilities and outdoor environments.
● The High Wire Entities: ADEX is a leading outsource provider of engineering and installation services, staffing solutions and other services which include consulting to the telecommunications and technology industry, service providers and enterprise customers domestically and internationally. ADEX seeks to assist its customers throughout the entire life cycle of a network deployment via its comprehensive suite of managed solutions that include consulting and professional staffing services to service providers as well as enterprise customers, network implementation, network installation, network upgrades, rebuilds, design, engineering and integration wireless network support, wireless network integration, wireless and wireline equipment installation and commissioning, wireless site development and construction management, network engineering, project management, disaster recovery design engineering and integration. The AWS Entities are professional, multi-service line, telecommunications infrastructure company that provide outsourced services to the wireless and wireline industry. The AWS Entities services include network systems design, site acquisition services, asset audits, architectural and engineering services, program management, construction management and inspection, construction, installation, maintenance and other technical services. The AWS Entities provide in-field design, computer aided design and drawing services (CADD), fiber and DAS deployments for facilities and outdoor environments. SVC is a wholesale network services provider with network footprint and licenses in the Northeast and Southeast United States as well as Texas. This network carries VoIP and other traffic for other service providers.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent to which the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak and measures taken in response thereto impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Global health concerns relating to the COVID-19 outbreak have been weighing on the macroeconomic environment, and the outbreak has significantly increased economic uncertainty. Risks related to consumers and businesses lowering or changing spending, which impact domestic and international spend. The outbreak has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place orders, and business shutdowns. These measures have not only negatively impacted consumer spending and business spending habits, they have also adversely impacted and may further impact our workforce and operations and the operations of its customers, suppliers and business partners. These measures may remain in place for a significant period of time and they are likely to continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our company’s business practices (including employee travel, employee work locations, and cancellation of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences), and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and business partners. There is no certainty that such measures will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by the virus or otherwise be satisfactory to government authorities.
The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Even after the COVID-19 outbreak has subsided, we may continue to experience materially adverse impacts to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future.
There are no comparable recent events which may provide guidance as to the effect of the spread of COVID-19 and a global pandemic, and, as a result, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 outbreak or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of the impacts on our business, our operations or the global economy as a whole. However, the effects could have a material impact on our results of operations, and we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely. As of November 2021, multiple variants of the COVID-19 virus are circulating globally that are highly transmissible, and there is uncertainty around vaccine effectiveness on the new strains of the virus. Uncertainty around vaccine distribution, supply and effectiveness will impact when the negative economic effects as a result of COVID-19 will abate or end and the timing of such recovery may affect our financial condition.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Changes in Demand for Data Capacity and Reliability.
The telecommunications industry has undergone and continues to undergo significant changes due to advances in technology, increased competition as telephone and cable companies converge, the growing consumer demand for enhanced and bundled services and increased governmental broadband stimulus funding. As a result of these factors, the networks of our customers increasingly face demands for more capacity and greater reliability. Telecommunications providers continue to outsource a significant portion of their engineering, construction and maintenance requirements in order to reduce their investment in capital equipment, provide flexibility in workforce sizing, expand product offerings without large increases in incremental hiring and focus on those competencies they consider core to their business success. These factors drive customer demand for our services.
The proliferation of smart phones and other wireless data devices has driven demand for mobile broadband. This demand and other advances in technology have prompted wireless carriers to upgrade their networks. Wireless carriers are actively increasing spending on their networks to respond to the explosion in wireless data traffic, upgrade network technologies to improve performance and efficiency and consolidate disparate technology platforms. These customer initiatives present long-term opportunities for us for the wireless services we provide. Further, the demand for mobile broadband has increased bandwidth requirements on the wired networks of our customers. As the demand for mobile broadband grows, the amount of cellular traffic that must be “backhauled” over customers’ fiber and coaxial networks increases and, as a result, carriers are accelerating the deployment of fiber optic cables to cellular sites. These trends are increasing the demand for the types of services we provide.
Our Ability to Recruit, Manage and Retain High-Quality IT and Telecommunications Personnel.
The shortage of skilled labor in the telecommunications industry and the difficulties in recruiting and retaining skilled personnel can frequently limit the ability of specialty contractors to bid for and complete certain contracts. We believe our access to a skilled labor pool gives us a competitive edge over our competitors as we continue to expand.
Our Ability to Expand Internationally
We believe international expansion represents a compelling opportunity for additional growth over the long-term because of the worldwide need for telecommunications infrastructure. We plan to expand our global presence either by expanding our current operations or by acquiring subsidiaries with international platforms.
Our Ability to Expand and Diversify Our Customer Base.
Our customers for specialty contracting services consist of leading telephone, wireless, cable television, utility and other companies. Historically, our revenue has been significantly concentrated in a small number of customers. Although we still operate at a net loss, we have acquired additional subsidiaries and diversified our customer base and revenue streams.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our historical consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported therein and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and assumptions, including those related to recognition of revenue for costs, the fair value of reporting units for goodwill impairment analysis, the assessment of impairment of intangibles and other long-lived assets, income taxes, asset lives used in computing depreciation and amortization, allowance for doubtful accounts, stock-based compensation expense, contingent consideration and accruals for contingencies, including legal matters. These estimates and assumptions require the use of judgment as to the likelihood of various future outcomes and as a result, actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to the accounting for our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations because they involve making significant judgments and estimates that are used in the preparation of our historical consolidated financial statements. The impact of these policies affects our reported and expected financial results and are discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” We have discussed the development, selection and application of our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our board of directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosure relating to our critical accounting policies in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Other significant accounting policies, primarily those with lower levels of uncertainty than those discussed below, are also important to understanding our historical consolidated financial statements. The notes to our consolidated financial statements in this report contain additional information related to our accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies described herein, and should be read in conjunction with this discussion.
Our consolidated financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. A complete summary of these policies is included in Note 2 of the notes to our financial statements. We have identified below the accounting policies that are of particular importance in the presentation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows, and which require the application of significant judgment by management.
Revenue Recognition
Adoption of New Accounting Guidance on Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue based on the five criteria for revenue recognition established under Topic 606: 1) identify the contract, 2) identify separate performance obligations, 3) determine the transaction price, 4) allocate the transaction price among the performance obligations, and 5) recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Contract Types
Our contracts fall under two main types: 1) fixed-price and 2) time-and-materials. Fixed-price contracts are based on purchase order line items that are billed on individual invoices as the project progresses and milestones are reached. Time-and-materials contracts include employees working permanently at customer locations and materials costs incurred by those employees.
A significant portion of our revenues come from customers with whom we have a master service agreement (“MSA”). These MSA’s generally contain customer specific service requirements.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is the unit of account in the new revenue standard. The contract transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. For our different revenue service types the performance obligation is satisfied at different times. For professional services revenue, the performance obligation is met when the work is performed. In certain cases this may be each day, or each week depending on the customer. For construction services, the performance obligation is met when the work is completed and the customer has approved the work.
Revenue Service Types
The following is a description of our revenue service types, which include professional services and construction:
● Professional services are services provided to the clients where we deliver distinct contractual deliverables and/or services. Deliverables may include but are not limited to: engineering drawings, designs, reports and specification. Services may include, but are not limited to: consulting or professional staffing to support our client’s objectives. Consulting or professional staffing services may be provided remotely or on client premises and under their direction and supervision.
● Construction Services are services provided to the client where we may self-perform or subcontract services that require the physical construction of infrastructure or installation of equipment and materials.
Disaggregation of Revenues
We disaggregate our revenue from contracts with customers by service type, contract type, contract duration, and timing of transfer of goods or services. We also disaggregate our revenue by operating segment and geographic location.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable include amounts from work completed in which we have billed. The amounts due are stated at their net estimated realizable value. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts to provide for the estimated amount of receivables that will not be collected. The allowance is based upon an assessment of customer creditworthiness, historical payment experience, the age of outstanding receivables and collateral to the extent applicable.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
Contract assets include costs and services incurred on contracts with open performance obligations. These amounts are included in contract assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Contract liabilities include payment received for incomplete performance obligations and are included in contract liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure and discloses the estimated fair value of financial assets and liabilities using the fair value hierarchy prescribed by US generally accepted accounting principles. The fair value hierarchy has three levels, which are based on reliable available inputs of observable data. The hierarchy requires the use of observable market data when available. The three-level hierarchy is defined as follows:
Level 1 - quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
Level 2 - quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model derived valuations in which significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets; and
Level 3 - fair value measurements derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Financial instruments consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, restricted cash, accounts payable, loans payable and convertible debentures. Derivative liabilities are determined based on “Level 3” inputs, which are significant and unobservable and have the lowest priority. The recorded values of all other financial instruments approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective relatively short maturity dates or durations.
Fair value estimates are made at a specific point in time, based on relevant market information and information about the financial statement. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment and therefore cannot be determined with precision. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect the estimates.
Derivative Liabilities
We account for derivative instruments in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” and all derivative instruments are reflected as either assets or liabilities at fair value in the balance sheet. We use estimates of fair value to value our derivative instruments. Fair value is defined as the price to sell an asset or transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between willing and able market participants. In general, our policy in estimating fair values is to first look at observable market prices for identical assets and liabilities in active markets, where available. When these are not available, other inputs are used to model fair value such as prices of similar instruments, yield curves, volatilities, prepayment speeds, default rates and credit spreads, relying first on observable data from active markets. Depending on the availability of observable inputs and prices, different valuation models could produce materially different fair value estimates. The values presented may not represent future fair values and may not be realizable. We categorizes our fair value estimates in accordance with ASC 820 based on the hierarchical framework associated with the three levels of price transparency utilized in measuring financial instruments at fair value as discussed above.
Goodwill
We test our goodwill for impairment at least annually on December 31st and whenever events or circumstances change that indicate impairment may have occurred. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include, among others: a significant decline in our expected future cash flows; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; unanticipated competition; and slower growth rates. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and our consolidated financial results.
We test goodwill by estimating fair value using a Discounted Cash Flow (“DCF”) model. The key assumptions used in the DCF model to determine the highest and best use of estimated future cash flows include revenue growth rates and profit margins based on internal forecasts, terminal value and an estimate of a market participant’s weighted-average cost of capital used to discount future cash flows to their present value. There were no impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Intangible Assets
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, definite-lived intangible assets consist of tradenames and customer relationships which are being amortized over their estimated useful lives of 10 years.
We periodically evaluate the reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets. Once these assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the accounts. These assets are reviewed for impairment or obsolescence when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If impaired, intangible assets are written down to fair value based on discounted cash flows or other valuation techniques. We have no intangibles with indefinite lives.
For long-lived assets, impairment losses are only recorded if the asset’s carrying amount is not recoverable through its undiscounted, probability-weighted future cash flows. We measure the impairment loss based on the difference between the carrying amount and the estimated fair value. When an impairment exists, the related assets are written down to fair value. There were no impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Long-lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, “Property, Plant and Equipment”, we test long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value, which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain instances. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value. There were no impairment charges recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly evaluate estimates and assumptions related to allowance for doubtful accounts, the estimated useful lives and recoverability of long-lived assets, equity component of convertible debt, stock-based compensation, and deferred income tax asset valuation allowances. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by our company may differ materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Going Concern Assessment
Management assesses going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine whether there is sufficient cash on hand and working capital, including available borrowings on loans, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date of the consolidated financial statements are issued or available to be issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period”, as defined in GAAP. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to management, management will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, estimates and will make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, its ability to delay or curtail expenditures or programs and its ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, management makes certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent it deems probable those implementations can be achieved and management has the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period.
We have generated losses in 2021 and 2020 and High Wire has generated losses since its inception and has relied on cash on hand, sales of securities, external bank lines of credit, and issuance of third-party and related party debt to support cash flow from operations. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, we had an operating loss of $3,886,872 (before deducting losses attributable to noncontrolling interests, cash flows used in operations of $4,207,759 and a working capital deficit of $20,788,076.
Management has prepared estimates of operations for 2022 and believes that sufficient funds will be generated from operations to fund its operations and to service its debt obligations for one year from the date of the filing of the consolidated financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K, which indicate improved operations and our ability to continue operations as a going concern.
The impact of COVID-19 on our business has been considered in these assumptions; however, it is too early to know the full impact of COVID-19 or its timing on a return to more normal operations. Further, the recently enacted CARES Act provides for economic assistance loans through the SBA. As of December 31, 2021, ADEX had $2,010,000 of PPP loans outstanding from the SBA under the CARES Act. The PPP provides that the PPP loans may be partially or wholly forgiven if the funds are used for certain qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act. ADEX used the proceeds from the PPP loans for qualifying expenses and is applying for forgiveness of the PPP loans in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis under which we are expected to be able to realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities in the normal course of business.
Management believes that based on relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable that our forecasts for one year from the date of the filing of the consolidated financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K indicate improved operations and our ability to continue operations as a going concern. We have contingency plans to reduce or defer expenses and cash outlays should operations not improve in the look forward period. The continuation of our company as a going concern is dependent upon the continued financial support from our shareholders, the ability of management to raise additional equity capital through private and public offerings of our common stock, and the attainment of profitable operations. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management requires additional funds over the next twelve months to fully implement its business plan. Management is currently seeking additional financing through the sale of equity and from borrowings from private lenders to cover its operating expenditures. There can be no certainty that these sources will provide the additional funds required for the next twelve months.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Revenues
Our revenue increased from $9,909,157 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27,206,689 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily related to the addition of the ADEX Entities, AWS PR, SVC, and Tropical, which accounted for $14,269,197 in revenue from the dates of acquisition through December 31, 2021. We expect our revenue to continue to increase with the addition of these entities going forward.
Additionally, our operations, as well as the operations of many of our customers, were impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which negatively impacted our revenues in 2020. We anticipate that as the COVID-19 restrictions are removed, revenues should begin to increase.
A significant portion of our services are performed under master service agreements and other arrangements with customers that extend for periods of one or more years. We are currently party to numerous master service agreements, and typically have multiple agreements with each of our customers. Master Service Agreements (MSAs) generally contain customer-specified service requirements, such as discreet pricing for individual tasks. To the extent that such contracts specify exclusivity, there are often a number of exceptions, including the ability of the customer to issue work orders valued above a specified dollar amount to other service providers, perform work with the customer’s own employees and use other service providers when jointly placing facilities with another utility. In most cases, a customer may terminate an agreement for convenience with written notice. The remainder of our services are provided pursuant to contracts for specific projects. Long-term contracts relate to specific projects with terms in excess of one year from the contract date. Short-term contracts for specific projects are generally three to four months in duration. The percentage of revenue from long-term contracts varies between periods depending on the mix of work performed under our contracts.
Operating Expenses
Cost of revenues includes all direct costs of providing services under our contracts, including costs for direct labor provided by employees, services by independent subcontractors, operation of capital equipment (excluding depreciation and amortization), direct materials, insurance claims and other direct costs.
For a majority of the contract services we perform, our customers provide all required materials while we provide the necessary personnel, tools and equipment. Materials supplied by our customers, for which the customer retains financial and performance risk, are not included in our revenue or costs of revenues.
General and administrative costs include all of our corporate costs, as well as costs of our subsidiaries’ management personnel and administrative overhead. These costs primarily consist of employee compensation and related expenses, including legal, consulting and professional fees, information technology and development costs, provision for or recoveries of bad debt expense and other costs that are not directly related to performance of our services under customer contracts. Information technology and development costs included in general and administrative expenses are primarily incurred to support and to enhance our operating efficiency. We expect these expenses to continue to generally increase as we expand our operations, but expect that such expenses as a percentage of revenues will decrease if we succeed in increasing revenues.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our operating expenses were $30,881,118, compared to operating expenses of $11,351,393 for the same period of 2020. The increase of $19.529,725 is primarily related to a $14,059,143 increase in cost of revenues as a result of the increase in sales discussed above, combined with increases of $2,976,207 and $2,197,264, respectively, in general and administrative expenses and salaries and wages as a result of the reverse merger and the acquisition of SVC.
Other Expense
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had other expense of $10,003,201, compared to other income of $732,233 for the same period of 2020. The change of $10,735,434 is primarily related to loss on settlement of debt of $6,251,954 and initial derivative expense of $4,750,064 in 2021.
Net Loss
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss attributable to High Wire Networks, Inc. common shareholders of $19,191,952, compared to a net loss attributable to High Wire Networks, Inc. common shareholders of $693,083 for the same period in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our total current assets were $11,072,222 and our total current liabilities were $31,860,298, resulting in a working capital deficit of $20,788,076, compared to working capital of $516,679 as of December 31, 2020.
We suffered recurring losses from operations. The continuation of our company is dependent upon our company attaining and maintaining profitable operations and raising additional capital as needed. In this regard, we have historically raised additional capital through equity offerings and loan transactions.
Cash Flows
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash increased $323,718, compared to a decrease in cash of 319,329 for the same period of 2020. The primary cash inflows during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $5,165,019 of proceeds from debt and factor financing in excess of repayments and release of restricted cash of $2,000,000. The net loss of $13,677,630 was partially offset by loss on settlement of debt of $6,251,954 and initial derivative expense of $4,750,064. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $873,400 of CARES Act loans.
In order to improve our liquidity, we intend to pursue additional equity financing from private placement sales of our equity securities or shareholders’ loans. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing shareholders. There is no assurance that we will be successful in completing any further private placement financings. If we are unable to achieve the necessary additional financing, then we plan to reduce the amounts that we spend on our business activities and administrative expenses in order to preserve our liquidity.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $508,395 compared to $184,677 as of December 31, 2020.
Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balances of loans payable to related parties, loans payable, convertible debentures, and factor financing were $1,442,949, $5,176,590, $4,132,931, and $3,387,070, respectively, net of debt discounts and premiums of $988,917, $239,214, $2,447,270, and $0, respectively.
The total outstanding principal balance per the loan agreements and factor financing due to our debt holders was $15,837,105 at December 31, 2021. We are currently in discussions with certain of our creditors to restructure some of these loan agreements to reduce the principal balance and extend maturity dates. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in reducing the principal balance or extending the maturity dates of any of our outstanding notes.
Loans Payable to Related Parties
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding the following loans payable to related parties:
Additional information on our loans payable to related parties is set forth in our consolidated financial statements included in this report in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Loans Payable
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, loans payable consisted of the following:
Additional information on our loans payable is set forth in our consolidated financial statements included in this report in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Convertible Debentures
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding the following convertible debentures:
Additional information on our convertible debentures is set forth in our consolidated financial statements included in this report in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to our stockholders.
Inflation
The effect of inflation on our revenue and operating results has not been significant.