Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF HYPERFINE
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations Hyperfine, Inc. and its subsidiaries (for purposes of this section, collectively referred as the “Company”, “we,” “us” and “our”) should be read together with the audited combined and consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the related notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described under the heading “Risk Factors.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are an innovative digital health business with a mission to provide affordable and accessible imaging and monitoring through magnetic resonance imaging (“MRI”) to revolutionize healthcare for people around the world. Our Swoop® Portable Magnetic Resonance (“MR”) Imaging SystemTM (“Swoop”) produces high-quality images at a lower magnetic field strength than conventional MRI systems, and can be used by healthcare professionals to make effective clinical diagnoses on a patient in a variety of settings where MRI devices have previously been inaccessible. The easy-to-use interface and portable design of our Swoop system make it accessible for use anywhere in a hospital, clinic or patient care site. We are working to realize our vision of providing affordable and accessible imaging of health conditions around the world.
MRI is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to image the anatomy and the physiological processes of the human body. It is typically used in a variety of clinical settings for medical diagnosis, staging of disease and follow-up treatment. Unlike X-ray computed tomography (“CT”) or positron emission tomography (“PET”), MRI does not expose patients to harmful ionizing radiation. We believe MRI offers the most sensitive and objective measures of brain tissue and injury. Despite its advantages, many healthcare institutions throughout the world lack the facilities, qualified operators and capital necessary to acquire and maintain expensive MRI devices. The Swoop system is intended for use at the patient’s bedside in any hospital room or clinical setting, such as a physician’s office or a local urgent care facility. The demand for MRI has been augmented by the aging population and rising prevalence of cancer and cardiovascular, neurological and orthopedic conditions. Healthcare professionals and insurers are recognizing imaging as a cost-effective and non-invasive diagnostic tool for evaluation and ongoing monitoring. Swoop is a next generation of these devices designed to drive costs down and expand the current $15.9 billion imaging market.
We believe the adoption of the Swoop system by healthcare professionals has benefits across healthcare communities in both high and low resource settings. Through our collaborations with the healthcare community, we have begun to optimize Hyperfine’s software ecosystem to harness Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) to transform the system into a true bedside clinical decision support platform. These efforts seek to improve image quality, help users analyze images, and reduce time to diagnosis. Our technology allows us to provide decision support and immediate feedback for diagnostic insight for clinicians of all levels of expertise. In the future, we hope to develop an ecosystem of products, expanding the capabilities of our core MRI product platform while introducing a brain sensing platform to offer a more complete solution and increase access to life saving technology across the care continuum.
Legacy Hyperfine received 510(k) clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in 2020 for its Swoop Portable MR Imaging System, which is commercially available in the United States. In 2021, we also obtained a Medical Device License issued by Health Canada and expanded into the Canadian market. We also recently received regulatory authorization in New Zealand and Pakistan. In addition, we are initially seeking necessary regulatory authorizations in other major markets, including the United Kingdom, Australia and other countries. We are building our direct commercial infrastructure in the United States and also have plans to sell our products in other countries either through direct sales or through distributors.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. We continue to closely monitor the recent developments surrounding the continued spread and potential resurgence of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is expected to continue to have, an adverse impact on our operations, particularly as a result of preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses, and governments are taking.
COVID-19 created multiple commercial challenges in 2020 and has continued to do so in 2021 and 2022. We expect to see restrictions on our salesforce’s ability to visit sites to continue during 2022. Commercially, many hospitals and other healthcare providers decreased spending and limited physical access to facilities, slowing our ability to demonstrate our
Swoop device. In addition, many hospitals and other healthcare providers continue to focus their attention on addressing COVID-19, which we believe has resulted in lower sales volume. Trade shows and conferences moved to a virtual platform creating difficulty in demonstrating our device to key stakeholders. We moved to create a product demonstration roadshow using demonstration trucks, but were not able to scale due to truck shortages. It was not uncommon to host virtual product demonstrations with 6-10 physicians, something that would ordinarily not happen or would take many weeks of planning to produce. With physician society conferences offline and slowing our commercial launch, we used the concept of “Demo at Your Door” - providing target customers hands-on device experience at a place of their choosing. Virtual demonstrations, even though they generated a lot of interest in our product, often did not result in sales, and all sales required an in-person product demonstration. As more conferences begin to be held in-person, we expect to improve our ability to provide product demonstrations to potential customers. It is unclear whether or not conferences will have the same in-person attendance as they would have had in the past.
Because the manufacturing of our Swoop system was developed, and our commercial launch of our Swoop system occurred, during the COVID-19 pandemic market and manufacturing conditions, we did not have to materially adjust our existing resource allocation or our factors of production because of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, if there are further waves of the COVID-19 pandemic driven by variants like Delta, Omicron or otherwise, we may experience a greater negative impact in our supply chain than we have previously.
During the COVID-19 pandemic and the variants that followed, our suppliers agreed to shift new work to domestic suppliers to help reduce the risk of manufacturing delays. Our supplier and sub tier suppliers have been adversely affected by COVID-19. Although we work closely with our suppliers to attempt to ensure continuity of supply, the supply of certain components and raw materials used in our product has been and may continue to be slowed as a direct result of COVID-19 and its variants. We have also experienced increases in product costs as raw materials have been constrained. Prices have risen sharply over the past year, and lead times have extended dramatically, particularly on semiconductor products. Over the next 12 months, we expect prices to increase due to the raw material demand surges across numerous industries, along with labor and transportation related constraints. We also expect lead times to reduce as component production levels recover to meet demand. We helped to minimize the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the manufacturing of our product and operations by using our manufacturer’s preferred suppliers, increasing communications with suppliers and freight carriers, and providing advanced forecasts and purchase orders for new and existing devices.
In addition, future regulatory authorizations by the FDA or other regulatory authorities may take longer because of COVID-19 pandemic-related delays, though we have not been impacted by such delays to date.
Please refer to the section titled, "Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information. We are unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic and actions that may be taken by government authorities across the United States. We will continue to monitor the performance of our business and reassess the impacts of COVID-19.
Key Performance Metrics
We review the key performance measures discussed below to evaluate the business and measure performance, identify trends, formulate plans and make strategic decisions.
Installed Base
The Swoop total installed base consists of three components, discussed in further detail below: Commercial system installations (which make up total revenue), grant fulfillment installations, and research unit installations. The Swoop total installed base (or total installed units) is the number of Swoop devices deployed to hospitals, other healthcare providers, and research institutions. We view the total installed base as a key metric of the growth of our business and is measured from period over period.
Presented below is a breakout of total Swoop systems installed during 2020 and 2021:
Commercial system installations reflect device sales and subscription services through commercial agreements (commercial sales) or through research transfer agreements ("RTA") sales. Commercial sales are made to hospitals and other healthcare providers as direct sales of devices and software subscription services or through subscriptions for the use of the device and software. RTA sales represent the sale of Swoop units for research use purposes. Our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 is derived from commercial sales and RTA sales.
Grant fulfillment installations consist of shipments of Swoop units to hospitals and other clinical facilities designated by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (“BMGF”). The corresponding funding for these installations from BMGF is recorded as a reduction in the research and development expenses when realized during the period.
Research units represent installed units, at no cost to the institutions, to expand clinical use cases. The installation of research units is recorded as a fixed asset with the related depreciation recorded as R&D expense over the life of the research unit.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
The following factors have been important to our business and we expect them to impact our results of operations and financial condition in future periods:
Strategic partnerships and accelerated international expansion
We believe that market expansion is a key to our continued growth and the success of our device. In line with our vision to democratize healthcare imaging by providing affordable and accessible imaging of health conditions around the world, we are building an international sales strategy that includes direct sales to customers and sales through distribution partners in target regions. In 2021, we obtained a Medical Device License issued by Health Canada and expanded into the Canadian market. We recently also received regulatory authorization in New Zealand and Pakistan. In our plans for international commercial expansion, the other countries in which we plan initially to commercialize our Swoop system include, subject to the regulatory authorization, the United Kingdom and Australia. Through the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (“BMGF”) partnership, we are deploying Swoop systems in these target areas for research and clinical settings. The utilization of our Swoop systems as part of the programs will allow us to begin building relationships across key stakeholders in these countries or regions to better understand and meet required regulatory hurdles in anticipation of filing for regulatory authorization and ultimately expand into clinical use with patients. In addition, we are considering commercial expansion into several of the larger EU countries following our initial international commercial expansion. We believe these countries have the market size, regulatory environment, commercial access, and mature healthcare systems necessary, subject to regulatory authorization, for a successful launch of our Swoop system. We believe our partnership with the BMGF demonstrates our commitment to the vision of providing affordable and accessible imaging that enables earlier detection and remote management of health conditions around the world. Through our engagement with nonprofit organizations, we aim to deploy the Swoop system to low-middle resource settings without readily-accessible MRI technology. During 2020, we were awarded a $1.6 million grant from the BMGF for the provision and equipping of 20 sites with the Hyperfine portable point-of-care MRI system to enable the performance of a multi-site study focused on optimizing diagnostic image quality (the “Project”). During the third quarter of 2021, we were awarded an additional $3.3 million grant, of which $2.5 million was received from the BMGF in September 2021, with the remainder expected to be received by April 2022. Both of the grants are designed to support the deployment of a total of 25 Swoop devices and other services to investigators, which commenced in the spring of 2021, and is expected to fund the program for approximately two years. At December 31, 2021, 18 Swoop system units were provisioned and delivered to BMGF. These grants are designed to provide data to validate the use of our Swoop system in measuring the impact of maternal anemia, malnutrition, infection and birth related injury.
Technical innovation
We have developed our device through extensive research and development activities. Our Swoop system is designed to make the customer experience as easy as possible through our integrated, easy-to-use interface that portrays images on a
tablet, smartphone or other WiFi capable device. In addition to this design, our team is focused on customer success programs that help integrate the Swoop system into any hospital or clinic workflow. We believe that as the Swoop system becomes integrated into ICUs and sites across medical practices, we will gain more insights into our product’s usability and potentially develop automated analysis of images that we believe will lead to further efficiencies in patient diagnosis. We plan to continue developing our technology to expand into new imaging applications to enable us to reach the broader care continuum through diagnosis and treatment. In the future, we plan to introduce a further enhanced MRI system designed to conduct neuroimaging and imaging of other extremities for interventional procedures. In addition to our efforts to disrupt the MRI market, we see a significant opportunity to help patients in the neuromonitoring space. Although we expect these activities in technical innovation of the current device and new devices will increase our research and development expenses, we expect it to positively impact our results of operations and profitability in the future.
Description of Certain Components of Financial Data
Sales
We derive our sales from the following sources: device sales and service sales as described in more detail below. Our revenue recognition policies are discussed in more detail under “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 to our combined and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Device: Device sales primarily consist of sales of our MRI devices.
Service: Service sales primarily consists of sales from subscriptions of bundled devices, maintenance, and software.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consists of product and service costs including personnel cost and benefits including stock-based compensation, product costs, production setup expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses, inventory excess and obsolescence expenses.
Research and development
Research and development costs consist of production costs for prototype, test and pre-production units, lab supplies, consulting and personnel costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation, bonuses and benefit costs. Most of our research and development expenses are related to developing new products and services as well as to enhance our current product and software capabilities. Consulting expenses are related to research and development activities as well as clinical and regulatory activities. Fabrication services include certain third-party engineering costs. Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. We expect to continue to make substantial investments in product development. As a result, research and development expenses are expected to increase in absolute dollars as the research and development efforts increase.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel costs and benefits including stock-based compensation, patent and filing fees, office expenses, technology expenses and outside services. Outside services consist of professional services, legal and other professional fees. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as a result of operating as a public company, including adding hires in accounting, human resources, and legal. Other related costs include additional facilities expenses and general corporate overhead to support the employee base.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing costs primarily consist of personnel costs and benefits including stock-based compensation, advertising, promotional costs, as well as costs for conferences, meetings, and other events. We expect sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in the near term as we build our internal sales and marketing teams, promote our brand through marketing and advertising initiatives and expand our market presence and awareness.
Interest income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents invested in money market securities.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net primarily relates to interest on a related party note payable.
Provision for income taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, as set forth in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities using the enacted statutory tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. A valuation allowance is established against net deferred tax assets if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. We recorded a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Based on available evidence, we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that we will be unable to utilize all of our deferred tax assets in the future.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was enacted which included provisions related to net operating loss ("NOL") carryovers and carrybacks. The CARES Act amended the NOL carryback rules by allowing NOLs arising in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017 and before January 1, 2021 to be carried back to each of the 5 years preceding the year of the loss to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. In addition, the CARES Act temporarily removed the 80% limitation under which NOLs generated post-2017 could be used to offset no more than 80% of taxable income, and allows for full use of such NOLs for tax years before January 1, 2021. We have evaluated the relevant provisions of the CARES Act and have determined that we do not expect to recognize any benefit related to these provisions due to our net operating losses in the current year and all prior years. Therefore, there are no income tax effects to be recognized in the combined and consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our results of operations for the periods shown below, and our accounting policies are described under "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in Note 2 in our combined and consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ Amounts in thousands)
Sales
Total sales increased by $1.2 million, or 408.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Device sales increased by $0.5 million, or 257.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by an increase in the volume of device sales. In the first quarter of 2022, we have taken a pricing action by increasing the price of the device while lowering the price of the annual subscription. We expect this pricing action will result in higher device revenue per unit and lower service revenue per unit for sales under the subscription plus ownership model beginning in the first quarter of 2022.
Service sales increased by $0.7 million, or 730.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by an increase in the volume of devices installed as generally all commercial systems installations generate service revenue. Service sales revenue is generally recognized over time as we are providing the customer with ongoing access to our resources throughout the subscription period. This type of revenue is recurring in nature and we expect will continue to grow as more devices are sold.
Cost of sales
Total cost of sales increased by $1.9 million, or 245.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of device sales increased by $1.3 million, or 169.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by third party manufacturing costs as a result of increased volume of products sold. The increase is comprised of a $0.8 million increase in product hardware costs and a $0.5 million increase in internal overheads and labor costs mostly related to customer support and engineering as a result of an increase in the volume of products sold.
Cost of service sales increased by $0.6 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by $0.4 million increase in internal overheads and labor costs and a $0.2 million increase in depreciation of devices installed.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased by $11.2 million, or 77.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in personnel related costs of $8.1 million as a result of increased headcount, an increase in professional services of $1.1 million, an increase in stock-based compensation of $0.5 million, and an increase in travel expenses of $0.5 million.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $21.6 million, or 364.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in professional services of $4.3 million, an increase in personnel related expenses of $6.7 million, an increase in legal costs of $1.6 million, an increase in stock-based compensation of $5.3 million, an increase in recruiting expenses of $1.5 million as well as an increase of $0.7 million of technology related costs.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $7.9 million, or 314.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in personnel related expenses of $3.3 million due to increased headcount as the business had a full year of commercial operations, an increase in product advertising and marketing expenses of $3.0 million, an increase in professional and other outside service of $0.6 million, and an increase in travel expense of $0.3 million.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $0.1 million, or 74.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by lower interest rates in money market accounts in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Other expense, net
Other expense decreased by $0.01 million, or 83.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by realized gains on foreign currencies.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the issuance of common and preferred stock. We have incurred significant cash burn and recurring net losses, which includes a net loss of $64.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and an accumulated deficit of $136.3 million as of December 31, 2021. In addition, on December 22, 2021, we completed the Business Combination with HealthCor, and as a result we received gross proceeds of approximately $162.1 million and net proceeds of approximately $141.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $188.5 million. As we continue to invest in research and development of our products and sales and marketing, we expect to continue to incur a significant cash burn and recurring net losses for the foreseeable future until such time that our product and services sales generate enough gross profit to cover our operating expenses. However, we can provide no assurance that our product and service sales will generate a net profit in the future or that our cash resources will be sufficient to continue our commercialization and development activities.
We expect to continue to incur net losses as we continue to invest in research and development and sales and marketing of our products. Our ability to access capital when needed is not assured and, if capital is not available when, and in the amounts needed, we could be required to delay, scale back or abandon some or all of our development programs, commercialization of our products, and other operations which could materially harm our operations, financial condition and operating results. We
expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with proceeds from the sales of our products and services, will enable us to conduct our planned operations for at least the next 12 months. We expect we will require an accelerated amount of spending to enhance the sales and marketing teams, continue to drive development of our products, and build inventory. Other factors that could accelerate cash needs include: (i) delays in achieving scientific and technical milestones; (ii) unforeseen capital expenditures and fabrication costs related to manufacturing; (iii) changes we may make in our business or commercialization and hiring strategy; (iv) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; (v) costs of running a public company; and (vi) other items affecting our forecasted level of expenditures and use of cash resources including potential acquisitions.
We expect to use our funds to further invest in the development of our products and services, commercial expansion, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Cash
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $188.5 million. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on various factors including further development costs, commercialization strategy, international expansion, and regulatory costs. If we need additional funds and are unable to obtain funding on a timely basis, we may need to curtail significantly our product development and commercialization efforts to provide sufficient funds to continue our operations, which could adversely affect our business prospects.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities of $47.2 million was due primarily to a net loss of $64.9 million, non-cash items of $8.7 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $9.0 million. Non-cash items were primarily stock-based compensation expense of $6.9 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were driven primarily by an increase in inventory of $2.7 million, partially offset by an increase in accrued expense and other current liabilities of $6.9 million and amounts due to related parties of $1.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $21.5 million was due primarily to a net loss of $23.4 million, non-cash items of $1.6 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million. Non-cash items were primarily stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were driven primarily by an increase in inventory of $1.9 million and amounts due from related parties of $0.8 million, partially offset by an increase in deferred grant funding of $1.6 million.
Net cash used for investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $2.7 million was from fixed assets purchased.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $1.6 million was from fixed assets purchased.
Net cash provided by financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $176.8 million was primarily due to proceeds from issuance of Series D convertible preferred stock of $30.5 million, and net proceed from equity infusion from the Business Combination of $141.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $60.9 million was primarily due to proceeds from issuance of Series D convertible preferred stock of $59.8 million and investment proceeds from 4Bionics of $1.0 million.
Contractual obligations
We sponsor a 401(k) defined contribution plan covering all eligible U.S. employees. Contributions to the 401(k) plan are discretionary. We did not make any matching contributions to the 401(k) plan for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In April 2020, we received a $1.6 million grant from the BMGF for the provision and equipping of 20 sites with the Hyperfine portable point-of-care MRI system to enable the performance of a multi-site study focused on optimizing diagnostic image quality. During the third quarter of 2021, we were awarded an additional $3.3 million grant, of which $2.5 million was received from the BMGF in September 2021. Refer to Note 16 to our combined and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the BMGF grant. Any grant funds, plus any income, that have not been used for, or committed to, the Project must be returned promptly to BMGF upon expiration of or termination of the agreement.
We had no other significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
For information on contingencies, refer to Note 16 to our combined and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP"). The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 in our combined and consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We make judgments applying the guidance related to the estimation of variable consideration. We have certain subscription contracts that provide variable discounts to customers (subject to a maximum). These discounts vary and represent variable consideration, and we use the expected value method to estimate this variable consideration. Given the high degree of uncertainty around the occurrence of these events, we determine the variable consideration to be fully constrained until the uncertainty associated with these discounts is resolved. We will recognize revenue from subscription revenue straight line over the subscription period. We will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period as uncertain events are resolved and other changes in circumstances occur.
Inventories
Inventories primarily consist of finished goods which are produced by the Company’s third-party contract manufacturers and raw materials ordered in advance by the third-party contract manufacturer due to long delivery-lead time and were billed to the Company. Inventories are stated at the lower of actual cost, determined using the average cost method, or net realizable value (“NRV”). We routinely evaluate quantities and value of our inventories in light of current market conditions and market trends and record a write-down against the cost of inventories for NRV below cost. NRV is based upon an estimated average selling price reduced by the estimated costs of disposal and transportation. The determination of NRV involves numerous judgments including estimating selling prices, existing customer orders, and estimated costs of disposal and transportation. If actual market conditions differ from our estimates, future results of operations could be materially affected.
The valuation of inventory also requires us to estimate excess and obsolete inventory. We periodically review the age, condition and turnover of our inventory to determine whether any inventory has become obsolete or has declined in value and incur a charge to operations for known and anticipated inventory obsolescence. We also consider how quickly customers will transition from older products to newer products, including whether older products can be re-manufactured into new products. The evaluation takes into consideration the effect that new products might have on the sale of existing products, product obsolescence, product merchantability and other factors. Market conditions are subject to change and if actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative impact on gross margin.
Stock-based compensation
Our stock-based compensation program includes restricted stock unit and stock option grants to our employees, directors and consultants. Stock options are granted at exercise prices not less than the estimated fair market value of our common stock at the dates of grant. For purposes of restricted stock unit grants, the grant date fair value is calculated as the fair market value of the stock on the date of grant.
The fair values of stock option grants are estimated using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Key inputs and assumptions include the expected term of the option, stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, stock price and exercise price. Many of the assumptions require significant judgment and changes in assumptions could have a significant impact in the determination of stock-based compensation expense.
Key assumptions include:
•Risk free interest rate: The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the awards is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
•Expected dividend yield: We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
•Expected term: We calculate expected term using the “simplified” method, which is the simple average of the vesting period and the contractual term. The simplified method is applied as we do not have sufficient historical data to provide a reasonable basis for an estimate of the expected term. We calculate the expected term for employee awards that take into account the effects of employees' expected exercise and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
•Expected volatility: We determined expected annual volatility based on the historical stock volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock- based awards.
Generally, stock options granted to employees fully vest four years from the grant date and have a term of 10 years and stock options granted to non-employees fully vest one year from the grant date or upon performance of a service and have a term of 10 years.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Liminal was a wholly owned subsidiary of 4Bionics, and as such, 4Bionics granted equity awards in the form of incentive units to Liminal employees and nonemployees under 4Bionics’ stock-based compensation program. On April 2, 2021, 4Bionics executed a plan of liquidation and dissolution and its ownership in Liminal was distributed to its members and to the holders of incentive units. Immediately subsequent to the dissolution, all outstanding unvested incentive unit awards under 4Bionics' 2019 Equity Incentive Plan were replaced with preferred stock awards indexed to and settled in the preferred stock of the former 4Bionics subsidiaries Liminal, Detect, Inc. (f/k/a Homodeus Inc.), Tesseract Health, Inc. and Protein Evolution, Inc. The preferred stock awards are subject to service vesting conditions only. No incremental value was provided to participants as a result of the modification of the awards as the modification date fair value of the incentive unit awards was equal to the modification date fair value of the stock underlying the restricted stock awards. Moreover, the remaining vesting period before and after the modification was unchanged. No incremental compensation expense was recognized as a result of the modification.
Prior to the dissolution of 4Bionics, a portion of total 4Bionics stock-based compensation expense was allocated to Liminal based on the level of service provided by the relevant employees and nonemployees to Liminal over the term of the award. Subsequent to the dissolution of 4Bionics, we recognize the stock-based compensation expense related to the replacement preferred stock awards and no allocation methodology is required. In connection with the Closing of the Business Combination, all replacement preferred stock awards were accelerated to fully vest. We recognized stock-based compensation expense of $0.6 million related to the incentive unit awards and replacement preferred stock awards during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our combined and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.