Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provide information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included as a part of the Form 10-K
to which this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is attached. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to “Hyzon,” “we,” “us,” and “our” are intended to mean the business and operations of Hyzon Motors Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination and to Legacy Hyzon and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination.
Overview
Headquartered in Rochester, New York, with operations in North America, Europe, China, and Australasia, Hyzon provides decarbonized solutions primarily for commercial vehicles market and hydrogen supply infrastructure.
Vehicles and Vehicle Platforms
Our commercial vehicle business is focused primarily on assembling and supplying hydrogen-powered FCEVs, including heavy-duty (Class 8) trucks, medium-duty (Class 6) trucks, light-duty (Class 3 and 4) trucks, and 40 and 60-foot
(12 and18-meter) city and coach buses to commercial vehicle operators.
On-road,
our potential customers include shipping and logistics companies and retail customers with large distribution networks, such as grocery retailers, food and beverage companies, waste management companies, and municipality and government agencies around the world. Off-road,
our potential customers include mining, material handling and port equipment manufacturers and operators. Initial strategic customer groups often employ a ‘back-to-base’
model where their vehicles return to a central base or depot between operations, thereby allowing operators to have fueling independence as the necessary hydrogen can be produced locally at or proximate to the central base and dispensed at optimally-configured hydrogen refueling stations. Hyzon may expand its range of products and hydrogen solutions as the transportation sector increasingly adopts hydrogen propulsion and investments are made in hydrogen production and related infrastructure in accordance with our expectations.
In addition, we perform integration for rail and aviation customers and plan to expand our integration activities across maritime and other applications in the future. We expect the opportunities in these sectors to continue to expand with the rapid technological advances in hydrogen fuel cells and the increasing investments in hydrogen production, storage and refueling infrastructure around the world.
Fuel and Infrastructure
Our hydrogen supply infrastructure business is focused on building and fostering a clean hydrogen supply ecosystem with leading partners from feedstock through hydrogen production, dispensing and financing. We collaborate with strategic partners on development, construction, operation, and ownership of hydrogen production facilities and refueling stations in each major region of our operations, which we intend to complement our back-to-base
model and near-term fleet deployment opportunities.
On July 12, 2021, Hyzon announced that it signed a memorandum of understanding (“MoU”) with TotalEnergies SE to expand the companies’ relationship. Under the terms of the MoU, the parties will seek to collaborate on developing hydrogen ecosystems, as well as the supply of 80 hydrogen fuel cell-powered trucks for TotalEnergies’ French customers.
On July 29, 2021, the Company entered into a Master Hub Agreement with Raven SR, LLC (“Raven SR”) whereby Raven SR granted to the Company a right of first refusal to co-invest
in up to 100 of Raven SR’s first 200 solid waste-to-hydrogen
production hubs, and up to 150 of Raven SR’s gas-to-hydrogen
production hubs across the U.S. on a hub-by-hub
basis. In connection with this agreement, Hyzon invested $2.5 million on July 30, 2021, to acquire a minority interest, and options to purchase additional common shares in Raven SR. We expect near-term realization of the first waste-to-hydrogen
production hub constructed by Raven SR coming online in Richmond, CA, with 5 tons per day of zero carbon intensity green hydrogen available for our near-term back-to-base
fleets at diesel parity, in 2022.
On July 29, 2021, Hyzon announced the signing of an MoU with RenewH2, a US-based
sustainable hydrogen production, liquefaction, distribution and dispensing company, to collaborate on the supply and demand side of liquid hydrogen production. Under the MoU, RenewH2 plans to reform biogenic methane gas to generate hydrogen. The hydrogen would then be liquefied and delivered to hydrogen fueling stations, which are expected to be developed in collaboration with Hyzon. Through this collaboration, the stations can be located near Hyzon customers to ensure consistent supply of hydrogen fuel.
On November 9, 2021, Hyzon announced the signing of an MoU with ITOCHU, the leading Japanese business group. Under this non-binding
MoU, the companies are expected to jointly develop hydrogen supply chain strategies as well as model customer projects for the deployment of Hyzon FCEVs and fuel cell technology in the mining sector.
On November 10, 2021, Hyzon announced an agreement with TC Energy to collaborate on development, construction, operation, and ownership of hydrogen production hubs across North America. The hubs will be used to meet hydrogen FCEV demand by focusing on low-to-negative
carbon intensity hydrogen from renewable natural gas, biogas and other sustainable sources. The hubs will be located close to demand, supporting Hyzon back-to-base
vehicle deployments.
On December 7, 2021, Hyzon announced an agreement with Woodside Energy to collaborate on developing supply of zero carbon intensity hydrogen and building demand from heavy-duty and medium-duty commercial vehicle customers in the U.S. and Australia. Under the agreement, the companies will evaluate opportunities to develop green hydrogen production hubs. Initially, the project will focus on liquid hydrogen supply projects to support Hyzon’s future liquid hydrogen onboard mobility use cases - including ultra-long range trucks already under development, and aviation, marine and rail applications.
On January 19, 2022, Hyzon announced a non-binding
MoU with Transform Materials, a provider of renewable hydrogen through its innovative proprietary microwave reactor technology. Together, Hyzon and Transform Materials will evaluate proposals to develop facilities to produce low-to-negative
carbon intensity hydrogen from various forms of methane, prioritizing biogas and renewable natural gas. Through Transform Material’s proprietary technology, these facilities (operating as hubs) can be built to produce hydrogen efficiently-even at small scales of 1-5
tons/day-offering modular construction that allows capacity to grow as customer demand increases. Transform’s technology to be employed in these projects produces hydrogen as a co-product
with acetylene, providing significantly advantaged hydrogen cost structures.
Business Combination
On February 8, 2021, Legacy Hyzon, now Hyzon Motors USA Inc. (“Legacy Hyzon”), a subsidiary of Hyzon Motors Inc., entered into the Business Combination Agreement and Plan of Reorganization (the “Business Combination”) with DCRB and Merger Sub pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Hyzon, with Legacy Hyzon surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of DCRB. The transaction closed on July 16, 2021. Following the close of the business combination, DCRB was named Hyzon Motors Inc., began trading on NASDAQ, and its common stock and public warrants trade under the symbols “HYZN” and “HYZNW”, respectively. The Business Combination generated proceeds of approximately $512.9 million in cash, net of transaction costs allocated to equity and redemptions by DCRB’s public stockholders. This includes an aggregate of $355 million of gross proceeds from the PIPE Financing at $10.00 per PIPE Share. Hyzon’s cash on hand after giving effect to this transaction, including transaction costs and expenses, is expected to be used for
general corporate purposes, including developing infrastructure and supply chain, acquiring and leasing equipment for manufacturing, and investing in research and development.
COVID-19
Pandemic
The COVID-19
pandemic is currently impacting countries, communities, supply chains, and the global financial markets. Governments have imposed laws requiring social distancing, travel restrictions, shutdowns of businesses and quarantines, among others, and these laws may limit our ability to meet with potential customers or partners, or affect the ability of our personnel, suppliers, partners and customers to operate in the ordinary course of business. Although the economy has begun to recover, the severity and duration of the related global economic crisis is not fully known and the global outlook continues to remain uncertain due to a variety of factors including the Omicron variant and the potential emergence of additional variants, supply chain disruptions, labor shortages, and inflation. The COVID-19
pandemic is expected to continue to have residual negative impacts (including potentially after the outbreak has subsided and containment measures are lifted), and in particular, the supply chain continues to face disruptions that adversely affect our business. Rebounding demand in key components challenge the supply base and supply chain with short notice and increasing volume levels. The supply constraints include overseas freight congestion causing extended lead times, semiconductor allocation, other raw/component material shortages, and supplier staffing challenges.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures to prevent its spread have had the following impact on our business:
•
Our workforce
. Employee health and safety is our priority. In response to COVID-19,
we established protocols to help protect the health and safety of our workforce. We will continue to stay up-to-date
and follow local, CDC, or WHO guidelines regarding safe work environment requirements.
•
Operations and Supply Chain.
We continue to experience supply chain disruptions, which may temporarily limit our ability to outfit vehicles and fuel cell systems with key components. However, our global footprint has allowed us to leverage our strategic partnerships and to meet customer demands for zero-emission
heavy commercial vehicles despite these challenges. In the future, we may experience supply chain disruptions from related or third-party suppliers and any such supply chain disruptions could cause delays in our development and delivery timelines. We continue to monitor the situation for any potential adverse impacts and execute appropriate countermeasures, where possible. To mitigate the impact of supply chain disruptions that we were experiencing in 2021, which disproportionately impacted our business in Europe, we focused on fulfilling orders for our vehicles in China where supply chain disruptions were not as significant.
While we have experienced some operational challenges, the long-term implications of the COVID-19
pandemic on our workforce, operations and supply chain, as well as demand remain uncertain. These factors may in turn have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Key Trends and Uncertainties
We believe that our performance and future success depends on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors
”.
Commercial Launch of Hyzon-branded commercial vehicles and other hydrogen solutions
We reported $6.0 million of revenue in 2021; however, our business model has yet to be proven. Prior to full commercialization of our commercial vehicle business at scale, we must complete the construction of required manufacturing facilities and achieve research and development milestones. We must establish and operate facilities capable of producing our hydrogen fuel cell systems or assembling our hydrogen-powered commercial vehicles in appropriate volumes and at competitive costs.
Until we can generate sufficient additional revenue from our commercial vehicle business, we expect to finance our operations through equity and/or debt financing. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development efforts. We expect that any delays in the successful completion of our manufacturing facilities, availability of critical parts, and/or validation and testing will impact our ability to generate revenue.
Hydrogen Production and Supply Infrastructure
We continue to develop an end-to-end
hydrogen ecosystem delivery model, with a partner-driven approach to design, build, own and operate hydrogen production hubs and downstream dispensing infrastructure expected to provide zero-to-negative
carbon intensity hydrogen at below diesel-parity cost structures supporting Hyzon vehicle fleet deployments. We intend to continue forming additional partnerships across the full hydrogen feedstock, production and dispensing value chain in each major region in which we operate, that will be designed to ensure that the hydrogen fuel required is available at the cost and carbon intensity requirements to drive fleet conversions to Hyzon hydrogen FCEVs. Because we have a partner-driven approach, we are naturally reliant upon our partners’ performance in fulfilling the obligations that we depend on for delivery of each segment of that value chain. Additionally, consistent with other construction projects, there are risks related to realized construction cost and schedule that can impact final cost to produce and deliver hydrogen and timing of that delivery, along with the availability of feedstock near our vehicle fleet deployments. We intend to manage these risks by partnering with high quality and high performing partners with a track record of timely delivery and instituting commercial agreements to drive down construction cost and achieve on-time
scheduled performance.
Continued Investment in Innovation
We believe that we are the industry-leading hydrogen technology company with the most efficient and reliable fuel cell powertrain technologies and an unmatched product and service offering. Our financial performance will be significantly dependent on our ability to maintain this leading position. We expect to incur substantial and increasing research and development expenses and stock-based compensation expenses as a result. We dedicate significant resources towards research and development and invest heavily in recruiting talent, especially for vehicle design, vehicle software, fuel cell system, and electric powertrain. We will continue to recruit and retain talented personnel to grow our strength in our core technologies. We expect to incur additional stock-based compensation expenses as we support our growth and status as a publicly traded company. We expect our strategic focus on innovation will further solidify our leadership position.
Customer Demand
We are continually seeking to expand our customer base; however we depend on a few major customers and we expect this will continue for the next several years. These customers will mostly employ a back-to-base model in the early adoption phase of FCEVs. Vehicles will return to a central “base” between operations, allowing them to refuel onsite and/or nearby, where hydrogen can be produced locally at or proximate to the central base. While we focus on back-to-base or regional customers, we expect to expand our target customer focus to include longer-haul truck and bus segments, additional vehicle classes, stationary power, and incremental mobility applications (e.g., rail, marine, aviation) for customers around the world.
Supplier Relationships
We depend on third parties, including our majority beneficial shareholder and parent company Horizon for supply of key inputs and components for our products, such as fuel cells and automotive parts. We intend to negotiate potential relationships with industry-leading OEMs to supply chassis for our Hyzon-branded vehicles but do not yet have any binding agreements and there is no guarantee that definitive agreements will be reached. Even if we reach such agreements, such suppliers, including Horizon, may be unable to deliver the inputs and components necessary for us to produce our hydrogen-powered commercial vehicles or hydrogen fuel cell systems at prices, volumes, and specifications acceptable to us. If we are unable to source required inputs and other components from third parties on acceptable terms, it could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
The automotive industry continues to face supply chain disruptions. We are experiencing increases in both the cost of and time to receive raw materials, such as semiconductors or chassis. Any such increase or supply interruptions could materially negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. Many of the parts for our products are sourced from suppliers in China and the manufacturing situation in China remains uncertain.
Market Trends and Competition
The last ten years have seen the rapid development of alternative energy solutions in the transportation space. We believe this growth will continue to accelerate as increased product offerings, technological developments, reduced costs, additional supporting infrastructure, and increased global focus on climate goals drive broader adoption.
We believe that commercial vehicle operators, one of our initial target markets, will be driven towards hydrogen-powered commercial vehicles predominantly by the need to decarbonize activities, but also by the potential for lower total cost of ownership in comparison to the cost of ownership associated with traditional gasoline and diesel ICE vehicles. Our fuel cell technology can be deployed across a broad range of mobility applications, including on-road,
off-road,
rail, maritime and aviation.
The competitive landscape for our commercial vehicles ranges from vehicles relying on legacy ICEs, to extended range BEVs, to other hydrogen fuel cell and alternative low-to-no
carbon emission propulsion vehicles. Competitors include well established vehicle companies already deploying vehicles with internal fuel cell technology and other heavy vehicle companies that have announced their plans to offer fuel cell trucks in the future. We also face competition from other fuel cell manufacturers. We believe that our company is well positioned to capitalize on growth in demand for alternative low-to-no
carbon emission propulsion vehicles expected from the numerous benefits of hydrogen power, including hydrogen’s abundance, its ability to be produced locally, and the generally faster refueling times for hydrogen-powered commercial vehicles as compared to electricity-powered vehicles. However, to successfully execute on our business plan, we must continue to innovate and convert successful research and development efforts into differentiated products, including new commercial vehicle models.
Our current and potential competitors may have greater financial, technical, manufacturing, marketing, and other resources. Our competitors may be able to deploy greater resources to the design, development, manufacturing, distribution, promotion, sales, marketing, and support of their internal combustion, alternative fuel and electric truck programs.
Regulatory Landscape
We operate in a highly regulated industry. The failure to comply with laws or regulations, including but limited to rules and regulations covering vehicle safety, emissions, dealerships, and distributors, could subject us to significant regulatory risk and changing laws and regulations and changing enforcement policies and priorities could adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We may be also required to obtain and comply with the terms and conditions of multiple environmental permits, many of which are difficult and costly to obtain and could be subject to legal challenges. We depend on global customers and suppliers, and adverse changes in governmental policy or trade regimes could significantly impact the competitiveness of our products. Changes to applicable tax laws and regulations or exposure to additional income tax liabilities could affect our business and future profitability. See the section entitled “Government Regulations
” in Part I, Item 1.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Hyzon was formed and commenced operations on January 21, 2020. As a result, we have a very limited operating history from inception and limited prior period comparable information available to be presented in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Hyzon.”
Revenue.
Revenue represents sales of hydrogen FCEVs. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.0 million. We did not generate revenue for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $107.4 million compared to $14.2 million for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Operating expenses consist of cost of revenue, research and development expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses, each of which is discussed below.
Cost of Revenue.
Cost of revenue includes direct materials, labor costs, allocated overhead costs related to the manufacture of hydrogen FCEVs, and estimated warranty costs. Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $21.2 million. The total cost of FCEVs that were delivered to certain customers in China was recorded within Cost of revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss since the Company no longer has the control of these FCEVs, while the associated revenue recognized was limited, and did not reflect the total contractual price for these arrangements. We did not generate revenue for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses.
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to support activities that advance the development of current and next generation hydrogen powered fuel cell systems, the design and development of electric powertrain, and the integration of those systems into various mobility applications. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related personnel expenses, prototype materials and tooling, design expenses, consulting and contractor costs and an allocated portion of overhead costs.
Research and development expenses were $16.4 million and $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to $8.2 million in personnel costs in research and development and headcount for our global customer base. The remaining increase of $6.7 million was primarily due to the advancing development of current and next generation hydrogen powered fuel cell systems, the design and development of electric powertrain, and the integration of those systems into various mobility applications. We expect research and development expenses to continue to increase significantly going forward as we build out our research facilities and organization.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses.
Selling expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for individuals working in our sales and marketing departments, third party commissions, and related outreach activities. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses associated with our executive, finance, legal, information technology, and human resources functions, as well as professional fees for legal, audit, accounting, and other consulting services, and an allocated portion of overhead costs.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $69.8 million and $12.8 million for year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. Stock-based compensation in selling, general and administrative expenses were $28.2 million and $9.9 million for year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. The $18.3 million increase was primarily due to $13.4 million triggered by a key executive retirement arrangement and $13.1 million related to earnout equity awards pursuant to the Business Combination, partially offset by the 2020 Executives’ Awards. See Note 15, Stock-based Compensation Plans and Note 3, Business Combination to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the stock based compensation and equity awards. The remaining increase was primarily due to $11.9 million in legal and accounting fees, $5.3 million in consulting fees, $8.6 million in salary and related expenses, and $4.9 million in insurance expense. We incurred greater selling, general, and administrative expense in 2021 due to building out the Company’s corporate infrastructure, including accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related
services, as well as expenses incurred in order to help maintain compliance with NASDAQ and SEC requirements. The increase in selling, general and administrative costs also resulted from director and officer insurance costs, investor and public relations costs, and transaction costs related to the Business Combination.
Change in Fair Value.
Change in fair value represents non-cash
gains in fair values of the private placement warrant and earnout liability required to be remeasured at each balance sheet date. Change in fair value of private placement warrants and earnout liability for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $4.2 million and $84.6 million, respectively. There were no equivalent instruments requiring fair value remeasurement during the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Foreign Currency Exchange Gain (Loss).
Foreign currency exchange gain (loss) represents exchange rate gains and losses related to all transactions denominated in a currency other than Hyzon’s or a Hyzon subsidiary’s functional currency. Foreign currency exchange loss was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, as there were few transactions in foreign currencies in the prior period. We expect the volume of foreign currency transactions to grow significantly in the future as we continue to expand our geographic footprint.
Interest Expense, net.
Interest expense, net was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to negligible expense for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Interest expense relates primarily to convertible debt issued in February 2021 and is comprised primarily from changes in the fair value of the embedded derivative associated with the automatic conversion provision of the convertible note. Upon close of the Business Combination in July 2021, convertible debt and accrued interest converted into shares of common stock of the Company. See Note 3, Business Combination in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information. There was minimal debt outstanding during the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit).
The Company has cumulative net operating losses at the federal and state level and maintains a full valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets.
Net Loss Attributable to Non-Controlling Interests.
Net loss attributable to non-controlling interests
represents results attributable to third parties in our operating subsidiaries. Net loss is generally allocated based on such ownership interests held by third parties with respect to each of these entities.
Net loss attributable to non-controlling interests
was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The change in the comparative periods is the result of increased activities in our Netherlands joint venture and the creation of a joint venture in Foshan, China in October 2021.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”), we believe the following non-GAAP
measures are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP
financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP
financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net loss before interest income or expense, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of private placement warrant liability, change in fair value of earnout liability and other special items determined by management, if applicable. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are intended as supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP
financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring
items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because not all companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
(1) Executive transition charges include stock-based compensation costs of $13.4 million and salary expense of $0.5 million related to former CTO’s retirement.
(2) Transaction costs of $6.4 million attributable to the liability classified earnout shares and $0.1 million of write-off
of debt issuance costs.
(3) Regulatory and legal matters include legal, advisory, and other professional service fees incurred in connection with the short-seller analyst article from September 2021, and investigations and litigation related thereto.
(4) Acquisition-related expenses incurred for potential and actual acquisitions that are unrelated to the current operations and neither are comparable to the prior period nor predictive of future results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has incurred losses from operations since inception. The Company incurred net losses of $19.3 million and $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities was $95.2 million and $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $445.1 million in unrestricted cash and positive working capital of $464.0 million. The Business Combination closed on July 16, 2021, and generated proceeds of approximately $512.9 million of cash net of transaction costs and redemptions. We believe that our current cash balance will provide adequate liquidity during the 12-month period following the issuance of our December 31, 2021 consolidated financial statements.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the rate of our growth, our ability to generate sufficient revenue from commercial vehicle sales and leases to cover operating expenses, working capital expenditures, and additional cash resources due to changed business conditions or other developments, including supply chain challenges, disruptions due to COVID-19,
competitive pressures, and regulatory developments, among other developments. Additionally, we are currently exploring raising additional capital through our subsidiary, Hyzon Zero Carbon, Inc., to invest in hydrogen production, distribution, and fueling stations. Further, we may enter into future arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services, strategic partnerships, and technologies. As such, we are exploring equity and/or debt financing through
Hyzon Zero Carbon, Inc., and we may be required to seek additional equity and/or debt financing at the Hyzon level or through one or more of Hyzon’s other subsidiaries. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Incurring debt would result in increased fixed obligations and could result in operating covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are unable to maintain sufficient financial resources, our business, financial condition and results of operations may be materially and adversely affected.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, we have no debt. The Convertible Notes and accrued interest were converted to 5,022,052 shares of common stock upon close of the Business Combination.
Cash Flows
The following table is summarized from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $95.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.2 million cash used for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by net loss of $19.3 million and adjusted for certain non-cash
items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash
gain adjustments primarily consisted of changes in fair value of private placement warrant liability of $4.2 million and earnout liability of $84.6 million. These non-cash
gain adjustments were partially offset by $29.1 million stock-based compensation expense and $1.1 million in depreciation and amortization. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by $23.0 million in prepayments for vehicle inventory, production equipment, other supplier deposits and D&O insurance, and a change of $19.3 million in inventory balances, offset by an increase in accounts payable of $8.2 million, accrued liabilities of $5.0 million and an increase in contract liabilities of $8.7 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by recording a net loss of $14.4 million and adjusted for the non-cash
stock-based compensation expense of $10.0 million, offset by an increase in contract liabilities of $2.6 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.6 million for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by $14.5 million in capital expenditures, as well as $4.3 million in machinery and equipment deposits to begin production of hydrogen fuel cell systems and assembly of hydrogen storage systems, and $4.8 million in cash used for investments in equity securities of NRG and Raven SR.
Net cash used in investing activities for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by capital expenditures of $0.4 million and an equity investment of $0.1 million in the period January 21, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $550.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $18.9 million for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. The cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due primarily to $512.9 million in proceeds from the Business Combination, net of transaction costs allocated to equity and redemption and $45.0 million in proceeds from issuance of convertible debt, partially offset by $6.9 million payment towards the Horizon IP Agreement. The cash flows provided by financing activities for the period from January 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 was due primarily to $18.6 million, net of transaction costs from the Round A Transaction (as defined in Note 16, Stockholders’ Equity in the accompanying consolidated financial statements) and $0.5 million in proceeds from issuance of convertible debt.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) The final $3.1 million payment due to Jiangsu Horizon Powertrain, pursuant to the terms of the Horizon IP Agreement. Please see the section below entitled, “Material Transactions with Related Parties
” for additional information concerning the Horizon IP Agreement. This liability is reported within Related party payables on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021. The payment was made in February 2022.
(2) The minimum lease payments for the finance lease obligation.
(3) The minimum lease payments for operating lease obligations. The operating leases relate to real estate and vehicles. No asset is leased from any related party.
(4) The Company enters into commitments under non-cancellable or partially cancellable purchase orders or vendor agreements in the ordinary course of business for FCEV components.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We do not maintain any off-balance
sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that would be expected to have a material current or future effect upon our financial condition or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s applications of accounting policies. Certain policies are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by management to determine appropriate assumptions to be used in certain estimates; as a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty and are considered critical. Accordingly, we believe the following policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Share-based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock options and restricted stock awards based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. The fair value is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award, on a straight-line basis when the only condition to vesting is continued service. If vesting is subject to a market or performance condition, recognition is based on the derived service period of the award. Expense for awards with performance conditions is estimated and adjusted based upon the assessment of the probability that the performance condition will be met.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards with service and/or performance conditions. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make a number of assumptions, including the expected life of the option, the volatility of the underlying stock, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent our best estimates at the time of grant. These estimates involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of our judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock.
Prior to the Business Combination with DCRB, the grant date fair value of our common stock utilized in the calculation of share-based compensation was determined using valuation methodologies which utilize certain assumptions, including observations of comparable equity values and transactions, probability weighting of events, time to liquidation, a risk-adjusted interest rate, and assumptions regarding our projected future cash flows and growth potential. Following the Business Combination with DCRB, as Class A common stock is traded in the public market, fair value is measured on the grant date based on the closing fair market value of our common stock.
•
Expected Term.
The expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding.
•
Expected Volatility.
We determine the price volatility factor based on the historical volatilities of our publicly traded peer group as Hyzon does not have a long trading history for our common stock. Industry peers consist of several public companies in the automotive and energy storage industry that are similar to Hyzon in size, stage of life cycle, and financial leverage.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate.
The risk-free interest rate was based on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon
securities with maturities consistent with the estimated expected term.
•
Expected Dividend Yield.
We have not paid dividends on our common stock nor do we expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Private Placement Warrant Liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
We account for the Private Placement Warrants, in connection with the Business Combination, as liabilities. In accordance with ASC 815, the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and remeasured at each reporting date.
We, with the assistance of third-party valuations, utilized the binominal lattice valuation model (“BLM”) to estimate the fair value of Private Placement Warrants as of July 16, 2021. The application of the BLM utilizes significant unobservable assumptions, including volatility. Significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock.
Earnout Liability
The earnout shares held by Legacy Hyzon’s common stockholders are accounted for as a liability. In accordance with ASC 815, the earnout shares held by Legacy Hyzon common stockholders do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. Pursuant to ASC 805 initial measurement of these earnout shares are measured at its acquisition-date fair value and included as part of the consideration transferred in a business combination. As these earnout shares meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, they are remeasured at each reporting date. Changes in fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
The earnout shares issued to other holders of outstanding equity awards are accounted for in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Compensation
, as they relate to stock-based compensation awards issued in exchange for service provided or to be provided to the Company. We recognized the earnout shares to other equity holders as separate and incremental awards from other equity holders’ underlying stock-based compensation awards. Upon the close of the Business Combination, we became contingently obligated to issue earnout shares if the vesting conditions were met. However, for unvested equity awards and where grant date was not established, we did not recognize any expense.
We, with the assistance of third-party valuations, utilize the Monte-Carlo valuation model to estimate the fair value of earnout shares at each reporting date. The application of the Monte-Carlo pricing model utilizes significant unobservable assumptions, including volatility. Significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock. Monte Carlo analysis simulates the future path of the Company’s stock price over the earnout period. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the liability’s estimated value.
Equity Valuations
For all periods prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, there was not a market for our equity. Accordingly, valuations of our equity instruments require the application of significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments. These valuations impact share-based compensation reported in our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion provides additional details regarding the significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments that impact the determination of the fair values of share-based compensation awards and the common stock that comprises our capital structure. The following discussion also explains why these estimates, assumptions, and judgments could be subject to uncertainties and future variability.
We used valuations of our common stock for various purposes, including, but not limited to, the determination of the exercise price of stock options and inclusion in the Black-Scholes option pricing model. As a privately held company, the lack of an active public market for our common stock required our management and board of directors to exercise reasonable judgment and consider a number of factors in order to make the best estimate of fair value of our equity. As our capital structure consisted of a single class of equity, Hyzon, with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, estimated the fair value of our total equity value using a combination of the comparable sales method (a market approach) and the excess earnings method (an income approach). Estimating our total equity value requires the application of significant judgment and assumptions. Factors considered in connection with estimating these values included:
•
Recent arms-length transactions involving the sale or transfer of our common stock;
•
Our historical financial results and future financial projections;
•
The market value of equity interests in substantially similar businesses, which equity interests can be valued through nondiscretionary, objective means;
•
The lack of marketability of our common stock;
•
The likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as the business combination, given prevailing market conditions;
•
Industry outlook; and
•
General economic outlook, including economic growth, inflation and unemployment, interest rate environment and global economic trends.
The fair value ultimately assigned to our common stock may take into account any number or combination of the various factors described above, based upon their applicability at the time of measurement. Determination of the fair value of our common stock also may involve the application of multiple valuation methodologies and approaches, with varying weighting applied to each methodology as of the grant date. Application of these approaches involves: the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows; discount rates; market multiples; the selection of comparable companies; and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
As of November 12, 2020, the estimated fair value of our common stock was $2.00 per share. In making this determination, we relied upon the previous Round A equity financing, which closed on November 12, 2020, as being the only reliable indication of fair value of our common stock before (and including) December 1, 2020. The price of the Round A capital raise was $2.00 per share of our common stock.
The estimated fair value of our common stock was $4.45 per share as of December 31, 2020. The increase in fair value was primarily due to our progress and steps taken to prepare for the Business Combination. The necessary steps undertaken to prepare for the Business Combination included meeting with DCRB and financial advisors, discussing timing expectations, negotiating a non-binding letter of intent and signing a binding exclusivity agreement between DCRB and Hyzon. As our ongoing negotiations related to the Business Combination reflected an increased likelihood of a near-term exit transaction and/or liquidity event, the valuation of our equity as of December 31, 2020, took into consideration the indicated equity value implied by the negotiations. While the December 31, 2020, valuation incorporated indicated equity values based upon traditional income and market approaches consisting of the excess earnings method and comparable sales method. The valuation also incorporated the equity value implied by the business combination. Accordingly, the valuation applied the probability-weighted expected return method (PWERM) to weight the indicated equity value determined under the traditional income and market approaches and the equity value implied by our expected business combination with DCRB. Due to the proximity in time and observability, management placed the most significant weighting on the value as implied by the comparable sales method.
The estimated fair value of our common stock was $9.90 per share as of June 30, 2021. The increase in fair value from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2021 was primarily due to Hyzon executing a non-binding letter of intent with DCRB in January 2021, signing a Business Combination Agreement with DCRB, and issuing a convertible note payable in the amount of $45.0 million in February 2021. In addition, Hyzon made progress in procuring new orders from customers during the six months ended June 30, 2021.
As of June 30, 2021, the estimated fair value of our common stock was $9.90 per share, which equates to an implied equity value of $1.0 billion. The primary difference between the fair value derived on June 30, 2021 and the fair value implied by the Business Combination is that the fair value implied by the Business Combination is based only upon a scenario in which the parties complete the Business Combination and is not probability weighted, in contrast to the June 30, 2021 valuation which considered multiple potential outcomes, some of which would have resulted in a lower value of our common stock than its implied transaction value.
Following the Business Combination with DCRB, it is no longer necessary for our management and its board of directors to estimate the fair value of our common stock, as the Class A common stock is traded in the public market.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging
growth companies, but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. Hyzon elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, Hyzon, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard, until such time Hyzon is no longer considered to be an emerging growth company. At times, Hyzon may elect to early adopt a new or revised standard.
In addition, Hyzon intends to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an emerging growth company, Hyzon intends to rely on such exemptions, Hyzon is not required to, among other things: (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on Hyzon’s system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (d) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
Hyzon will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) the last day of Hyzon’s first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the closing of DCRB’s initial public offering, (b) the last date of Hyzon’s fiscal year in which Hyzon has total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the date on which Hyzon is deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates
or (d) the date on which Hyzon has issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible
debt securities during the previous three years.
Material Transactions with Related Parties
Horizon IP Agreement
In January 2021, Hyzon entered into the Horizon IP Agreement with JS Horizon, part of the Horizon group of Companies, and in September 2021 JS Powertrain was an added party to the agreement. Pursuant to the agreement, the parties convey to each other certain rights in intellectual property relating to Hyzon’s core fuel cell and mobility product technologies under which Hyzon will pay JS Horizon and JS Powertrain a total fixed payment of $10.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, $6.9 million was paid and the remaining $3.1 million was paid February 2022.
Horizon Supply Agreement
In January 2021, Hyzon entered into a supply agreement with Jiangsu Horizon New Energy Technologies Co. Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Horizon, to supply certain fuel cell components. The Company made a deposit payment to Horizon in the amount of $5.0 million for long lead time components. This payment is included in prepaid expenses as the components have yet been received as of December 31, 2021. The Company currently relies and expects to rely on Horizon as a single source supplier of hydrogen fuel cell systems until completion of Hyzon hydrogen fuel cell manufacturing facilities.
Holthausen
The Company entered into a joint venture agreement in 2020 to create Hyzon Europe with Holthausen. As Hyzon Europe builds out its production facilities, it relies on Holthausen for certain production resources that result in related party transactions. In addition, both companies rely on certain suppliers including Horizon.
In June 2021, the Company transferred inventory purchased from Horizon amounting to $1.2 million to Holthausen at cost and recorded a related party receivable of $1.2 million.
In July 2021, Hyzon Europe assumed certain customer sales contracts from Holthausen with an aggregate value of $5.1 million. As a result of this transaction, the Company recorded contract liabilities of $4.1 million, work-in-process
inventory of $3.4 million, and due from Holthausen of $0.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $0.5 million to two affiliated entities of certain executives of Hyzon Europe for their director services.
The Company currently owns 50.5% of the equity interests of Hyzon Europe. On December 31, 2021, Hyzon executed a non-binding Letter of Intent (“LOI”) with Holthausen to increase its stake to 75% in Hyzon Europe. Concurrent with the signing of this LOI, €1 million refundable deposit was paid to Holthausen, approximately $1.1 million in USD. This deposit is recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets in Prepaid expenses and other current assets.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a net related party receivable in the amount of $0.3 million due from Holthausen.