Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the “Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” preceding Part I.
Our fiscal year consists of 52 weeks with every fifth year consisting of 53 weeks and ending either the last Sunday in December or the first Sunday in January. As used in this section, references to the:
-“fiscal year ended January 2, 2022” or “fiscal 2021” refer to the 53-week period that began on December 28, 2020 and ended on January 2, 2022.
-“fiscal year ended December 27, 2020” or “fiscal 2020” refer to the 52-week period that began on December 30, 2019 and ended on December 27, 2020.
-“fiscal year ended December 29, 2019” or “fiscal 2019” refer to the 52-week period that began on December 31, 2018 and ended on December 29, 2019.
Overview
We are a leading global digital marketplace connecting vehicle buyers and sellers. Leveraging leading-edge technology and focusing on innovation, our unique platform facilitates the marketing and sale of total-loss, damaged and low-value vehicles for a full spectrum of sellers. Headquartered in Westchester, IL, we have two operating segments: United States and International. We maintain operations in the United States, which make up the United States segment and operations in Canada and the United Kingdom, which make up the International segment. We have more than 200 facilities across both business segments.
We serve a global buyer base and a full spectrum of sellers, including insurance companies, dealerships, fleet lease and rental car companies, and charitable organizations. We offer sellers a comprehensive suite of services aimed at maximizing vehicle value, reducing administrative costs, shortening selling cycle time and delivering the highest economic returns. Our products provide global buyers with the vehicles they need to, among other things, fulfill their vehicle rebuild requirements, replacement part inventory or scrap demand. We provide global buyers with multiple bidding/buying digital channels, innovative vehicle merchandising, efficient evaluation services and online bidding tools, enhancing the overall purchasing experience.
The Separation
On February 27, 2018, KAR announced a plan to pursue the separation and spin off (“the Separation”) of its salvage auction businesses into a separate public company. On June 28, 2019 (the “Separation Date”), KAR completed the distribution of 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of IAA to the holders of record of KAR’s common stock on June 18, 2019, on a pro rata basis (the “Distribution”). Following the Separation and Distribution, IAA became an independent publicly-traded company.
Industry Trends
Vehicles deemed a total loss by automobile insurance companies represent the largest category of vehicles sold in the salvage vehicle auction industry. Based on data from CCC Information Services, the percentage of claims resulting in total losses was approximately 20% in 2021, 21% in 2020 and 19% in 2019. There is no central reporting system for the salvage vehicle auction industry that tracks the number of salvage vehicle auction volumes in any given year, which makes estimating industry volumes difficult.
Fluctuations in used vehicle and commodity pricing (aluminum, steel, etc.) have an impact on proceeds received in the salvage vehicle auction industry. In times of rising prices, we experience higher revenue per unit in our auctions, which positively impacts revenue and gross profit. If used vehicle and commodity prices decrease, proceeds, revenue and gross profit at salvage auctions may be negatively impacted, which could adversely affect our level of profitability. The price per ton of crushed auto bodies in North America increased approximately 60% in 2021 as compared to 2020 and increased approximately 15% in 2020 as compared to 2019.
See Part I, Item 1, Business - Our Industry and Trends in Market Demand for additional information.
Sources of Revenues and Expenses
A significant portion of our revenue is derived from auction fees and related services associated with our salvage auctions. Approximately two-thirds of our revenue is earned from buyers. Buyer revenue represents fees charged based on a tiered structure that increases with the sales price of the vehicle as well as fees for additional services such as storage, transportation, and vehicle condition reporting. Approximately one-third of our revenue is earned from sellers. Seller revenue represents the combination of the inbound tow, processing, storage, titling, enhancing and auctioning of the vehicle. In exchange for agreed-upon processing and service fees, we sell total loss, damaged and low-value vehicles on behalf of vehicle sellers primarily on a consignment basis, meaning that our sellers continue to own their vehicles until they are sold to buyers through one of our digital marketplaces. We recognize revenues from consigned vehicles on a net basis as we have no influence on the vehicle auction selling price agreed by the seller and the buyer at the auction. However, our related receivables and payables include the gross value of the vehicles sold. We also purchase vehicles in certain situations and resell them. We recognize revenues from purchased vehicles on a gross basis, which results in lower gross margin versus vehicles sold at auction on a consignment basis.
Our operating expenses consist of cost of services, cost of vehicle sales, selling, general and administrative and depreciation and amortization. Cost of services is comprised of payroll and related costs, subcontract services, supplies, insurance, property taxes, utilities, service contract claims, maintenance and lease expense related to the auction sites. Cost of vehicle sales represents the cost of purchased vehicles. Cost of services and vehicle sales excludes depreciation and amortization. Selling, general and administrative expenses are comprised of payroll and related costs, sales and marketing, information technology services and professional fees.
COVID-19 Impact on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted, and continues to impact, worldwide economic activities. Following stay-at-home orders and other mandates implemented by federal, state and local governments in mid-March 2020, miles driven declined significantly and reduced the supply of salvage vehicle assignments. This decline in volume significantly impacted our business in fiscal 2020 and, to a lesser extent, in fiscal 2021. Even with improvement in miles driven and vehicle assignments beginning in the second half of 2020 and continuing through fiscal 2021, miles driven remain slightly lower than pre-COVID levels. In addition, labor, towing and other transportation shortages have increased our associated costs and we expect they will continue to do so at least in the near term. We believe COVID-19 and the efforts taken to reduce its spread may continue to have a negative impact on our business in fiscal 2022.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact our business and results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the duration and severity of the virus and the actions taken to contain its impact and spread; resurgences of COVID-19 or variants thereof that may continue to occur; other actions taken by governments, businesses, and individuals in response to the virus and any resulting economic disruption; and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions resume.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Financial Results
COVID-19:
The COVID-19 pandemic and the efforts taken to reduce its spread adversely affected our operations in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. See above under "COVID-19 Impact on our Business" for additional information.
Acquisitions:
On October 26, 2021, we acquired SYNETIQ, a leading integrated salvage and vehicle dismantling company in the United Kingdom. The cash purchase price for SYNETIQ, including working capital and other adjustments, was $314.2 million (£228.2 million), of which $260.2 million (£189.0 million) was paid out in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. The remaining payment of $54.0 million (£39.2 million) is contingent upon receipt of required approvals from the CMA and is held in an escrow account, and presented as Restricted cash on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. This transaction is currently undergoing review by the U.K. Competition and Markets Authority. The results of operations of SYNETIQ are included in our International segment from the date of acquisition.
On June 18, 2021, we acquired Marisat, Inc. d/b/a Auto Exchange ("Auto Exchange"), a salvage auction provider located in New Jersey, for $7.3 million. The results of operations of Auto Exchange are included in our United States segment from the date of the acquisition.
See Note 4 - Acquisitions in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on these acquisitions.
Debt financing:
On April 30, 2021, we executed a new senior secured credit facility, consisting of a $650 million term loan and a $525 million revolving credit facility, both maturing on April 30, 2026. This replaced the company’s prior $774 million term loan and $361 million revolving credit facility, and resulted in a reduction in the interest rate on our floating rate debt.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The table below presents consolidated statements of income for the periods indicated and the dollar change and percentage change between periods.
* NM - Not meaningful
Service Revenues
United States service revenues increased $294.8 million due to an increase in revenue per unit of 18%, which primarily resulted from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and higher used car prices. In addition, United States service revenues also benefited from a higher volume of vehicles sold, which increased by 8% primarily resulting from higher miles driven and a higher supply of vehicle assignments due to the reopening of the United States economy.
International service revenues increased by $9.8 million mainly due to an increase in revenue per unit of 32%, which primarily resulted from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and higher used car prices. This increase was partially offset by a lower volume of vehicles sold, which decreased by 9% as the International segment continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Vehicle Sales
United States vehicle sales increased $53.4 million due to a higher volume of vehicles sold, which increased by 40%, primarily resulting from an increase in vehicle purchases. In addition, United States vehicle sales also benefited from an increase in revenue per unit sold of 19%, which primarily resulted from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and higher used car prices.
International vehicle sales increased $94.5 million due to incremental revenue of $31.4 million from the SYNETIQ acquisition, a higher volume of vehicles sold, which increased by 35% primarily due to the impact of a provider switching from a consignment model to a purchased vehicle model, and an increase in revenue per unit sold of 40%, which primarily resulted from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and higher used car prices.
Cost of Services
United States cost of services increased $116.5 million primarily due to a higher volume of vehicles sold and higher costs relating to towing, wages, incentive compensation, vehicle processing and occupancy, including costs associated with responding to catastrophic events. These increases were partially offset by cost savings from adopting a fully-digital auction model.
International cost of services increased $13.3 million primarily due to incremental costs of $8.7 million from the SYNETIQ acquisition and higher towing and occupancy costs, partially offset by a lower volume of vehicles sold.
Cost of Vehicles Sales
United States cost of vehicle sales increased $53.5 million primarily due to a higher volume of vehicles sold and higher average purchase prices due to the mix of vehicles sold.
International cost of vehicle sales increased $82.5 million primarily due to the impact of an international provider switching from a consignment model to a purchased vehicle model, higher average purchase prices and incremental costs of $24.4 million from the SYNETIQ acquisition.
Selling, General and Administrative
United States selling, general and administrative expenses increased $43.6 million primarily due to higher employee costs relating to incentive-based compensation and headcount, higher costs relating to professional services, information technology and severance, and a $2.7 million non-income, tax related accrual, partially offset by a $3.2 million decrease in bad debt expense compared to the prior year.
International selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3.8 million primarily due to higher employee costs relating to headcount.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $5.4 million as compared to the prior year as there were more intangible assets to amortize in both segments in the second half of fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as well as due to intangible assets acquired in recent acquisitions.
Interest Expense Interest expense increased by $1.7 million as compared to the prior year period due to the $10.3 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in conjunction with the refinancing of our credit facilities in April 2021, partially offset by lower interest rates on our floating rate debt and a lower average debt balance.
Income Taxes The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 24.1% as compared to 24.2% for fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
For a discussion of fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 27, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 22, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We believe that the significant indicators of liquidity for our business are cash on hand, cash flow from operations and working capital. Our principal source of liquidity consists of cash generated by operations. Our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) provides another source of liquidity as needed.
Our cash flow is used to invest in new products and services, fund capital expenditures and working capital requirements and, coupled with borrowings under our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, is expected to be adequate to satisfy our cash requirements, including those listed below, fund future acquisitions, and repurchase shares of our common stock, if any. Our ability to fund our cash requirements will depend on our ongoing ability to generate cash from operations and to access borrowings under our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility. We believe that our cash on hand, future cash from operations, borrowings available under our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility and access to the debt and capital markets will provide adequate resources to fund our operating and financing needs for the next twelve months and beyond.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations include:
Debt Service Obligations
On June 6, 2019, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2027 (the "Notes"). We must pay interest on the Notes in cash on June 15 and December 15 of each year at a rate of 5.500% per annum. The Notes will mature on June 15, 2027. The net proceeds from the Notes offering, together with borrowings under our prior senior credit facility, were used to make a cash distribution to KAR and to pay fees and expenses related to the Separation. We were in compliance with the covenants in the indenture governing the Notes at January 2, 2022.
On April 30, 2021, we entered into a new credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and the other lenders from time to time party thereto (the "2021 Credit Agreement"). The 2021 Credit Agreement provides for, among other things: (i) a senior secured term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $650 million (the "2021 Term Loan") and (ii) a senior secured revolving credit facility with revolving commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $525 million (the "2021 Revolving Credit Facility" and, together with the 2021 Term Loan, the “2021 Credit Facility”). Borrowing availability under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility is subject to no default or event of default under the 2021 Credit Agreement having occurred at the time of borrowing. The proceeds of the 2021 Credit Facility, along with cash on hand, were used to repay in full the $774.0 million in outstanding borrowings under our prior seven-year senior secured term loan. The 2021 Credit Facility matures on April 30, 2026. As of January 2, 2022, $650.0 million was outstanding
under the 2021 Term Loan and $165.0 million was outstanding under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 10 - Debt in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information including future principal payment schedule.
Capital Expenditures
We expend capital to support our operating plan and business strategies. Capital expenditures for the years ended January 2, 2022 and December 27, 2020, were $135.6 million and $69.8 million, respectively. Capital expenditures were funded primarily from cash flow from operations. We continue to invest in our core information technology capabilities and capacity expansion. Our capital expenditures during fiscal 2021 primarily related to real estate purchases and technology-based investments, including improvements in information technology systems and infrastructure. Future capital expenditures could vary substantially based on capital project timing, the opening of new auction facilities, capital expenditures related to acquired businesses and the initiation of new information systems projects to support our business strategies.
Leases
We enter into leases in the normal course of business. We lease property, software, automobiles, trucks and trailers pursuant to operating lease agreements. Lease obligations for fiscal 2021 were funded primarily from cash flow from operations. We also lease furniture, fixtures and equipment under finance leases. See Note 11 - Leases in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information and a schedule of maturities of lease maturities. Future lease obligations would change if we entered into additional lease agreements.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we sold a property in South Carolina consisting of land and a building for $37.2 million and simultaneously leased back the same property for an initial term of 20 years. The carrying value of this property included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets within "Property and equipment, net" was $37.2 million as of January 2, 2022.
Acquisitions
On June 18, 2021, we acquired Auto Exchange, a salvage auction provider located in New Jersey. The estimated acquisition date fair value of the total consideration was $7.3 million, which consisted of $2.0 million of cash, and the fair value of contingent consideration of $5.3 million, $2.0 million of which was paid at closing. The remaining $3.3 million of contingent consideration is payable over five years subject to the achievement of certain performance targets.
On October 26, 2021, we acquired SYNETIQ, a leading integrated salvage and vehicle dismantling company in the United Kingdom. The cash purchase price for SYNETIQ, including working capital and other adjustments, was $314.2 million (£228.2 million), of which $260.2 million (£189.0 million) was paid out in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. The remaining payment of $54.0 million (£39.2 million) is contingent upon receipt of required approvals from the UK Competition and Markets Authority and is held in an escrow account. We funded the acquisition with cash on hand and $100.0 million in borrowings under our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility.
See Note 4 - Acquisitions in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on these acquisitions.
Put Option
In November 2020, we entered into an agreement which grants the owner a right during fiscal years 2023 and 2024 to cause the Company to acquire certain assets (the "Put Option") for a price based on a pre-defined formula. We measured and recognized this Put Option at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation. The estimated fair value of the Put Option at January 2, 2022 and December 27, 2020 was zero.
Working Capital
A substantial amount of our working capital is generated from the payments received for services provided. The majority of our working capital needs are short-term in nature, usually less than three months in duration. Due to the decentralized nature of the business, payments for most vehicles purchased are received at each auction and branch. Most of the financial institutions place a temporary hold on the availability of the funds deposited that generally can range up to two business days, resulting in cash in our accounts and on our balance sheet that is unavailable for use until it is made available by the various financial institutions. There are outstanding checks (book overdrafts) to sellers and vendors included in current liabilities. Because a portion of these outstanding checks for operations are drawn upon bank accounts at financial institutions other than the financial institutions that hold the cash, we cannot offset all the cash and the outstanding checks on our balance sheet. Changes in working capital vary from quarter-to-quarter as a result of the timing of collections and disbursements of funds to consignors from auctions held near period end.
Approximately $47.5 million of available cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries at January 2, 2022. We do not currently expect to incur significant additional tax liabilities if funds held by our foreign subsidiaries were to be repatriated.
Summary of Cash Flows
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Net cash flow provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 increased by $1.1 million as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in operating cash flow was primarily attributable to an increase in profitability, net of non-cash adjustments, of $132.1 million and higher incentive-based compensation accruals. These increases were partially offset by changes in accounts receivable and payable as a result of the timing of collections from customers and other parties, and disbursement of funds to vehicle consignors and vendors of $100.8 million, as well as increases in inventory and prepaid consigned vehicle charges of $30.5 million.
Net cash used by investing activities increased by $324.9 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in net cash used by investing activities was primarily due to the acquisition of the Auto Exchange and SYNETIQ businesses, and an increase in capital expenditures during fiscal 2021. See "Acquisitions" and "Capital Expenditures" above for additional information.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $68.5 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a change in book overdrafts of $62.4 million and an increase in net borrowings of $45.0 million to fund a recent acquisition, partially offset by treasury share repurchase of $34.0 million and a decrease in issuance of common stock under stock plans of $7.1 million.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
For a discussion of fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Summary of Cash Flows in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 27, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 22, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing the financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, management must often make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures at the date of the financial statements and during the reporting period. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex. Consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. Accounting measurements that management believes are most critical to the reported results of our operations and financial condition include: (1) business combinations; (2) goodwill and other intangible assets; and (3) legal proceedings and other loss contingencies.
In addition to the critical accounting estimates, there are other items used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that require estimation, but are not deemed critical. Changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our financial statements.
We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the consolidated financial statements. In cases where management estimates are used, they are based on historical experience, information from third-party professionals, and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable. In addition, our most significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and elsewhere in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Business Combinations
When we acquire businesses, we estimate and recognize the fair values of tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, identifiable intangible assets acquired, and contingent consideration, if any. The excess of the purchase consideration over the fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. The purchase accounting process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets and contingent consideration.
Critical estimates are often developed using valuation models that are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, growth rates, royalty rates, obsolescence, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates. Depending on the facts and circumstances, we may engage an independent valuation expert to assist in valuing significant assets and liabilities.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We assess goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. Important factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results; significant negative industry or economic trends; and our market valuation relative to our book value. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If we do not perform a qualitative assessment, or if we determine that a reporting unit’s fair value is not more likely than not greater than its carrying value, then we calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit using income approach (discounted cash flows) and market approach (market multiples of companies in similar lines of business).
When assessing goodwill for impairment, our decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for a reporting unit in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including the size of the reporting unit’s goodwill, the significance of the excess of the reporting unit’s estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, and the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments and the date of acquisition. If we perform a quantitative assessment of a reporting unit’s goodwill, our impairment calculations contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and apply judgment when estimating future cash flows and earnings, including projected revenue growth and operating expenses related to existing businesses, as well as utilizing valuation multiples of similar publicly traded companies and selecting an appropriate discount rate based on the estimated cost of capital that reflects the risk profile of the related business. Estimates of revenue growth and operating expenses are based on internal projections considering the reporting unit’s past performance and forecasted growth, strategic initiatives and changes in economic conditions. These estimates, as well as the selection of comparable companies and valuation multiples used in the market approach are highly subjective, and our ability to realize the future cash flows used in our fair value calculations is affected by factors such as the success of strategic initiatives, changes in economic conditions, changes in our operating performance and changes in our business strategies.
The estimated fair value of both of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying value by a substantial amount in the quantitative assessment performed in 2021. Based on our goodwill assessment, the Company has not identified a reporting unit for which the goodwill was impaired in fiscal 2021, 2020 or 2019.
As with goodwill, we assess indefinite-lived tradenames for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. When assessing indefinite-lived tradenames for impairment using a qualitative assessment, we evaluate if changes in events or circumstances have occurred that indicate that impairment may exist. If we do not perform a qualitative impairment assessment or if changes in events and circumstances indicate that a quantitative assessment should be performed, management is required to calculate the fair value of the tradename asset group. The fair value calculation includes estimates of revenue growth, which are based on past performance and internal projections for the tradename asset group's forecasted growth, and royalty rates, which are adjusted for our particular facts and circumstances. The discount rate is selected based on the estimated cost of capital that reflects the risk profile of the related business. These estimates are highly subjective, and our ability to achieve the forecasted cash flows used in our fair value calculations is affected by factors such as the success of strategic initiatives, changes in economic conditions, changes in our operating performance and changes in our business strategies.
We review other intangible assets for possible impairment whenever circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. If it is determined that the carrying amount of an other intangible asset exceeds the total amount of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows from that asset, we would recognize a loss to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Management judgment is involved in both deciding if testing for recovery is necessary and in
estimating undiscounted cash flows. Our impairment analysis is based on the current business strategy, expected growth rates and estimated future economic conditions.
In 2021, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our indefinite-lived tradenames. We did not record any impairment relating to indefinite-lived tradenames and other intangible assets in fiscal 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Legal Proceedings and Other Loss Contingencies
We are subject to the possibility of various legal proceedings and other loss contingencies, many involving litigation incidental to the business and a variety of environmental laws and regulations. Litigation and other loss contingencies are subject to inherent uncertainties and the outcomes of such matters are often very difficult to predict and generally are resolved over long periods of time. We consider the likelihood of loss or the incurrence of a liability, as well as the ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss, in determining loss contingencies. Estimating probable losses requires the analysis of multiple possible outcomes that often are dependent on the judgment about potential actions by third parties. Contingencies are recorded in the consolidated financial statements, or otherwise disclosed, in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies. We accrue for an estimated loss contingency when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Management regularly evaluates current information available to determine whether accrual amounts should be adjusted. If the amount of an actual loss is greater than the amount accrued, this could have an adverse impact on our operating results in that period.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements for a description of recently issued accounting standards.