Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled "Forward Looking Statements," the following discussion and analysis contains forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020 is presented below.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms “Company,” “Integral Ad Science Holding Corp.,” “IAS,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or similar terms refer to Integral Ad Science Holding LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries before the corporate conversion, and Integral Ad Science Holding Corp. and, where appropriate, its subsidiaries after the corporate conversion. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our corporate conversion.
Overview
We are a leading digital media quality company by revenue. With our cloud-based technology platform and the actionable insights it provides, we deliver independent measurement and verification of digital advertising across all devices, channels, and formats, including desktop, mobile, connected TV (“CTV”), social, display, and video. Our proprietary and Media Rating Council (the “MRC”) accredited Quality Impressions® metric is designed to verify that digital ads are served to a real person rather than a bot, viewable on-screen, and appear in a brand-safe and suitable environment in the correct geography.
Without an independent evaluation of digital advertising quality, brands and their agencies previously relied on a wide range of publishers and ad platforms to self-report and measure the effectiveness of campaigns without a global benchmark to understand success. We are an independent, trusted partner for buyers and sellers of digital advertising to increase accountability, transparency, and effectiveness in the market. We help advertisers optimize their ad spend and better measure consumer engagement with campaigns across platforms, while enabling publishers to improve their inventory yield and revenue.
As a leading digital media quality partner, we have deep integrations with all the major advertising and technology platforms including Amazon, Facebook, Google, Instagram, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Pinterest, Snap, Spotify, TikTok, The Trade Desk, Twitter, Xandr, Yahoo, and YouTube. Our platform uses advanced artificial intelligence (“AI”) and machine learning (“ML”) technologies to process over 100 billion daily web transactions on average. With this data, we deliver real-time insights and analytics to our global customers through our easy-to-use reporting platform, IAS Signal™, helping brands, agencies, publishers, and platform partners improve media quality and campaign performance.
Our pre-bid and post-bid verification solutions enable advertisers to measure campaign performance and value across viewability, ad fraud prevention, brand safety and suitability, and contextual targeting for ads on desktop, mobile in-app, social, and CTV platforms. Our pre-bid programmatic solution is directly integrated with DSPs to help optimize return on ad spend (“ROAS”) by directing budget to the best available inventory. With our Context Control solution, advertisers can leverage more than 300 contextual segments from the Company on a pre-bid basis to avoid undesirable content or target towards content that is more suitable for their campaigns. Additionally, our Total Visibility® offering provides marketers with actionable insights to optimize their campaign spend and drive higher yield by focusing on the most efficient and cost effective pathways. Our solutions help hundreds of publishers globally deliver high quality ad inventory that is fraud free, viewable, brand safe and suitable, and geographically targeted.
We acquired Publica, on August 9, 2021, a leading CTV ad platform that helps publishers better monetize their video programming across CTV devices and deliver true TV like experience to streaming audiences.
COVID-19
Since January 2020, an outbreak of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has evolved into a worldwide pandemic. Due to the pandemic, we have temporarily closed our offices globally, including our corporate headquarters, and are continuing to operate with substantially all staff working remotely. Management reviews operations on a continuous basis and there have been minimal interruptions in our customer facing operations to date.
We have continued to experience revenue growth year-over-year, however, during the three months ended June 30, 2020, we experienced a revenue decline due to a decline in spending from our total number of large advertising customers and publishers compared to the three months ended March 31, 2020. In the quarters subsequent to the second quarter of 2020, the underlying demand for our products has remained stable and we have experienced revenue growth.
In addition, to date, we have not experienced a material increase in customers’ cancellations, or requests for more favorable contractual terms, or concessions, and we have not experienced a significant deterioration in the collectability of our receivables or a material negative impact from our vendors and third-party service providers. Further, we have not incurred impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as result of the pandemic and are not aware of any specific events or circumstances that would require a revision to the estimates reflected in our consolidated financial statements.
We have had sufficient liquidity and capital resources to continue to meet our operating needs and service our debt.
However, the severity, magnitude and duration of the current COVID-19 pandemic continues to be uncertain, rapidly changing, and hard to predict and depends on events beyond our knowledge or control. We might not be able to predict or respond to all impacts on a timely basis to prevent near- or long-term adverse impacts to our results. As a result, we cannot predict the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Our Business Model
We generate revenue based on the volume of purchased digital ads that our solution measures. Advertisers use our digital marketing solutions for ad viewability, brand safety, optimization, context control, and ad fraud prevention. Advertisers pay us based on the total volume of impressions, which is our primary contracting model. Certain contracts with advertisers have pricing with a minimum commitment and/or fixed fee, plus overage, based on a predetermined number of impressions. We maintain an expansive set of integrations across the digital advertising ecosystem, including with leading programmatic and social platforms, which enables us to cover all key channels, formats and devices. We generate revenue from sell-side customers from contracts that are generally for twelve-month terms (with auto renew), and a fixed fee each month (tied to a total number of impressions), and an overage CPM that is applied when impressions exceed the impression threshold for a particular tier.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Innovate and Develop New Products for Key High-Growth Segments
•Programmatic. We aim to deliver transparency to programmatic ad buying via innovative solutions including contextual targeting and brand safety and suitability.
•Social. We plan to develop deeper integrations with social platforms, also known as Walled Gardens, including feed-based brand safety and suitability, to be able to deliver continued transparency to our customers.
•Connected TV. We plan to continue to expand CTV-specific verification solutions and contextual capabilities to address the fast-growing connected TV segment.
•Adjacent product expansion. We aim to expand our platforms to address new areas of verification and measurement needs for our clients.
For example, with the introduction of our pre-bid contextual capability in 2020, we not only enhanced our core verification offering, but we were also able to expand into contextual targeting addressing new needs and providing new value to our customers. Similarly, in 2019, our CTV solution expanded our presence into this important and emerging digital channel. In 2021, we acquired Publica, a leading CTV ad platform and launched our brand safety solution for in-feed video ads on TikTok.
Increase Sales Within Our Existing Customer Base
We aim to increase the use of our products among existing customers across more campaigns and impressions. Given our comprehensive product portfolio, we believe we can cross-sell additional or new solutions to provide end-to-end coverage to more clients from pre-bid viewability to post-buy verification, fraud prevention, safety, suitability, and targeting.
Acquire New Customers and Increase Market Share
Our ability to acquire new customers and increase our market share is dependent upon a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our solutions, marketing and sales to drive new business prospects and execution, client digital marketing investment adoption, new products and feature offerings, global reach and the growth of the market for digital ad verification. There is a market opportunity to provide advertisers directly or through advertising agencies with verification services, specifically around ad viewability, ad fraud prevention and brand safety and suitability. Based on a March 2021 analysis by Frost & Sullivan, we estimate the global market opportunity for our ad verification solutions to be $9.5 billion and expect it to grow at a 16.2% CAGR from 2021 to 2025. We plan to work with the top 500 global advertisers by targeting high-spend verticals and brands with a natural sensitivity for brand safety, brand suitability, and ROAS needs. We believe we will increase our market share by strengthening our work with the leading social platforms, enhancing our programmatic solutions, deriving benefit from our broad global position, and leveraging our differentiated data science and market-leading contextual capabilities.
Expand Customer Base Internationally
Our ability to expand our customer base internationally is dependent upon a number of factors, including effectively implementing our business processes and go-to-market strategy, our ability to adapt to market or cultural differences, the general competitive landscape, our ability to invest in our sales and marketing channels, the maturity and growth trajectory of our services by region and our brand awareness and perception. Global marketers are becoming increasingly cognizant of the value of sophisticated verification strategies and, as such, we believe there is growing demand for our services internationally. Our investments in international markets resulted in an 18% growth in revenue year-over-year. We believe that Latin America and the APAC region may represent substantial growth opportunities, and we are investing in developing our business in those markets by way of expanded in-market customer service investment and by leveraging our global relationships. We aim to continue to grow outside the U.S. in Europe and other established markets such as Australia and Japan, and view ourselves as best positioned to continue penetrating these markets given our market-leading global footprint.
Seasonality
We experience fluctuations in revenue that coincide with seasonal fluctuations in the digital ad spending of our customers. The global advertising industry experiences seasonal trends that affect the vast majority of participants in the digital advertising ecosystem. Most notably, advertisers have historically spent relatively more in the fourth quarter of the calendar year to coincide with the holiday shopping season, and relatively less in the first quarter. We expect seasonality trends to continue, and our ability to manage our resources in anticipation of these trends will affect our operating results. Consequently, the fourth quarter usually reflects the highest level of measurement activity and the first quarter reflects the lowest level of activity. Our revenue, cash flow, operating results and other key operating and performance metrics may vary from quarter to quarter due to the seasonal nature of our clients’ spending on advertising campaigns. While our revenue is highly re-occurring, seasonal fluctuations in ad spend may impact quarter-over-quarter results. We believe that the year-over-year comparison of results more appropriately reflects the overall performance of the business. See “Risk Factors-Certain of our operating results and financial metrics may be difficult to predict as a result of seasonality.”
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. The key business metrics are presented based on our advertising customers, as revenue from these customers represents substantially all the revenue.
The following table sets forth our key performance indicators for the periods set forth below:
Net revenue retention of advertising customers
We define net revenue retention of advertising customers as a metric to reflect the expansion or contraction of our advertising customers’ revenue by measuring the period-over-period change in trailing twelve-month revenues from customers who were also advertising customers in the prior trailing twelve-month period. As such, this metric includes the impact of any churned, or lost, advertising customers from the prior trailing twelve-month period as well as any increases or decreases in their spend, including the positive revenue impacts of selling new services to an existing advertising customer. The numerator and denominator includes revenue from all advertising customers that we served and from which we recognized revenue in the earlier of the two trailing twelve-month periods being compared. For purposes of discussing our key business metrics, we define an advertising customer as any advertiser account that spends at least $3,000 in the applicable trailing twelve month periods. We calculate our net revenue retention of advertising customers as follows:
Numerator: The total revenue earned during the current trailing twelve-month period from the cohort of advertising customers in the prior trailing twelve-month period.
Denominator: The total revenue earned during the immediately preceding trailing twelve-month period from such cohort of advertising customers in such trailing twelve-month period.
The quotient obtained from this calculation is our net revenue retention rate of advertising customers.
Our calculation of net revenue retention of advertising customers may differ from similarly titled metrics presented by other companies.
Our net revenue retention of advertising customers increased to 128% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 108% and 112% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the net revenue retention of advertising customers for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the strong revenue growth of 34% in 2021 compared to 13% revenue growth in 2020 which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In the quarters subsequent to the second quarter of 2020, the underlying demand for the Company's services stabilized.
Total advertising customers
We view the number of advertising customers as a key indicator of our scale and growth and the adoption of our platform. We determine our number of advertising customers by counting the total number of advertiser accounts who have spent at least $3,000 in the trailing twelve months. The total number of advertising customers has limitations as an operating metric as it does not reflect the product mix chosen by our advertising customers, the order frequency, or the purchasing behavior of our advertising customers. Because of these and other limitations, we consider, and you should consider, advertising customers in conjunction with our other metrics, including net revenue retention, net loss, adjusted EBITDA, and average revenue per advertising customer.
Total number of large advertising customers
Historically our revenue has been driven primarily by a subset of large advertising customers who have leveraged our platform substantially from a usage standpoint. Increasing awareness of our solutions, further developing our sales and marketing expertise and partner ecosystem, and continuing to build solutions that address the unique identity needs of the top 500 global advertisers have increased our number of large advertising customers. We determine our number of large advertising customers by counting the total number of advertising accounts who have spent at least $200,000 per year. We believe the recruitment and cultivation of large advertising customers is critical to our long-term success. Our total number of large advertising customers increased to 183 as of December 31, 2021 from 160 as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to economic recoveries and improved macroeconomic conditions since the prior year. As macroeconomic conditions fluctuate, including inflationary pressures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there is no guarantee that we will continue to see an increase of large advertising customers.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from advertisers and programmatic services offered through a demand side platform to our customers across the digital advertising platform, which is our performance obligation. Fees associated with our contracts include impression-based fees driven by impression volume and CPM.
We deliver our products and solutions to serve two customer types (i) buy-side (advertisers and agencies) and (ii) sell-side (publishers, advertising/audience networks, and supply side platforms). We generally generate revenue by charging a CPM based on the volume of purchased digital ads that we measure and optimize on behalf of these customers. There are no separate fees to access our platform. Depending on our customer needs, our contracts have (i) usage-based pricing, or (ii) monthly, quarterly or annual minimum commitments, or (iii) fixed fees. Usage based pricing is our primary contracting model. For these minimum commitment contracts, if a customer uses fewer impressions than the minimum, there are no discounts or prorating to adjust the minimum fees, and if a customer uses more impressions than the minimum, then an overage fee is applied on such usage.
We recognize revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to customers. Revenue from the cloud-based technology platform is primarily recognized based on impressions delivered to customers. An “impression” is delivered when an advertisement appears on pages viewed by users. A significant majority (i.e., over 90%) of the Company’s contracts are usage-based contracts with no substantive minimum commitments. We have certain contracts for which pricing is variable through tiered pricing arrangements or include annual base fees that do not coincide with the calendar year, requiring an estimate of the transaction price attributable to each year. The majority of our contracts have a duration of one year or less.
Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Cost of revenue consists of data center costs, hosting fees, revenue share with our DSP partners and personnel costs. Personnel costs include salaries, bonuses, equity-based compensation, and employee benefit costs, primarily attributable to our customer operations group. Our customer operations group is responsible for onboarding, integration of new clients and providing support for existing customers, including technical support for our technology platform and product offering. We allocate overhead such as rent and occupancy and information technology infrastructure charges based on headcount.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, equity-based compensation, employee benefits costs and commission costs, for our sales and marketing personnel. Sales and marketing expense also includes costs for advertising, promotional and other marketing activities. We allocate overhead such as rent and occupancy and information technology infrastructure charges based on headcount. Sales commissions are expensed as incurred.
Technology and development. Technology and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs of our engineering, product, and data sciences activities. Personnel costs including salaries, bonuses, equity-based compensation and employee benefits costs, third-party consultant costs associated with the ongoing development and maintenance of our technology platform and product offering. We allocate overhead such as rent and occupancy and information technology infrastructure charges based on headcount. Technology and development costs are expensed as incurred, except to the extent that such costs are associated with software development that qualifies for capitalization, which are then recorded as capitalized software development costs included in internal use software, net on our consolidated balance sheet.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consist of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, equity-based compensation, and employee benefits costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources, information technology, and other administrative employees. General and administrative expenses also include outside consulting, legal and accounting services, allocated facilities costs, and travel and entertainment primarily related to intra-office travel and conferences.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of depreciation and amortization expenses related to customer relationships, developed technologies, trademarks, favorable leases, equipment, leasehold improvements and other tangible and intangible assets. We depreciate and amortize our assets in accordance with our accounting policies. Maintenance and repairs, which do not extend the useful life of the respective assets, are charged to expense as incurred. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives or using an accelerated method. Useful lives of intangible assets range from four years to fifteen years.
Facility exit costs. Facility exit costs were incurred in connection with the sublease of our New York corporate headquarters.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net. Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments on our outstanding borrowings under our Prior Credit Facility, New Credit Facility and amortization of related debt issuance costs net of interest income.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was incurred in connection with the repayment of outstanding debt under our Prior Credit Agreement.
Benefit from income taxes
Benefit from income taxes. The benefit from income taxes resulted primarily from deferred tax benefits resulting from the current period losses in the U.S.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented. For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our IPO prospectus, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 29, 2021.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $82.9 million, or 34%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a significant increase in our programmatic revenue of $47.3 million, or 54%, attributable to growth in volume of impressions of 25% and an increase of 20% in average CPMs. The increase in average CPMs, was attributable to the launch of our Context Control solution in early 2020. Revenue from our advertiser direct customers increased $21.8 million, or 17%, reflecting volume growth in volume of impressions of 31% as well as the acquisition of a number of new large customers. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of 10% in average CPMs due to changes in mix from open web towards social platforms. Revenue from our supply side customers increased $13.8 million, or 47%, primarily due to the acquisition of Publica.
Operating expenses
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue increased by $14.1 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by a $5.9 million increase in data center and hosting fees resulting from overall revenue growth and migration of data centers to Amazon Web Services (“AWS”) cloud and an increase of $11.8 million in revenue share to our DSP partners on account of our growth in programmatic revenue. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in compensation expense of $2.6 million, a decrease in restructuring costs of $0.3 million, and a decrease in allocated overhead expense of $0.6 million as a result of workforce reductions in 2020.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $20.8 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $16.1 million of stock-based compensation expense, which we did not incur in the 2020 fiscal year, an increase of $2.4 million in advertising and marketing related expenses, and increases of $3.2 million in compensation expenses attributable to higher bonuses and commissions due to higher revenue growth. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of restructuring costs of $0.7 million, and a decrease in allocated overhead expense of $0.4 million as a result of workforce reductions in 2020.
Technology and development. Technology and development expenses increased by $18.0 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $11.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, which we did not incur in the 2020 fiscal year, increase in restructuring expense of $1.3 million due to termination of certain employees, increases of $5.7 million for compensation expenses and increase in server, hosting and license fees of $2.8 million to support our growth, and $1.0 million in professional services. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.9 million incurred in the prior period related to purchase of certain technology and an increase in internally developed costs capitalized of $2.6 million.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $45.9 million, or 138%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $31.4 million of stock-based compensation expense, which we did not incur in the 2020 fiscal year, increase in professional fees of $2.6 million for IPO related assistance and audit and tax services, increase of $2.6 million insurance costs related to public company costs, increase in recruiting and training costs of $0.8 million, increase in compensation expenses of $6.9 million to support the Company’s growth and public company infrastructure, costs of $2.4 million related to the Publica and Context acquisitions, an increase in $0.6 million caused due to lower allocation of overhead costs, an increase of $0.4 million related to software licenses and an increase of $0.8 million in reserves for bad debts. These increases were partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in professional and consultant fees incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 for automation and process improvement initiatives.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $3.4 million, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease results from decreased depreciation of our property and equipment of $1.2 million and decreased amortization of our intangible assets of $5.5 million, resulting from the use of the accelerated method to amortize the asset. These decreases were partially offset by increased amortization expense related to our internal-use software of $3.2 million.
Facility exit costs. Facility exit costs increased by $6.6 million, or 100%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss of $6.6 million was incurred in connection with the exit of the New York office that served as our corporate headquarters until December 2021 partially offset by sublease income to be received in future periods.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net. Interest expense decreased by $12.3 million, or 39%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to reduced PIK interest expense on the Term Loan of $3.0 million and decreased interest on our debt instruments by $9.3 million due to a reduction in interest rates caused by the COVID-19 pandemic as well as benefits of a lower interest rate on our New Credit Facility.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt increased by $3.7 million, or 100%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss was incurred in connection with the repayment of outstanding debt under our Prior Credit Agreement of $3.7 million.
Benefit from income taxes
Benefit from income taxes. Benefit from income taxes decreased by $9.5 million, or 73%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The benefit from income taxes decreased primarily on account of non-deductible expenses relating to stock-based compensation expenses that are included in the current period losses in the U.S.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use supplemental measures of our performance, which are derived from our consolidated financial information, but which are not presented in our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary financial performance measure used by management to evaluate our business and monitor ongoing results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as loss before depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, interest expense, benefit from income taxes, acquisition, restructuring and integration costs, IPO readiness costs and other one-time, non-recurring costs. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents the adjusted EBITDA for the applicable period divided by the revenue for that period presented in accordance with GAAP.
We use non-GAAP financial measures to supplement financial information presented on a GAAP basis. We believe that excluding certain items from our GAAP results allows management to better understand our consolidated financial performance from period to period and better project our future consolidated financial performance as forecasts are developed at a level of detail different from that used to prepare GAAP-based financial measures. Moreover, we believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide our shareholders with useful information to help them evaluate our operating results by facilitating an enhanced understanding of our operating performance and enabling them to make more meaningful period-to-period comparisons. Although we believe these measures are useful to investors and analysts for the same reasons they are useful to management, as discussed below, these measures are not a substitute for, or superior to, U.S. GAAP financial measures or disclosures. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
The non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered as indicators of performance in isolation from or as a substitute for net loss prepared in accordance with GAAP and should be read only in conjunction with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. Reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net loss, is presented below. We encourage you to review the reconciliations in conjunction with the presentation of the non GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented. In future fiscal periods, we may exclude such items and may incur income and expenses similar to these excluded items.
Adjusted EBITDA
(1) Other non-recurring, non-cash charges include loss on extinguishment of debt of $3.7 million, facility exit costs of $6.6 million and asset impairments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $73.2 million, which was held for working capital purposes, as well as the available balance of our New Revolver, defined below.
We have financed our operations primarily through debt financing. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, our New Revolver and cash provided by operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure and cash needs for the next twelve months and beyond. We also expect our operating cash flows to improve as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings, the continuing market acceptance of our products. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, it could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.
Some of our customers pay in advance for subscriptions, a portion of which is recorded as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is later recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $0.2 million, all of which was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next twelve months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Credit Facilities
On July 19, 2018, we entered into the Prior Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders, comprised of the $325.0 million Term Loan Facility and the $25.0 million Revolving Credit Facility, with a maturity date of July 19, 2024 and a maturity date of July 19, 2023, respectively. Pursuant to the Incremental Facility Assumption Agreement No. 1, dated as of November 19, 2019, the Term Loan Facility was increased to $345.0 million. As of December 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021, we had $345.0 million outstanding under our Term Loan Facility. As explained below, on September 29, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding balances and terminated the Prior Credit Agreement.
In addition to the cash pay interest, the Prior Credit Agreement included Paid in Kind ("PIK") interest at a rate of 1.25% per annum. All PIK interest due was paid and terminated with the Prior Credit Agreement by capitalizing such interest and adding such applicable PIK interest to the principal amount of the then outstanding Term Loan.
On September 29, 2021, we entered into a new credit agreement with various lenders (the “New Credit Agreement”), which provides for an initial $300.0 million in commitments for revolving credit loans (the “New Revolver”), which amount may be increased or decreased under specific circumstances, with a $30.0 million letter of credit sublimit and a $100.0 million alternative currency sublimit. The New Revolver matures in 2026. In addition, the New Credit Agreement provides for the ability to request incremental term loan facilities, in a minimum amount of $5.0 million for each facility. Borrowings under to the New Credit Agreement may be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including for acquisitions permitted under the New Credit Agreement.
The interest rates applicable to revolving borrowings under the New Credit Agreement are, at our option, either (i) in the case of U.S. dollar loans, (x) a base rate, which is equal to the greater of (a) the Prime Rate, (b) the Federal Funds Effective Rate plus 0.5%, and (c) the Adjusted LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.0%) for a one month Interest Period (each term as defined in the New Credit Agreement) plus 1%, or (y) the Adjusted LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.0%) equal to the LIBOR (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) for the applicable Interest Period multiplied by the Statutory Reserve Rate (each term as defined in the New Credit Agreement) or (ii) in the case of RFR Loans (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) denominated in sterling or euro, (x) the applicable RFR (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) or (y) the applicable Term RFR (as defined in the New Credit Agreement), plus in the case of each of clauses (i) and (ii), the Applicable Rate (as defined in the New Credit Agreement). The Applicable Rate (i) for base rate loans range from 0.75% to 1.50% per annum, (ii) for LIBOR loans range from 1.75% to 2.50% per annum, (iii) for RFR Loans denominated in sterling range from 1.7826% to 2.5326%, and (iv) for RFR Loans denominated in euro range from 1.7965% to 2.5456%, in each case, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the New Credit Agreement). Base rate borrowings may only be made in dollars. A commitment fee during the term of the New Credit Agreement ranging from 0.20% to 0.35% per annum of the average daily undrawn portion of the revolving commitments based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the New Credit Agreement). The interest rate at December 31, 2021 was 2.2%.
The New Credit Agreement contains covenants requiring certain financial information to be submitted quarterly and annually. In addition, we are also required to comply with certain financial covenants such as maintaining a Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) of 3.50:1.00 or lower and maintaining a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) of 2.50 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants contained in the New Credit Agreement. Based upon current facts and circumstances, we believe existing cash coupled with the cash flows generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our cash needs and comply with covenants.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under operating leases for office space, our purchase commitments related to hosting and data services and repayments of long-term debt. We lease office space under operating leases, which expire on various dates through May 2027 and the total noncancellable payments under these leases were $32.4 million as of December 31, 2021, $7.0 million of which will be paid within the next 12 months and $25.4 million thereafter. Total noncancelable rentals under subleases were $13.8 million as of December 31, 2021, $1.6 million will be received in the next 12 months and $12.2 million thereafter. Total noncancelable purchase commitments related to hosting services as of December 31, 2021 were $119.5 million for periods through 2026, of which $21.3 million are committed for the next 12 months and $98.2 million thereafter. As of December 31, 2021, we had short-term debt of $2.0 million. Information about our long-term debt is provided above.
Cash Flows
The table below presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $63.6 million, resulting from a net loss of $52.4 million partially offset by adjustments for non-cash expenses of depreciation and amortization of $62.3 million, stock-based compensation of $58.8 million, a loss on extinguishment of debt of $3.7 million, facility exit costs of $6.5 million, amortization of debt issuance costs of $1.1 million, bad debt expense of $3.0 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.4 million, and a loss on disposal of assets of $0.2 million, partially offset by a decrease in working capital of $10.4 million, and a deferred tax provision of $9.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $33.9 million, resulting from a net loss of $32.4 million partially offset by adjustments for non-cash expenses of depreciation and amortization of $65.7 million, a deferred tax benefit of $15.3 million, cash provided by changes in working capital of $7.9 million and other non-cash adjustments of $8.0 million.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $200.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting payment for the acquisition of Publica, net of acquired cash of $166.2 million, payment for the acquisition of Context, net of acquired cash of $20.2 million, capitalized costs relating to our internal use software of $12.7 million and purchase of property and equipment of $1.0 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting capitalized costs relating to our internal use software of $9.0 million and purchase of property and equipment of $0.6 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $160.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting proceeds from the IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions of $281.6 million, issuance of new debt of $245.0 million, and $1.1 million in stock options exercised. This was offset by a repayment of outstanding debt of $356.4 million, $1.2 million in common stock repurchases, $7.2 million in deferred offering costs, payments for debt issuance costs of $2.3 million and $0.3 million in principal payment on our capital leases.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting primarily of payments on capital lease obligations of $1.5 million and unit repurchases of $0.2 million.
Impact of Inflation
While inflation may impact our revenues and costs of revenues, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. However, there can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future, including by heightened levels of inflation experienced globally as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss, or Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting estimates involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 2 - “Basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted the new revenue recognition standard Accounting Standards Codification (ASC 606) effective January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective method for all contracts not completed as of the date of adoption. The core principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received for those goods and services. Based on the terms of our contracts with customers and consistent with prior practice, we recognize revenue upon invoicing for a large majority of our contracts. Additionally, the performance obligations identified are consistent with prior years. As such, the adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. Refer to Note 2 “Basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies-(u) Recently adopted accounting pronouncements” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our revenue recognition policies under the new standard.
We derive revenue primarily from advertisers and programmatic services offered through a demand side platform delivered to customers across the digital advertising platform, which is our performance obligation. Fees associated with our contracts include impression-based fees driven by impression volume and CPM. The solutions are designed to serve both the buy-side and the sell-side of digital ad transactions.
The adoption of ASC 606 in 2019 led us to evaluate all contracts not completed as of January 1, 2019. Part of that assessment is to calculate the cumulative effect of adopting the new revenue recognition standard. A majority of our contracts are usage based or have commitments that refresh quarterly and monthly. We have a small population of contracts for which pricing is variable through tiered pricing arrangements, or include annual base fees that do not coincide with the calendar year, requiring an estimate of the transaction price attributable to each year. We calculated the transaction price related to these contracts to determine the cumulative effect of adoption as of January 1, 2019, and recorded the adjustment, net of tax, to retained earnings and deferred revenue.
We evaluate arrangements with our customers where the customer purchases our services through a demand side platform to determine if such revenue should be reported on a gross or net basis. In these arrangements, the demand side platform collects the fee on our behalf for the purchase of advertising inventory on an exchange. We are primarily responsible for providing these services directly to the customer and have latitude in establishing the sales price with the customers. As a result, we record revenue for the gross amounts paid by the customers for these services and records the amounts retained by the demand side platforms as a cost of revenue.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets
We record goodwill as the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill, at a minimum, on an annual basis in the fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit’s carrying amount, including goodwill, to its fair value. For purposes of this analysis, we consider the Company to be a single reporting unit. We will first perform a qualitative analysis (“Step Zero”) to determine if the existence of events or circumstances would lead to a conclusion that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value. If after this assessment it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, then a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis is performed which is referred to as “Step 1”. Depending upon the results of that analysis, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, goodwill may be written down and impairment expense is recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we conducted a Step Zero analysis and concluded that there were no impairment indicators. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as well as whenever events or circumstances change that would make it more likely than not that an impairment may have occurred. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Our intangible assets consist of developed technology, customer relationships, favorable leases, and trademarks. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis or using an accelerated method over their estimated useful lives. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on significant judgments and estimates made by management. Such estimates are based on valuation techniques, which require forecasting of future cash flows and developing other assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies, and also include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows earned from the product-related technology and discount rates applied in determining the present value of those cash flows. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
All long-lived assets are subject to review for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is assessed based on the future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized. Any impairment loss, if indicated, is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated fair value and is recognized as a reduction in the carrying amount of the asset.
As of December 31, 2021, there were no events or changes in circumstances to indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable.
Business Combinations
Upon acquisition of an entity or group of assets, we determine if the transaction is a business combination, which is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, once control of a business is established, the assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributed to noncontrolling interests, are recorded at fair value. We use our best estimate and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. One of the most significant estimates relates to the determination of the fair value of these assets and liabilities. The determination of the fair values is based on estimates and judgments made by us. We estimate fair value based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Additionally, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. Measurement period adjustments are reflected at the time identified, up through the conclusion of the measurement period, which is the time at which all information for determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is received, and is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date. We may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. If outside of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded in our statement of operations.
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the modified Black-Scholes pricing model and Monte Carlo simulation. We estimated its future stock price volatility based upon observed option-implied volatilities for a group of peer companies. Management believes this is the best estimate of the expected volatility over the weighted-average expected term of its option grants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on U.S. treasury issues with terms approximately equal to the expected term of the option. We currently have no history or expectation of paying cash dividends on common stock. We use the simplified method to calculate the expected term for its options.
For awards that include performance conditions, we recognize the associated expense when the performance is considered to be probable. For awards that contain market conditions (i.e., achievement of a specified equity return or stock price), we value such awards on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
We have granted time-based service options under our 2018 Unit Option Plan (the “2018 Plan”). The time- based options vest over four years with 25% vesting after 12 months and an additional 6.25% vesting at the end of each successive quarter thereafter. In connection with the IPO, the 2018 Plan was amended and restated to reflect the Company’s conversion to a C-Corp. In addition, the repurchase feature included in the 2018 Plan was removed. As a result of this adjustment, a grant date as of the closing of our IPO was established and we recognized $18.00 as the grant date fair value of these awards, the per share price to the public in the IPO. Accordingly, in the period ended June 30, 2021, we recognized $38,148 of compensation expense upon the Company’s IPO relating to the time-based service options.
Concurrent with the effectiveness of the Company’s IPO, the return target options were also modified. Vesting of the new return target options was based upon a sale of shares by Vista following the IPO resulting in Vista realizing a cash return on its investment equaling or exceeding $1.17 billion. As the return multiple and vesting conditions associated with the return target options were also modified, we fair valued the options using a Monte Carlo simulation model which resulted in a fair value of $36,395 on the modification date. As of December 31, 2021, the condition relating to Vista’s cash return was not deemed probable and therefore, no stock-based compensation expense was recognized relating to the return target options.
In addition to the above awards, we also issued Top-Up Grants to certain executives and RSUs to employees which are recognized over the vesting period.
In July 2021, we offered employees with LTIP grants the opportunity to convert their cash award into RSUs. The conversion was at a 10% premium to the cash value of the award. The RSUs issued in exchange for LTIP grants vest 50% each year and become fully vested after two years of service. Certain employees did not convert their cash award to RSUs and to cover those cash awards, we adopted the Amended and Restated Long-Term Incentive Plan to modify the vesting conditions to include vesting upon the occurrence of a sell down event by Vista following the IPO resulting in Vista realizing a cash return on its investment equaling or exceeding $1.17 billion. As of December 31, 2021, since the sell down event was not deemed probable, no stock-based compensation expense was recognized relating to these LTIP cash awards.
Income Taxes
We are subject to U.S. federal, state, and local income taxation on our income. We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach, which requires estimates of taxes payable or refunds for the current period and estimates of deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the anticipated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the corresponding amounts used for income tax purposes. Current and deferred income tax assets and liabilities are based on provisions of the enacted income tax laws and are measured using the enacted income tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the future tax events are expected to reverse. The effects of future changes in income tax laws or rates are not anticipated. The income tax provision is comprised of the current income tax expense and the change in deferred income tax assets and liabilities.
The portion of any deferred tax asset for which it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized is offset by recording a valuation allowance. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
The tax effects of an uncertain tax position (“UTP”) taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns are recognized only if it is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on its technical merits as of the reporting date. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than a 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize estimated interest and penalties related to UTPs in income tax expense.
We recognize the resolution of an UTP in the period when it is effectively settled. Previously recognized tax positions are derecognized in the first period in which it is no longer more likely than not that the tax position would be sustained upon examination.
We evaluated all potential uncertain tax positions and have established a UTP on the Research and Development Tax Credit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see Note 2 “Basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies-(u) Recently adopted accounting pronouncements” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.