Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on October 22, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,561,747, which consists of interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $16,940, change in fair value of warrants $2,913,100, interest income from the bank of $176 and transactions costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $364,321, offset by formation and operating costs of $1,004,148.
For the period from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,759, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 2, 2021, we completed the IPO of 13,800,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $138,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our IPO, we completed the sale of 4,835,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $4,835,000.
Following our IPO, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $138,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $8,359,325 in IPO related costs, including $2,760,000 of underwriting fees, $4,830,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $769,325 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $868,746. The net income of $1,561,747 was affected by noncash charges related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability of $2,913,100, transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $364,321 and interest earned on investments held in trust account of $16,940. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $135,226 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $3,541. The net loss of $5,759 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,218 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $138,016,940 (including approximately $16,940 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $458,388. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices,
plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we will repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a business combination. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
As a result of the above, in connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB’s ASU 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the liquidity condition and date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through approximately one year from the date of filing of this report. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, off-balance sheet arrangements or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on February 25, 2021, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $4,830,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for the warrants issued as part of the units in the IPO and Private Placement Warrants (together the “Warrants”) as liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The assessment considers whether the Warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of Warrant issuance and as of each subsequent reporting period while the Warrants are outstanding. Because the Company does not control the occurrence of events, such as a tender offer or exchange, that may trigger cash settlement of the Warrants where not all of the shareholders also receive cash, the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, as such, the Warrants must be recorded as a derivative liability. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date, with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations.
The public warrants are publicly traded and as such are classified as Level 1 and no longer require a valuation. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants is determined using Level 2 inputs.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements. See Note 2 of the financial statements.