Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and the notes thereto and other information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
iBio, Inc. (“we”, “us”, “our”, “iBio”, “iBio, Inc” or the “Company”) is a developer of next-generation biopharmaceuticals using our proprietary Artificial Intelligence (“AI”)-Driven Discovery Platform and FastPharming® Manufacturing System. We are focusing our technologies on the research and development of novel products at its Drug Discovery Center in California. We are currently using our FastPharming Manufacturing System (“FastPharming” or the “FastPharming
System”) and GlycaneeringSM Technologies to develop our portfolio of proprietary biologic drug candidates. We also offer contract development and manufacturing services from its 130,000 square foot cGMP facility in Texas.
We operate in two segments: (i) Biopharmaceuticals; its large molecule discovery, development, and licensing activities, and (ii) Bioprocessing; its contract development and manufacturing services for recombinant proteins.
On September 19, 2022, we acquired substantially all of the assets of RubrYc Therapeutics, Inc. (“RubrYc”) which included:
● AI Drug Discovery Platform: A patented system that uses artificial intelligence (“AI”) to design 3D models of subdominant and conformational epitopes to facilitate the creation of antibody drug candidates against previously hard-to-target tumors.
● Previously Licensed Candidates: All rights, with no future milestone payments or royalty obligations, to IBIO-101, an IL-2 sparing anti-CD25 antibody for depletion of regulatory T cells, along with the jointly discovered monoclonal antibody (“Target 6”) that was identified in Q2 FY2022 using the Discovery Engine.
● New Therapeutic Candidates: Three immuno-oncology candidates, plus a partnership-ready PD-1 agonist for serious autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus and multiple sclerosis.
We expect the addition of new therapeutic candidates and an AI-driven drug discovery platform for difficult to treat tumors to strengthen its Biopharmaceutical discovery and development capabilities. Meanwhile, IBIO-101 remains our lead immuno-oncology asset.
For our Bioprocessing area, the FastPharming System is our proprietary approach to recombinant protein production using plants. It uses hydroponically grown Nicotiana benthamiana (a relative of the tobacco plant), novel expression vectors, and transient transfection at scale to produce complex proteins emerging from our own development pipeline or for our clients.
In an effort to focus our resources on the promising new AI discovery platform and entering the clinic with our lead compounds, we have initiated a review of potential options to accelerate our transformation into a platform drug discovery and development company while extending our cash runway. These include a review of the pipeline, asset sales or licenses,
partnerships, portfolio decisions, cost reductions, and efforts to raise additional capital, including non-dilutive additions of capital.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Gross revenue for 2022 and 2021 was approximately $2.4 million and $2.4 million, respectively, an increase of 1%. The increase is primarily attributable to the recognition of the Fraunhofer license fee of $1.8 million offset by a decrease in services revenue. which is based on the timing of the completion of deliverables for individual customers. We do not have recurring contracts, so revenue can be highly variable year to year. In 2022, we had a number of small customers with task and milestones completed. In 2021, we entered into a Master Manufacturing Services and Supply Agreement (“MSA”) with Lung Bio to produce recombinant human collagen-based bioinks for 3D-bioprinted organ transplants. Revenue earned from the MSA totaled $0.9 million. This MSA has been terminated. Additionally in 2021, revenue earned from four other third-party customers totaled $1.5 million.
Significant year-over-year variability is commonplace for early-stage pharma services companies, given the relatively small number of contracts and timing of revenue recognition. Based upon the current outlook, iBio expects a sequential decline in revenue during the fiscal 2023 compared to fiscal 2022.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for 2022 and 2021 were approximately $17.7 million and $10.0 million, respectively, an increase of $7.7 million or 77%. The increase primarily related to the ramp up of activities related to our internal pipeline including an increase in research and development personnel costs of approximately $2.7 million, an increase in consulting fees and outside services of $3.4 million, an increase in lab consumables of $0.2M, and other various expense increases. While iBio expects R&D will continue to grow in fiscal 2023, it anticipates a slower growth rate compared to fiscal 2022.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for 2022 and 2021 were approximately $34.1 million and $22.0 million, respectively, an increase of $12.1 million or 55%. General and administrative expenses principally include officer and employee salaries and benefits, depreciation and amortization, professional fees, facility repairs and maintenance, rent, utilities, consulting services, operational costs and other costs associated with being a publicly traded company. The increase is primarily attributable to additional personnel costs of $7.3 million, impairment of our equity investment in RubrYc of $1.8 million, facility expenses including repair and maintenance of $1.3 million, and various expense increases.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for 2022 and 2021 was ($0.6) million and $7.9 million, a decrease of $8.5 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to the receipt of settlement Income of $10.2 million related to the Fraunhofer IP settlement in fiscal year 2021 offset by lower interest expense due to the purchase of the Bryan Site.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
This represents the share of the loss in iBio CDMO for the Eastern Affiliate in 2022 and 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We held cash, cash equivalents and investments in debt securities of $39.5 million as of June 30, 2022. Based on current trends and activities, there is significant doubt that we can continue as a going concern beyond Q3 of Fiscal 2023. We are currently evaluating a number of potential options to expand our cash runway, the implementation of which will impact
our liquidity. Potential options being considered to increase liquidity include lowering our expenses through decreasing spending and focusing product development on a select number of product candidates, the sale or out-licensing of certain product candidates or parts of the business, raising money from capital markets, grant revenue or collaborations, or a combination thereof. Regardless of whether we are able to reduce our burn rate or sell or out-licensing certain assets or parts of the business, we will need to raise additional capital in order to fully execute our longer-term business plan. We believe based on input from expert advisors, that it is likely we will be able to implement one or more options that will extend our cash runway for 12 months or more from the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in implementing any of the options that we are evaluating.
On October 11, 2022, we and Woodforest entered into the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement pursuant to which the Credit Agreement was amended to: (i) include a payment of $5,500,000 of the outstanding principal balance owed under the Credit Agreement on the date of the amendment, (ii) include a payment of $5,100,000 of the outstanding principal balance owed under the Credit Agreement within two (2) business days upon our receipt of such amount owed to us by Fraunhofer as part of our legal settlement with them (see Item 3 - Legal Proceedings for more information), (iii) include principal payments of $250,000 per month in debt amortization for a 6 month period commencing the date of the amendment through March 2023, (iv) include an amendment fee of $22,375 and all costs and expenses, (v) require delivery of a report detailing cash flow expenditures every two (2) weeks for the period prior to the delivery of the last report and a monthly 12-month forecast (vi) reduce the liquidity covenant in the Guaranty (as defined in the Credit Agreement) from $10 million to $7.5 million with the ability to lower the liquidity covenant to $5.0 million upon the occurrence of a specific milestone in the Credit Agreement, and (vii) change the annual filing requirement solely for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, such that the filing is acceptable with or without a “going concern” designation. In addition, Woodforest cancelled the irrevocable letter of credit issued by JPMorgan Chase Bank upon closing of the amendment. If we fail to successfully extend our cash runway via strategic options or other alternatives as described we would be in violation of the liquidity covenant on December 31, 2022.
Between July 25, 2022, and August 17, 2022, Cantor Fitzgerald sold as sales agent pursuant to the Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement, dated as of November 25, 2020, that we entered into, 175,973 post reverse split shares of common stock. We received net proceeds of approximately $1.2 million (see Note 17 Stockholders’ Equity for more detail).
On May 12, 2022, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with a certain accredited investor for the issuance and sale of 1,000 shares of Series 2022 Convertible Preferred Stock, $0.001 par value per share (the “Preferred Stock”), at a price of $0.27 per share. The Preferred Stock permitted the holder to vote at the Special Meeting, on the Reverse Stock Split proposal, with the holders of the common stock as a single class, with each share of Preferred Stock being entitled to 200,000 votes per share, provided that any votes cast by the Preferred Stock with respect to the Proposal must be voted in the same proportion as the aggregate shares of common stock are voted on the Proposal. Pursuant to the terms of the preferred stock, our Board of Directors converted the Preferred Stock to common stock at a conversion ratio of 1:1 on July 19, 2022.
On November 3, 2021, as part of consideration for the purchase of the Bryan site and other rights, iBio issued a warrant to purchase 51,583 post reverse split shares of the Common Stock at an exercise price of $33.25 post reverse split per share to affiliates of Eastern Capital Limited. The Warrant expires October 10, 2026, is exercisable immediately, provides for a cashless exercise at any time and automatic cashless exercise on the expiration date if on such date the exercise price of
the Warrant exceeds its fair market value as determined in accordance with the terms of the Warrant and adjustments in the case of stock dividends and stock splits.
Also, as part of the consideration for the purchase of the Bryan site and other rights, iBio entered into a $22,375,000 Senior Secured Term Loan with Woodforest National Bank. The loan bears interest at 3.25% and matures November 3, 2023.
As discussed above, the Company completed a reverse stock split at a ratio of one-for-twenty five (1 : 25) shares of the Company's common stock. The effective date of the reverse stock split was October 7, 2022. All share and per share amounts of common stock presented have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the one-for-twenty five reverse stock split.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
In Fiscal 2022, net cash used in operating activities was ($37.5) million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of ($30.1) million in Fiscal 2021. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by an increase of approximately $13.6 million for cash operating expenses to support our business strategy offset primarily by the positive impact in Fiscal 2022 of $6 million in cash received related to the Fraunhofer settlement and license agreements.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
In Fiscal 2022, net cash used in investing activities was ($5.1) million, which primarily consisted of investments in Purchase of RubrYc equity and Additions to Intangible Assets related to our license of IBIO-101 offset by the net redemption of debt securities. In Fiscal 2021, our net cash used in investing activities was $ (26.5) million, which primarily consisted of the purchase of debt securities and the purchase of fixed assets.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
In Fiscal 2022, net cash provided by financing activities was ($6.1) million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $78.8 million in Fiscal 2021. Net cash spent by financing activities in 2022 related to the purchase of the Bryan site while the net cash funds generated in 2021 was primarily the result of the issuance of common stock.
Funding Requirements
We have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our spin-off from Integrated BioPharma in August 2008. As of June 30, 2022, our accumulated deficit was approximately ($223.9) million, and we used approximately ($48.7) million of net cash in Fiscal 2022.
We plan to fund our future business operations using cash on hand, through proceeds realized in connection with the commercialization of our technologies and proprietary products, license and collaboration arrangements and the operation of iBio CDMO, through the collection or proceeds from our license agreement with Fraunhofer, through potential proceeds from the sale or out-licensing of assets, and through proceeds from the sale of additional equity or other securities. We cannot be certain that such funding will be available on favorable terms or available at all. Based on current trends and activities, there is significant doubt that iBio can continue as a going concern beyond Q3 of Fiscal 2023. If we fail to successfully extend our cash runway via strategic options or other alternatives as described we would be in violation of the liquidity covenant on December 31, 2022. To the extent that the Company raises additional funds by issuing equity securities, its stockholders may experience significant dilution. If we are unable to raise funds when required or on favorable terms, this assumption may no longer be operative, and we may have to: a) significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the product application and/or commercialization of our proprietary technologies; b) seek collaborators for our technology and product candidates on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available; c) relinquish or otherwise dispose of rights to technologies, product candidates, or products that we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize; or d) possibly cease operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of our ongoing business, we do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities (SPEs), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually limited purposes. As of June 30, 2022, we were not involved in any SPE transactions.
Critical Accounting Estimates
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Our consolidated financial statements are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). All applicable U.S. GAAP accounting standards effective as of June 30, 2022, have been taken into consideration in preparing the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Some of those estimates are subjective and complex, and, consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. The following accounting policies and estimates have been highlighted as significant because changes to certain judgments and assumptions inherent in these policies could affect our consolidated financial statements:
● valuation of intellectual property;
● revenue recognition;
● legal and contractual contingencies;
● research and development expenses; and
● share-based compensation expenses.
We base our estimates, to the extent possible, on historical experience. Historical information is modified as appropriate based on current business factors and various assumptions that we believe are necessary to form a basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis and make changes when necessary. Actual results could differ from our estimates. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies and estimates.