ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion also contains forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are an automated global electronic broker. We custody and service accounts for hedge and mutual funds, ETFs, registered investment advisers, proprietary trading groups, introducing brokers and individual investors. We specialize in routing orders and executing and processing trades in stocks, options, futures, forex, bonds, mutual funds, ETFs, metals and cryptocurrencies on more than 150 electronic exchanges and market centers in 33 countries and 25 currencies seamlessly around the world.
As an electronic broker, we execute, clear and settle trades globally for both institutional and individual customers. Capitalizing on our proprietary technology, our systems provide our customers with the capability to monitor multiple markets around the world simultaneously and to execute trades electronically in these markets at a low cost, in multiple products and currencies from a single trading account. The ever-growing complexity of multiple market centers across diverse geographies provides us with ongoing opportunities to build and continuously adapt our order routing software to secure excellent execution prices.
Since our inception in 1977, we have focused on developing proprietary software to automate broker-dealer functions. The proliferation of electronic exchanges and market centers since the early 1990s has allowed us to integrate our software with an increasing number of trading venues, creating one automatically functioning, computerized platform that requires minimal human intervention.
Our customer base is diverse with respect to geography and segments. Currently, approximately 77% of our customers reside outside the U.S. in over 200 countries and territories, and over 50% of new customers come from outside the U.S. Approximately 62% of our customers’ equity is in institutional accounts such as hedge funds, financial advisors, proprietary trading desks and introducing brokers. Specialized products and services that we have developed successfully attract these accounts. For example, we offer prime brokerage services, including financing and securities lending, to hedge funds; our model portfolio technology and automated share allocation and rebalancing tools are particularly attractive to financial advisors; and our trading platform, global access and low pricing attract introducing brokers.
Business Environment
In 2021, world equities markets ended the year mixed. While the U.S., the United Kingdom, Europe and Australia saw double-digit gains in their major equity market indexes, Asian markets either experienced small gains or fell. Despite this varied backdrop, there continues to be worldwide interest in the financial markets. Growing numbers of individuals, especially those newly attracted to investing, turned to the markets with increased awareness, due to the interconnectedness of investors to each other and to the markets, as they sought to earn higher yields on their assets in zero and negative-interest rate environments.
The following is a summary of the key economic drivers that affect our business and how they compared to the prior year:
Global trading volumes. According to industry data, average daily volume in U.S. exchange-listed equity-based options increased by 34%, U.S. futures by 3%, and in U.S. listed cash equities volume by 5%. These increases followed a very active 2020.
Volumes were impacted positively by large numbers of investors, particularly individuals, participating in securities markets throughout the year. Market volatility decreased moderately over the course of 2021, while average volatility for the year was down substantially from a highly volatile, pandemic-impacted 2020. Despite lower volatility, higher equities, futures and options volumes demonstrated the continuing impact of more participants in the financial markets and their increasing comfort with taking part in the investment arena.
Note that while U.S. options, futures and cash equities volumes are readily comparable measures, they reflect most but not all of the global volumes that generate our commission revenue. See “Trading Volumes and Customer Statistics” below in this Item 7 for additional details regarding our trade volumes, contract and share volumes, and customer statistics.
Volatility. U.S. market volatility, as measured by the average Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (“VIX®”), fell markedly from 29 in 2020 to 20 in 2021. While last year’s unusual COVID-19 pandemic-induced spike in market volatility to over 30 has moderated, it remains elevated compared to pre-pandemic levels.
In general, higher volatility improves our performance because it correlates with customer trading activity across product types. Various market cross-currents led to mixed results across our major product types: customer options and stock volumes were up 46% and 131%, respectively, while futures and foreign exchange volumes declined 7% and 30%, respectively, compared to 2020. Trading was active as investors continued to capitalize on the opportunities to participate in the markets, seeking higher yields on their investments in the zero or negative interest rate environments that existed globally in 2021. These trends led to an influx of new accounts and increases in trading volume, particularly in equities.
Interest Rates. The U.S. Federal Reserve’s target federal funds rate range in the current quarter remained at zero to 0.25%, similar to rates in many other currencies, with the exception of those where rates are negative. U.S. rates also continued to exhibit a relatively flat yield curve. Both of these factors present us with fewer investment opportunities for interest-sensitive assets, and can lead to a narrower net interest margin.
Low benchmark rates also reduce the interest we earn on our segregated cash, the majority of which is invested in U.S. government securities and related instruments. Further, our margin balances are tied to benchmark rates, with a minimum charge of 0.75% in U.S. dollars, so low interest rates limit the interest we receive on margin lending to our customers. We continue to offer among the lowest rates in the industry on margin lending, and we believe our low rates are an important factor that attracts customers to our platform.
As an offset, lower rates also reduce our interest expense. For example, in U.S. dollars we pay interest to customers only when the federal funds effective rate is above 0.50%, and in currencies with negative rates we collect interest on a portion of customer cash balances. As an indirect positive effect, we believe low and negative benchmark world interest rates have been a factor leading to the active trading we have experienced, as investors enter securities markets to achieve higher yields on their investments.
Net interest income increased compared to 2020 while the average federal funds effective rate decreased to 0.08% in 2021 from 0.38% in 2020. The interest we pay on customer cash balances and earn on customer margin loans and investment of customer segregated funds results in spreads that are compressed at low benchmark rates. Rising balances and a minimum margin loan interest rate have partially compensated for this reduction in net interest income. Despite flat benchmark rates in 2021, a 58% increase in our average margin loan balances contributed to a 41% rise in margin loan interest over 2020. Further, a strong inflow of new accounts drove average customer credit balances up 17% for the year.
Fueled by higher average balances and strong securities lending results, our net interest income grew 32% over 2020, and our overall net interest margin increased from 1.07% to 1.17%.
Currency fluctuations. As a global electronic broker trading on exchanges around the world in multiple currencies, we are exposed to foreign currency risk. We actively manage this exposure by keeping our net worth in proportion to a defined basket of 10 currencies we call the “GLOBAL” to diversify our risk and to align our hedging strategy with the currencies that we use in our business. Because we report our financial results in U.S. dollars, the change in the value of the GLOBAL versus the U.S. dollar affects our earnings. During 2021 the value of the GLOBAL, as measured in U.S. dollars, decreased 1.31% compared to its value at December 31, 2020, which had a negative impact on our comprehensive earnings for the year. A discussion of our approach for managing foreign currency exposure is contained in Part I,