ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Part I. Item 1A, and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, our other filings with the SEC, and other press releases, documents, reports and announcements that we make, issue or publish may contain statements that we believe are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that are subject to risks and uncertainties and are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and other related federal security laws. These forward-looking statements include information about our possible or assumed future results of operations, including our future revenues, income, expenses, provision for taxes, effective tax rate, earnings per share and cash flows, our future capital expenditures and dividends, our future financial condition and changes therein, including changes in our loan portfolio and allowance for credit losses, our future capital structure or changes therein, the plan and objectives of management for future operations, our future or proposed acquisitions, the future or expected effect of acquisitions on our operations, results of operations and financial condition, our future economic performance and the statements of the assumptions underlying any such statement. Such statements are typically, but not exclusively, identified by the use in the statements of words or phrases such as “aim,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “goal,” “guidance,” “intend,” “is anticipated,” “is estimated,” “is expected,” “is intended,” “objective,” “plan,” “projected,” “projection,” “will affect,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will decrease,” “will grow,” “will impact,” “will increase,” “will incur,” “will reduce,” “will remain,” “will result,” “would be,” variations of such words or phrases (including where the word “could,” “may” or “would” is used rather than the word “will” in a phrase) and similar words and phrases indicating that the statement addresses some future result, occurrence, plan or objective. The forward-looking statements that we make are based on the Company’s current expectations and assumptions regarding its business, the economy, and other future conditions. Because forward-looking statements relate to future results and occurrences, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements, which are neither statements of historical fact nor guarantees or assurances of future performance. Many possible events or factors could affect our future financial results and performance and could cause those results or performance to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements. These possible events or factors include, but are not limited to:
•the disruption to local, regional, national and global economic activity caused by infectious disease outbreaks, including the ongoing existence of coronavirus, or COVID-19 and the significant impact that such outbreak has had and may have on our growth, operations, earnings and asset quality;
•our ability to sustain our current internal growth rate and total growth rate;
•changes in geopolitical, business and economic events, occurrences and conditions, including changes in rates of inflation or deflation, nationally, regionally and in our target markets, particularly in Texas and Colorado;
•worsening business and economic conditions nationally, regionally and in our target markets, particularly in Texas and Colorado, and the geographic areas in those states in which we operate;
•our dependence on our management team and our ability to attract, motivate and retain qualified personnel;
•the concentration of our business within our geographic areas of operation in Texas and Colorado;
•changes in asset quality, including increases in default rates on loans and higher levels of nonperforming loans and loan charge-offs, generally, and specifically resulting from the economic dislocation caused by the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•concentration of the loan portfolio of the Bank, before and after the completion of acquisitions of financial institutions, in commercial and residential real estate loans and changes in the prices, values and sales volumes of commercial and residential real estate;
•the ability of the Bank to make loans with acceptable net interest margins and levels of risk of repayment and to otherwise invest in assets at acceptable yields and presenting acceptable investment risks;
•inaccuracy of the assumptions and estimates that the managements of our Company and the financial institutions that we acquire make in establishing reserves for expected credit losses and other estimates, generally, and specifically as a result of the effect of the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•lack of liquidity, including as a result of a reduction in the amount of sources of liquidity we currently have;
•material increases or decreases in the amount of deposits held by the Bank or other financial institutions that we acquire and the cost of those deposits;
•our access to the debt and equity markets and the overall cost of funding our operations;
•regulatory requirements to maintain minimum capital levels or maintenance of capital at levels sufficient to support our anticipated growth;
•changes in market interest rates that affect the pricing of the loans and deposits of each of the Bank and the financial institutions that we acquire and that affect the net interest income, other future cash flows, or the market value of the assets of each of the Bank and the financial institutions that we acquire, including investment securities;
•fluctuations in the market value and liquidity of the securities we hold for sale, including as a result of changes in market interest rates;
•effects of competition from a wide variety of local, regional, national and other providers of financial, investment and insurance services;
•changes in economic and market conditions, including the economic dislocation resulting from the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic, that affect the amount and value of the assets of the Bank and of financial institutions that we acquire;
•the institution and outcome of, and costs associated with, litigation and other legal proceedings against one or more of the Company, the Bank and financial institutions that we acquire or to which any of such entities is subject;
•the occurrence of market conditions adversely affecting the financial industry generally, including the economic dislocation resulting from the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the impact of recent and future legislative regulatory changes, including changes in banking, securities, and tax laws and regulations and their application by the Company’s regulators, and changes in federal government policies, as well as regulatory requirements applicable to, and resulting from regulatory supervision of, the Company and the Bank as a financial institution with total assets greater than $10 billion;
•changes in accounting policies, practices, principles and guidelines, as may be adopted by the bank regulatory agencies, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, as the case may be;
•governmental monetary and fiscal policies, including changes resulting from the implementation of the new Current Expected Credit Loss (CECL) accounting standard;
•changes in the scope and cost of FDIC insurance and other coverage;
•the effects of war or other conflicts, acts of terrorism (including cyber attacks) or other catastrophic events, including natural disasters such as storms, droughts, tornadoes, hurricanes and flooding, that may affect general economic conditions;
•our actual cost savings resulting from previous or future acquisitions are less than expected, we are unable to realize those cost savings as soon as expected, or we incur additional or unexpected costs;
•our revenues after previous or future acquisitions are less than expected;
•the liquidity of, and changes in the amounts and sources of liquidity available to, us, before and after the acquisition of any financial institutions that we acquire;
•deposit attrition, operating costs, customer loss and business disruption before and after our completed acquisitions, including, without limitation, difficulties in maintaining relationships with employees, may be greater than we expected;
•the effects of the combination of the operations of financial institutions that we have acquired in the recent past or may acquire in the future with our operations and the operations of the Bank, the effects of the integration of such operations being unsuccessful, and the effects of such integration being more difficult, time consuming, or costly than expected or not yielding the cost savings we expect;
•the impact of investments that the Company or the Bank may have made or may make and the changes in the value of those investments;
•the quality of the assets of financial institutions and companies that we have acquired in the recent past or may acquire in the future being different than we determined or determine in our due diligence investigation in connection with the acquisition of such financial institutions and any inadequacy of credit loss reserves relating to, and exposure to unrecoverable losses on, loans acquired;
•our ability to continue to identify acquisition targets and successfully acquire desirable financial institutions to sustain our growth, to expand our presence in our markets and to enter new markets;
•general business and economic conditions in our markets change or are less favorable than expected, generally, and specifically as a result of the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•changes occur in business conditions and inflation, generally, and specifically as a result of the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an increase in the rate of personal or commercial customers’ bankruptcies, generally, and specifically as a result of the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•technology-related changes are harder to make or are more expensive than expected;
•attacks on the security of, and breaches of, the Company's and the Bank's digital information systems, the costs we or the Bank incur to provide security against such attacks and any costs and liability the Company or the Bank incurs in connection with any breach of those systems;
•the potential impact of technology and “FinTech” entities on the banking industry generally;
•the potential impact of anticipated climate change regulations on the Company and its customers;
•the other factors that are described or referenced in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Risk Factors”; and
•other economic, competitive, governmental, regulatory, technological and geopolitical factors affecting the Company’s operations, pricing and services.
We urge you to consider all of these risks, uncertainties and other factors carefully in evaluating all such forward-looking statements made by us. As a result of these and other matters, including changes in facts and assumptions not being realized or other factors, the actual results relating to the subject matter of any forward-looking statement may differ materially from the anticipated results expressed or implied in that forward-looking statement. Any forward-looking statement made in this 10-K or made by us in any report, filing, document, or information incorporated by reference in this 10-K speaks only as of the date on which it is made. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any such forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as may be required by law.
A forward looking-statement may include a statement of the assumptions or bases underlying the forward-looking statement. The Company believes that these assumptions or bases have been chosen in good faith and that they are reasonable. However, the Company cautions you that assumptions as to future occurrences or results almost always vary from actual future occurrences or results, and the differences between assumptions and actual occurrences and results can be material. Therefore, the Company cautions you not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this 10-K or incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
The Company was organized as a bank holding company in 2002. The Company has pursued a strategy to create long-term shareholder value through organic growth of our community banking franchise in our market areas and through selective acquisitions of complementary banking institutions with operations in the Company’s market areas or in new market areas. On April 8, 2013, the Company consummated the initial public offering, or IPO, of its common stock which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
The Company’s principal business is lending to and accepting deposits from businesses, professionals and individuals. The Company conducts all of the Company’s banking operations through its principal bank subsidiary. The Company derives its income principally from interest earned on loans and, to a lesser extent, income from securities available for sale. The Company also derives income from noninterest sources, such as fees received in connection with various deposit services, mortgage banking operations and investment advisory services. From time to time, the Company also realizes gains on the sale of assets. The Company’s principal expenses include interest expense on interest-bearing customer deposits, advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas (FHLB) and other borrowings, operating expenses such as salaries, employee benefits, occupancy costs, communication and technology costs, expenses associated with other real estate owned, other administrative expenses, amortization of intangibles, acquisition expenses, provisions for credit losses and the Company’s assessment for FDIC deposit insurance.
The Company intends for this discussion and analysis to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding the Company’s financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from period to period and the primary factors that accounted for those changes. This discussion relates to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, and the accompanying notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s fiscal year ends on December 31. The following discussion and analysis presents the more significant factors that affected our financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and results of operations for each of the years then ended. Refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021 for discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Developments
New Accounting Standard
As discussed in Note 2. Recent Accounting Standards, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (ASC 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments on January 1, 2021, pursuant to the delayed adoption allowable under the CARES Act. Upon adoption of CECL, the Company recorded an increase of $80.9 million to the allowance for credit losses for loans and $1.1 million to the allowance for credit losses for unfunded commitments. In addition, the Company recognized a cumulative effect reduction to retained earnings totaling $53.9 million, net of a recorded deferred tax asset of $15.1 million, and reclassified $13.0 million of allowance for credit losses related to purchase credit deteriorated (PCD) loans that were previously classified as purchase credit impaired (PCI) under prior accounting guidance. See discussion in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Note 2. Recent Accounting Standards and Note 5. Loans, net and Allowance for Credit Losses for more details on the impact of CECL, including related accounting policies.
COVID-19 Update
In 2021, restrictive measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic continued to ease, both on a national level and more specifically in the Company's markets of Texas and Colorado. Most businesses are returning to full capacity, which has increased commercial and consumer activity but still not to the pre-pandemic levels. The overall outlook has improved due to the availability of vaccines, although uncertainty remains as new variants emerge and ongoing vaccine effectiveness is undetermined.
The Company continues to take deliberate actions to ensure the continued health and strength of its balance sheet in order to serve its clients and communities, including increases in liquidity and managing our assets and liabilities in order to maintain a strong capital position. This pandemic crisis has been impactful and the timing and magnitude of recovery cannot be predicted. The Company continues to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on its customers, the communities it serves and the economy as a whole; however, the extent to which the pandemic will continue to impact operations and financial results into 2022 is uncertain.
Impact on our Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Company's financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 have not been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Macroeconomic variables that drive our allowance for credit losses calculation have improved during 2021, thereby resulting in a negative provision to the allowance for credit losses for the current year. Should economic conditions worsen as the result of virus resurgence, the allowance for credit losses could increase and additional provision for credit losses could be required.
Lending Operations and Accommodations to Borrowers
As a result of the economic environment caused by the COVID-19 outbreak during 2021 and 2020, the Company worked with its borrowers on an individual, one-on-one basis to assess and understand the impact of pandemic-related economic hardship on the borrowers and provided prudent modifications allowing for short-term payment deferrals or other payment relief where appropriate. The deferred payments along with interest accrued during the deferral period are due and payable on the maturity date. Under the applicable accounting and regulatory guidance, such modifications were not considered troubled debt restructurings. It is possible that the Company’s asset quality measures could worsen and/or the deferred interest is reversed at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 continue for a prolonged period or worsen and/or the borrower is not able to fully recover as the economy continues to rebound.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company participated in the CARES Act PPP and had outstanding PPP loan balances of $112.1 million as of December 31, 2021, down from $804.4 million as of December 31, 2020. Management believes that the remainder of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program.
Capital and Liquidity
The Company's capital remains strong, with ratios of the Company, and its subsidiary bank, well above the standards to be considered well-capitalized under regulatory requirements. Refer to Note 20. Regulatory Matters and elsewhere in this Management's Discussion and Analysis for additional information related to the Company's regulatory capital.
The Company's liquidity also remains strong and continues to reflect excess balances, with cash and securities representing approximately 24.6% of total assets as of December 31, 2021. The Company maintains the ability to access considerable sources of contingent liquidity as described under the section captioned Liquidity Management. Management considers the Company's current liquidity position to be adequate to meet short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Refer to Item 1. Business - "COVID-19 Impact Update" and Item 1A. Risk Factors - "RISKS RELATED TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC" for additional discussion.
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations
Selected income statement data and key performance metrics are summarized in the table below:
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s results of operations compares its results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company’s net income available to common shareholders increased by $23.5 million, or 11.7%, to $224.8 million ($5.21 per common share on a diluted basis) for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $201.2 million ($4.67 per common share on a diluted basis) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net income for 2021 over 2020 was primarily due to the $52.0 million decrease in provision for credit losses, as well as the $3.9 million increase in net interest income, offset by an $18.5 million decrease in noninterest income, a $7.5 million increase in noninterest expense and a $6.3 million increase in income tax expense. Provision was elevated in the prior year due the economic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, while the current year provision reflects improvements in the economic forecast, as well as credit quality and past dues trends during 2021. The Company posted returns on average common equity of 8.86% and 8.26%, returns on average assets of 1.21% and 1.23%, and efficiency ratios of 51.30% and 48.79% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The efficiency ratio is calculated by dividing total noninterest expense (which does not include the provision for credit losses and the amortization of core deposits intangibles) by net interest income plus noninterest income. The Company’s dividend payout ratio was 25.29% and 22.48% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively due to the increase in dividends paid from $1.05 per share in 2020 to $1.32 per share in 2021 .
Details of the changes in the various components of net income are detailed below.
Net Interest Income
The Company’s net interest income is its interest income, net of interest expenses. Changes in the balances of the Company’s interest-earning assets and its interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in the market interest rates, affect the Company’s net interest income. The difference between the Company’s average yield on earning assets and its average rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities is its net interest spread. Noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as demand deposits and stockholders’ equity, also support the Company’s earning assets. The impact of the noninterest-bearing sources of funds is reflected in the Company’s net interest margin, which is calculated as annualized net interest income divided by average earning assets.
The Company earned net interest income of $520.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.9 million, or 0.8%, from $516.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The slight increase in net interest income from the previous year was driven by overall decreased funding costs for the year, offset by decreased earnings on assets due to lower yields and accretion, but also due to a shift in the mix of interest-earning assets to lower yielding securities and interest-bearing cash balances. The Company’s net interest margin for 2021 decreased to 3.10% from 3.55% in 2020, and the Company’s interest rate spread for 2021 decreased to 2.92% from the 3.26% interest rate spread for 2020. The average balance of interest-earning assets for 2021 increased by $2.2 billion, or 15.1%, to $16.8 billion from an average balance of $14.6 billion for 2020. The increase from the prior year was primarily related to increased average interest-bearing deposits with correspondent banks and average taxable securities due primarily due to excess liquidity during 2021. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $1.2 billion, or 11.4% primarily due to increased average deposit balances, offset by lower average FHLB advances and other borrowings. The Company’s net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively impacted by a 72 basis point decrease in the weighted-average yield on interest-earning assets to 3.48% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 4.20% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease from the prior year is due primarily to overall lower yields on all interest-earning assets due to the declining rate environment but also the shift in mix mentioned above, as well as decreased loan accretion. The year ended December 31, 2021 includes $21.2 million of loan accretion compared to $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cost of interest bearing liabilities, including borrowings, was 0.56% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 0.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease from the prior year is primarily due to lower rates offered on deposit products, as well as rate decreases on short-term FHLB advances and other borrowings.
Average Balance Sheet Amounts, Interest Earned and Yield Analysis. The following table presents average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yields earned and rates paid for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The average balances are principally daily averages and, for loans, include both performing and nonperforming balances.
____________
(1) Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans.
(2) Net interest margins for the periods presented represent: (i) the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets and the interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, divided by (ii) average interest-earning assets for the period.
(3) A tax-equivalent adjustment has been computed using a federal income tax rate of 21%.
Interest Rates and Operating Interest Differential. Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest rates. The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned on the Company’s interest-earning assets and the interest incurred on the Company’s interest-bearing liabilities. The effect of changes in volume is determined by multiplying the change in volume by the previous year’s average rate. Similarly, the effect of rate changes is calculated by multiplying the change in average rate by the prior year’s volume. For purpose of the following table, changes attributable to both volume and rate, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amount of change in each.
Provision for Credit Losses
The measurement of expected credit losses under the CECL methodology is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost. Provision for credit losses is determined by management as the amount to be added to the allowance for credit loss accounts for various types of financial instruments including loans, held to maturity debt securities and off-balance sheet credit exposures, after net charge-offs have been deducted, to bring the allowance to a level deemed appropriate by management to absorb expected credit losses over the lives of the respective financial instruments. Management actively monitors the Company’s asset quality and provides appropriate provisions based on such factors as historical loss experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
Financial instruments are charged-off against the allowance for credit losses when appropriate. Although management believes it uses the best information available to make determinations with respect to the provision for credit losses, future adjustments may be necessary if economic conditions differ from the assumptions used in making the determination.
The following table presents the components of provision for credit losses:
The Company recorded a negative provision for credit losses on loans totaling $12.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. This is a decrease of $55.6 million, or 129.3% compared to the $43.0 million provision for credit losses on loans recorded in 2020. Provision expense for loans is generally reflective of organic loan growth as well as charge-offs or specific reserves taken during the respective period. Provision expense is also impacted by the economic outlook and changes in macroeconomic variables. The negative provision recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to improvements in the economic forecast, while the prior year provision was elevated due to general provision expense incurred due to the economic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 crisis.
The Company recorded $3.6 million in provision for off-balance sheet credit exposures for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to none for the same period in 2020 due to new methodology applied related to the implementation of CECL.
Noninterest Income
The following table sets forth the major components of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of noninterest income:
____________
N/M - Not meaningful
Noninterest income decreased $18.5 million, or 21.8%, to $66.5 million for the year ended 2021 from $85.1 million for the year ended 2020. Significant changes in the components of noninterest income are discussed below.
Investment management fees. Investment management fees increased $1.0 million, or 13.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in assets under management balances due to improved market activity for the year over year period.
Mortgage banking revenue. Mortgage banking revenue decreased $13.3 million, or 36.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease is reflective of decreased volumes and margins resulting from rate increases in 2021. Revenue was also negatively impacted by volatility in the market during the year over year period, which resulted in a fair value losses on our derivative hedging instruments of $2.4 million compared to losses of $1.6 million during 2020.
Other noninterest income. Other noninterest income decreased $6.2 million, or 32.4% or the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was due to a decrease in acquired loan recoveries of $3.9 million, primarily the recovery of a $3.5 million contingency reserve on an acquired SBA loan that occurred in 2020, as well as a decrease of $2.9 million in interchange fees to due to the Durbin Amendment, which was effective for the Company July 2020. The decrease was offset by smaller increases in miscellaneous income accounts.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth the major components of the Company’s noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of noninterest expense:
____________
N/M - not meaningful
Noninterest expense increased $7.5 million, or 2.4%, to $313.6 million for the year ended 2021 from $306.1 million for the year ended 2020. Significant changes in the components of noninterest expense are discussed below.
Salaries and employee benefits. Salaries and employee benefits expense, which historically has been the largest component of the Company’s noninterest expense, increased $22.8 million, or 14.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is primarily due to $16.1 million in higher salaries, bonus, payroll taxes, insurance expense, 401(k) match and stock grant amortization related to additional headcount, including executive and senior positions added during the year. Contract labor costs increased $2.6 million due to PPP resources and various bankwide infrastructure projects. Deferred salaries costs, which reduces overall expense, was $6.3 million lower in the current year as prior year loan originations were elevated due to PPP activity. Offsetting these changes was a decrease of $1.6 million for mortgage commissions and incentives due to decreased volumes and margins resulting from rate increases in 2021, and a decrease of $1.8 million in severance expenses, which primarily related to departmental and business line restructurings that occurred in 2020.
FDIC assessment. FDIC assessment expense decreased $1.0 million, or 15.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease from prior year is due to the improvement in certain components of the assessment calculation, including capital ratios and credit quality measures.
Advertising and public relations. Advertising and public relation expense decreased $1.3 million, or 54.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. Advertising and public relations expenses were higher in the prior year primarily due to rebranding expenses which occurred in 2020 as well as advertising related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Professional fees. Professional fees increased $2.9 million, or 23.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The change is due to increased consulting expenses related to the various infrastructure projects and PPP forgiveness.
Acquisition expense. Acquisition expense is primarily legal, advisory and accounting fees associated with services to facilitate the acquisition of other banks. Acquisition expenses also include data processing conversion costs and contract termination costs. There were no acquisition expenses incurred in 2021. The $16.2 million in acquisition expenses in 2020 primarily related to an announced merger that was terminated in second quarter 2020.
Other. Other noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1.0 million, or 2.9%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in other noninterest expense is due to increases in charitable contributions, auto and travel expenses and insurance expenses offset by a decrease in loan-related expenses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $57.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is an effective tax rate of 20.4%. Income tax expense was $51.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is an effective tax rate of 20.3%.
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the financial condition of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and details certain changes between those periods.
Assets
The Company's total assets increased by $1.0 billion, or 5.5%, to $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $17.8 billion at December 31, 2020. The significant components of the total change are discussed below.
Loan Portfolio
The Company’s loan portfolio is the largest category of the Company’s earning assets. The following table presents the gross balance and associated percentage of each major category in the Company’s loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
____________
(1) Includes SBA PPP loans of $112.1 million with net deferred loan fees of $2.6 million at December 31, 2021 and SBA PPP loans of $804.4 million at December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes loans held for sale of $32.1 million and $82.6 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(3) Loan class amounts are shown at amortized cost, net of deferred loan fees of $9.4 million, in accordance with ASC 326 at December 31, 2021 and shown at recorded investment at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company's loan portfolio, before the allowance for credit losses, totaled $12.5 billion, which is a decrease of 5.2% over total gross loans as of December 31, 2020. Loans held for investment, excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans, loans held for sale and PPP loans, increased $728.5 million, or 6.7% for the year over year period. See Note 5. Loans, Net and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans for more details on the Company's loan portfolio. The principal categories and changes in the loan portfolio are discussed below.
Commercial loans. The Company provides a mix of variable and fixed rate commercial loans. The loans are typically made to small-and medium-sized manufacturing, wholesale, retail, energy related service businesses and medical practices for working capital needs and business expansions. Commercial loans generally include lines of credit and loans with maturities of five years or less. The loans are generally made with operating cash flows as the primary source of repayment, but may also include collateralization by inventory, accounts receivable, equipment and/or personal guarantees. Additionally, our commercial loan portfolio includes Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans originated under the CARES Act and shared national credits (SNC).
The Company’s commercial loan portfolio decreased $464.8 million, or 19.0%, to $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2021, from $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. The net decrease in this portfolio type is primarily due to a $692.3 million decrease in PPP loans for the year over year period related to forgiveness activity offset by increases in energy-related loans of $137.3 million and SNC loans of $106.8 million.
Mortgage warehouse purchase loans. The Company’s mortgage warehouse purchase loan portfolio decreased $664.9 million, or 45.7%, to $788.8 million as of December 31, 2021, from $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in this portfolio type for the current year is primarily reflective of lower volumes related to mortgage interest rate increases and shorter hold times.
Commercial real estate loans (CRE). The commercial real estate loan portfolio has historically been the Company's largest category of loans, representing 53.1% and 46.3% of the total portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such loans generally involve less risk than other loans in the portfolio. The Company expects that commercial real estate loans will continue to be a significant portion of the Company’s total loan portfolio and an area of emphasis in the Company’s lending operations.
Commercial real estate loans increased $520.8 million, or 8.5%, to $6.6 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $6.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase was due to organic loan growth in this loan type during the year.
Commercial construction, land and land development loans. The Company’s commercial construction, land and land development loans comprise loans to fund commercial construction, land acquisition and real estate development construction. Although the Company continues to make commercial construction loans, land acquisition and land development loans on a selective basis, the Company does not expect the Company’s lending in this area to result in this category of loans being a significantly greater portion of the Company’s total loan portfolio.
Commercial construction, land and land development loans decreased slightly by $65.6 million, or 5.3% to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, due to payoffs exceeding originations for the year.
Residential Real Estate Loans. The Company’s residential real estate loans, excluding mortgage loans held for sale, are primarily made with respect to and secured by single-family homes, which are both owner-occupied and investor owned and include a limited amount of home equity loans, with a relatively small average loan balance spread across many individual borrowers. The Company offers a variety of mortgage loan portfolio products which generally are amortized over five to thirty years. Loans collateralized by 1-4 family residential real estate generally have been originated in amounts of no more than 80% of appraised value. The Company requires mortgage title insurance and hazard insurance. The Company retains the majority of these portfolio loans for its own account rather than selling them into the secondary market. By doing so, the Company incurs interest rate risk as well as the risks associated with nonpayments on such loans. The Company’s loan portfolio also includes a number of multi-family housing real estate loans.
The Company’s residential real estate loan portfolio declined by $102.9 million, or 7.2%, to a balance of $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in this category was primarily a result of decreased origination activity due to rate increases in 2021.
Single-Family Interim Construction Loans. The Company makes single-family interim construction loans to home builders and individuals to fund the construction of single-family residences with the understanding that such loans will be repaid from the proceeds of the sale of the homes by builders or, in the case of individuals building their own homes, with the proceeds of a permanent mortgage loan. Such loans are secured by the real property being built and are made based on the Company’s assessment of the value of the property on an as-completed basis. The Company expects to continue to make single-family interim construction loans so long as demand for such loans continues and the market for single-family housing and the values of such properties remain stable or continue to improve in the Company’s markets.
The balance of single-family interim construction loans in the Company’s loan portfolio increased by $54.1 million, or 16.6%, to $380.6 million as of December 31, 2021 from $326.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in this category was due to organic origination activity that exceeded repayments during the year.
Other Categories of Loans. Other categories of loans included in the Company’s loan portfolio include agricultural loans made to farmers and ranchers relating to their operations and consumer loans made to individuals for personal purposes, including automobile purchase loans and personal loans. None of these categories of loans represents more than 1% of the Company’s total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and such categories continue to be a very small percentage of the Company's total loan portfolio.
Most of the Company’s lending activity occurs within the state of Texas, primarily in the north, central and southeast Texas regions and the state of Colorado, specifically along the Front Range area. As of December 31, 2021, loans in the North Texas region represented about 40% of the total portfolio, followed by the Colorado Front Range region at 24%, the Houston region at 23% and the Central Texas region at 13%. A large percentage of the Company’s portfolio consists of commercial and residential real estate loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no concentrations of loans related to a single industry in excess of 10% of total loans.
Loans by Maturity and Interest Rate Sensitivity
The following table sets forth the contractual maturities of the Company’s loan portfolio, including scheduled principal repayments and the distribution between fixed and adjustable interest rate loans as of December 31, 2021:
At December 31, 2021, the average duration of the Company's loan portfolio was 2.2 years. The Company generally structures certain loans, like commercial and commercial real estate, with shorter-term loan maturities in order to match funding sources that will enable the Company to effectively manage the portfolio by providing the flexibility to respond to liquidity needs, changes in interest rates and changes in underwriting standards and loan structures, among other things. Due to the shorter-term nature of such loans, from time to time in the ordinary course of business and without any contractual obligation, the Company will renew or extend maturing lines of credit or refinance existing loans at their maturity dates based on customer practice and need. These renewals, extensions and refinancings are made in the ordinary course of business for customers that meet the normal level of credit standards. These requests are typically made by the customer to support their working capital needs for operations. Such borrowers are generally not experiencing financial difficulties and could obtain similar financing elsewhere. In connection with each renewal, extension or refinancing, the Company may require a principal reduction or an adjustment to the terms and structure to reflect the current market pricing/structuring for such loans or to remain competitive with other financial institutions.
Asset Quality
Nonperforming Assets. The Company has established procedures to assist the Company in maintaining the overall quality of the Company’s loan portfolio. In addition, the Company has adopted underwriting guidelines to be followed by the Company’s lending officers and require significant senior management review of proposed extensions of credit exceeding certain thresholds. When delinquencies exist, the Company rigorously monitors the levels of such delinquencies for any negative or adverse trends. The Company’s loan review procedures include approval of lending policies and underwriting guidelines by the Company’s board of directors, an annual independent loan review, approval of large credit relationships by the Bank’s Executive Loan Committee and loan quality documentation procedures. The Company, like other financial institutions, is subject to the risk that its loan portfolio will be subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
The Company classifies nonperforming loans as nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest or loans modified under restructurings as a result of the borrower experiencing financial difficulties. Further information regarding the Company's accounting policies related to past loans, nonaccrual loans, collateral dependent loans and troubled debt restructurings is presented in Note 5. Loans, Net and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the Company’s nonperforming assets among the Company’s different asset categories and key credit-related metrics as of the dates indicated. The balances of nonperforming loans reflect the net investment in these assets.
____________
(1) Nonaccrual loans include troubled debt restructurings of $1.0 million and $578 thousand as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Excludes loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality of $6.7 million as of December 31, 2020 presented under prior GAAP.
(2) Due to the adoption of CECL, amounts are shown at amortized cost, net of deferred loan fees at December 31, 2021.
(3) Excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans of $788.8 million and $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company had $53.7 million and $49.0 million in loans on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily due to additions of one $13.0 million commercial loan, one $11.7 million commercial real estate loan as well as $3.8 million in remaining PCD loans that were added related to the January 1, 2021 CECL adoption, offset by a $15.2 million commercial real estate loan removed from nonaccrual during the year in addition to charge-offs of $1.6 million. The remainder of the change is due to individually smaller net payoffs/paydowns totaling $7.0 million during 2021. Loans delinquent 90 days or more and still accruing increased to $1.8 million as of December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to four residential real estate loans totaling $1.6 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had other real estate owned and other repossessed assets of $114 thousand, which is a decrease from the balance of $589 thousand for prior year, due solely to the sale of two other real estate properties. There was no other real estate foreclosed upon during 2021.
Allowance for Credit Losses
As discussed elsewhere in Item 7. MDA, Overview and Note 2. Recent Accounting Standards, the Company adopted the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2021 and has accounted for the allowance for credit losses under the CECL model for the year ended December 31, 2021. The measurement of expected credit losses under the CECL methodology is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loan receivables, held to maturity debt securities and off-balance-sheet credit exposures. The CECL model requires the measurement of all expected credit losses on applicable financial assets based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. While historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses, adjustments to historical loss information may be made for differences in current portfolio-specific risk characteristics, environmental conditions or other relevant factors. While management utilizes its best judgment and information available, the ultimate adequacy of the allowance accounts is dependent upon a variety of factors beyond the Company's control, including the performance of the portfolios, the economy, changes in interest rates and the view of the regulatory authorities toward classification of assets. The Company applied the incurred loss methodology for estimating the allowance and applicable provision in all years prior to 2021.
Analysis of the Allowance for Credit Losses - Loans
The following table sets forth the allowance for credit losses by category of loans:
____________
(1) Represents the percentage of the Company’s total loans included in each loan category.
As of December 31, 2021, the allowance for credit losses amounted to $148.7 million, or 1.28%, of total loans held for investment, excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans, compared with $87.8 million, or 0.76%, as of December 31, 2020. The dollar and percentage increase during 2021 is primarily due to the adoption of CECL, which increased the allowance for credit losses on loans by $80.9 million offset by negative provision of $12.6 million and net charge-offs of $7.4 million.
The allowance for credit losses on loans as a percentage of nonperforming loans increased from 170.80% at December 31, 2020, to 259.35% at December 31, 2021, due primarily to the adoption of CECL offset by the increase in nonperforming loans. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had specific credit loss allocations of $18.1 million on individually evaluated loans totaling $64.9 million, compared with specific credit loss allocations of $8.5 million on individually evaluated loans totaling $64.4 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in specific credit loss allocations was due primarily to the addition of two commercial loan relationships that added an additional $4.6 million in specific credit loss and a commercial real estate relationship with a $1.6 million specific credit loss. Additionally, the specific credit losses on two energy credits increased by $3.4 million during 2021.
Refer to Note 5. Loans, Net and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans, in the notes to the Company's audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional details of the allowance for credit losses on loans.
Additional information related to net charge-offs (recoveries) by loan type is presented in the table below.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net charge-offs totaled $7.4 million, which is 0.06% of the Company's average loans outstanding during the period, compared to net charge-offs of $6.6 million, or 0.05% of average loans for the year ended December 31, 2020. The majority of the charge-offs were concentrated in the commercial portfolio, which is consistent with prior years. Commercial charge-offs in 2021 primarily consist of two commercial loan charge-offs totaling $2.5 million and $3.4 million relating to an acquired PCD leasing portfolio, which were fully reserved through purchase accounting adjustments at acquisition and transitioned to the loan allowance under CECL.
The majority of the 2020 charge-offs consisted of a $3.5 million energy charge-off and $1.7 million total charge-offs on two commercial relationships. The remainder of net charge-off activity were due to individually insignificant transactions.
Allowance for Credit Losses - Off-Balance Sheet Credit Exposures
The allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is calculated under the CECL model, representing expected credit losses over the contractual period for which the Company is exposed to credit risk resulting from a contractual obligation to extend credit. Off-balance sheet credit exposures primarily consist of amounts available under outstanding lines of credit and letters of credit detailed in Note 14. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Commitments and Contingencies. The allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is estimated by loan segment at each balance sheet date using the same methodologies as portfolio loans, taking into consideration the likelihood that funding will occur based on historical utilization rates. At December 31, 2021, the allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures was $4.7 million. There was no allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet exposures as of December 31, 2020 under the Company's prior loss methodology.
Securities Available for Sale
The Company’s investment strategy aims to maximize earnings while maintaining liquidity in securities with minimal credit, interest rate and duration risk. The types and maturities of securities purchased are primarily based on the Company’s current and projected liquidity and interest rate sensitivity positions. Refer to Note 4. Securities Available for Sale for more details on the Company's security portfolio.
The fair value of securities available for sale increased $853.0 million, or 73.9% to $2.0 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase was a result of deploying excess liquidity into higher yielding assets to contribute to overall earnings for the Company. Securities represented 10.7% and 6.5% of the Company’s total assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net gains of $13 thousand, $382 thousand and $275 thousand were recognized on the sale of securities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Certain investment securities are valued at less than their amortized cost. At December 31, 2021, the Company's review of all available for sale securities at an unrealized loss position determined that the losses resulted from factors not related to credit quality. This conclusion is based on the Company's analysis of the underlying risk characteristics, including credit ratings, and other qualitative factors for each security type in the portfolio. The unrealized losses are generally due to increases in market interest rates. Furthermore, the Company has the intent to hold these securities until maturity or a forecasted recovery, and it is more likely than not that the Company will not have to sell the securities before the recovery of their cost basis. The fair value is expected to recover as the securities approach their maturity date. As such, there is no allowance for credit losses on available for sale securities recognized as of December 31, 2021.
Residential pass through securities (mortgage-backed securities) are securities that have been developed by pooling a number of real estate mortgages that are principally issued by federal agencies. These securities are deemed to have high credit ratings, and minimum regular monthly cash flows of principal and interest are guaranteed by the issuing agencies. Unlike U.S. treasury and U.S. government agency securities, which have a lump sum payment at maturity, mortgage-backed securities provide cash flows from regular principal and interest payments and principal prepayments throughout the lives of the securities. Premiums and discounts on mortgage-backed securities are amortized over the expected life of the security and may be impacted by prepayments. As such, mortgage-backed securities which are purchased at a premium will generally suffer decreasing net yields as interest rates drop because home owners tend to refinance their mortgages resulting in prepayments and an acceleration of premium amortization. Securities purchased at a discount will generally obtain higher net yields in a decreasing interest rate environment as prepayments result in acceleration of discount accretion.
The following table sets forth the amount, scheduled maturities and weighted average yields for the Company’s investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Yields are based on amortized cost and calculated on a tax-equivalent basis assuming a 21% tax rate
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $794.5 million, or 43.8% to $2.6 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.8 billion at December 31, 2020, of which $2.0 billion was held with the Federal Reserve Bank at year end 2021. Cash and cash equivalent balances can vary due to cash needs and volatility of several large title company and commercial accounts. Balances as of December 31, 2021 is due to organic deposit growth during the year over year period.
Liabilities
Total liabilities increased $917.9 million, or 6.0%, to $16.2 billion as of December 31, 2021, from $15.2 billion as of December 31, 2020 with significant components discussed below.
Deposits
Total deposits increased $1.2 billion, or 8.0%, to $15.6 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $14.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase is due to organic growth. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits totaled $5.1 billion, or 32.6% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2021, compared with $4.2 billion, or 28.9% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2020. The total cost of deposits decreased 30 basis points from 0.59% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 0.29% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.42% per annum for 2021 compared with 0.83% for 2020. The decrease in cost of funds is primarily due to decreased funding costs.
Brokered deposits totaled $909.7 million and $1.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in brokered deposits is consistent with management's intent to reduce excess liquidity due to core deposit growth during the year.
The following table summarizes the Company’s average deposit balances and weighted average rates for the periods presented:
The following table sets forth the maturity of time deposits (including IRA deposits) greater than $250 thousand as of December 31, 2021:
The estimated amount of uninsured and uncollateralized deposits including related accrued interest is approximately $8.9 billion and $7.7 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
FHLB Advances
The Company’s FHLB borrowings totaled $150.0 million as of December 31, 2021, compared with $375.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease included the early termination and payoff of two advances totaling $200.0 million during 2021 that were scheduled to mature in 2023. The early payoff resulted in reductions related to both the Company's excess liquidity and total interest expense. The prepayment penalty on the early termination was $48 thousand and is included in interest expense in 2021. See further details of FHLB advances, including collateral and letters of credit in Note 9. Federal Home Loan Bank Advances.
Other Borrowings
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $266.4 million and $305.7 million, respectively, of long-term indebtedness (other than FHLB advances and junior subordinated debentures) outstanding, which included subordinated debentures. The decrease from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was due to the Company redeeming $40.0 million of subordinated debentures during third quarter 2021. In addition, the Company had $17.0 million and $6.5 million of short-term borrowings outstanding on its $100.0 million revolving line of credit as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The line was subsequently paid off in 2022 and there are no borrowings outstanding as of February 25, 2022. See Note 10. Other Borrowings for further details of the Company's other borrowings.
Capital Resources and Liquidity Management
Capital Resources
The Company’s stockholders’ equity is influenced by the Company’s earnings, the sales and redemptions of common stock that the Company makes, stock based compensation expense, the dividends the Company pays on its common stock, and, to a lesser extent, any changes in other comprehensive income relating to available for sale securities and cash flow hedges.
Total stockholder’s equity was $2.6 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with $2.5 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $61.3 million. The increase was primarily due to net income earned for the year totaling $224.8 million, stock based compensation of $10.7 million offset by the day-one CECL transition adjustment to retained earnings of $53.9 million, a decrease of $31.1 million in other comprehensive income (loss), stock repurchased by the Company totaling $32.1 million and dividends paid of $57.1 million.
Regulatory Capital Requirements
The Company’s capital management consists of providing equity to support the Company’s current and future operations. The Company is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by state and federal banking agencies, including the TDB, Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements may prompt certain actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. Please refer to Note 20. Regulatory Matters, in the notes to the Company's audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional details.
Stock Repurchase Program. From time to time, the Company's board of directors has authorized stock repurchase programs which allow the Company to purchase its common stock generally over a one-year period at various prices in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. During 2021, the Company repurchased 419,098 shares at a total cost of $29.2 million and 109,548 shares of Company stock at a total cost of $5.7 million during 2020. In December 2021, upon the expiration of the current plan, the Company's board established the 2022 Stock Repurchase Plan, which provides for the repurchase of up to $160.0 million of common stock through December 31, 2022. No shares have been repurchased under the 2022 Plan through February 23, 2022. Part II, Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities, in this report for additional information.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity refers to the measure of the Company’s ability to meet current and future cash flow requirements as they become due, while at the same time meeting the Company’s operating, capital and strategic cash flow needs, all at a reasonable cost. The Company’s asset and liability management policy is intended to maintain adequate liquidity and, therefore, enhance the Company’s ability to raise funds to support asset growth, meet deposit withdrawals and lending needs, maintain reserve requirements, and otherwise sustain operations. The Company accomplishes this through management of the maturities of the Company’s interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The Company believes that the Company’s present position is adequate to meet the Company’s current and future liquidity needs.
The Company continuously monitors the Company’s liquidity position to ensure that assets and liabilities are managed in a manner that will meet all of the Company’s short-term and long-term cash requirements. The Company manages the Company’s liquidity position to meet the daily cash flow needs of customers, while maintaining an appropriate balance between assets and liabilities to meet the return on investment objectives of the Company’s shareholders. The Company also monitors its liquidity requirements in light of interest rate trends, changes in the economy, and the scheduled maturity and interest rate sensitivity of the investment and loan portfolios and deposits.
Liquidity risk management is an important element in the Company’s asset/liability management process. The Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity requirements are primarily to fund on-going operations, including payment of interest on deposits and debt, extensions of credit to borrowers, capital expenditures and shareholder dividends. These liquidity requirements are met primarily through cash flow from operations, redeployment of pre-paid and maturing balances in the Company’s loan and investment portfolios, debt financing and increases in customer deposits. The Company’s liquidity position is supported by management of liquid assets and liabilities and access to alternative sources of funds. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits in banks, federal funds sold, securities available for sale and maturing or prepaying balances in the Company’s investment and loan portfolios. Liquid liabilities include core deposits, brokered deposits, federal funds purchased, securities sold under repurchase agreements and other borrowings. Other sources of liquidity include the sale of loans, the ability to acquire additional national market non-core deposits, the issuance of additional collateralized borrowings such as FHLB advances, the issuance of debt securities, borrowings through the Federal Reserve’s discount window and the issuance of equity securities. For additional information regarding the Company’s operating, investing and financing cash flows, see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows provided in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Deposits represent the Company’s primary source of funds. The Company continues to focus on growing core deposits through the Company’s relationship driven banking philosophy and community-focused marketing programs. In addition to deposits, the Company utilizes FHLB advances either as a short-term funding source or a longer-term funding source and to manage the Company’s interest rate risk on the Company’s loan portfolio. FHLB advances can be particularly attractive as a longer-term funding source to balance interest rate sensitivity and reduce interest rate risk.
In addition to the liquidity provided by the sources described above, the Company maintains correspondent relationships with other banks in order to sell loans or purchase overnight funds should additional liquidity be needed. The Company's $100.0 million line of credit also provides an additional source of liquidity. Under this agreement, the Company is required to meet certain financial covenants on a quarterly basis, which includes maintaining $5.0 million in cash at Independent Bank Group and meeting minimum capital ratios. The line also bears a non-usage fee of 0.30% per year on the unused commitment at the end of each fiscal quarter. See Note 10. Other Borrowings for more details of the Company's borrowings.
In the ordinary course of the Company’s operations, the Company has entered into certain contractual obligations and has made other commitments to make future payments. The Company believes that it will be able to meet its contractual obligations as they come due through the maintenance of adequate cash levels. The Company expects to maintain adequate cash levels through profitability, loan and securities repayment and maturity activity and continued deposit gathering activities. The Company has in place various borrowing mechanisms for both short-term and long-term liquidity needs. Refer to the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this report for the expected timing of such obligations as of December 31, 2021. These include payments related to (a) time deposits with stated maturity dates (Note 8. Deposits), (b) short and long term borrowings (Note 9. Federal Home Loan Bank Advances, Note 10. Other Borrowings and Note 11. Junior Subordinated Debentures), (c) operating leases (Note 12. Leases) and (d) commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit (Note 14. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Commitments and Contingencies).
In addition, as mentioned in Item 2. Properties, phase 2 of the corporate headquarters is under construction. The new facility, which will serve as the Company's operation center, is expected to be completed mid-year 2022. The approximately 198,000 square-foot, six story facility is estimated to cost approximately $75.0 million. At December 31, 2021, the project's estimated remaining costs were approximately $35.0 million.
The Company is a corporation separate and apart from the Bank and, therefore, the Company must provide for the Company’s own liquidity. The Company’s main source of funding is dividends declared and paid to the Company by the Bank. Statutory and regulatory limitations exist that affect the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Company. Management believes that these limitations will not impact the Company’s ability to meet the Company’s ongoing short-term cash obligations. For additional information regarding dividend restrictions, see “Supervision and Regulation” under Part I, Item 1. “Business.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the Company’s reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under current circumstances, results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. The Company evaluates its estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting policies, as described in detail in the notes to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements are an integral part of the Company’s financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing the Company’s reported results of operations and the Company’s financial position. The Company has deemed the accounting policy and estimate discussed below as most critical and require the Company to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. Changes in these estimates, that are likely to occur from period to period, or the use of different estimates that the Company could have reasonably used in the current period, would have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or liquidity. The Company has other significant accounting policies and continues to evaluate the materiality of their impact on its consolidated financial statements, but management believes these other policies either do not generally require them to make estimates and judgments that are difficult or subjective, or it is less likely they would have a material impact on the Company's reported results for a given period.
Allowance For Credit Losses. Management considers policies related to the allowance for credit losses on financial instruments, including loans and off-balance sheet credit exposures, to be critical to the financial statements. As discussed in Note 2. Recent Accounting Standards, the Company's policies related to allowance for credit losses changed on January 1, 2021 in connection with the adoption of a new accounting standard ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. In accordance with ASC 326, the allowance for credit losses on loans is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of loans to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged against the allowance for credit losses when management believes that collectability of the principal is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance is increased (decreased) by provisions (or reversals of) reported in the income statement as a component of provisions for credit loss. Under the new guidance, the allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is a liability account representing expected credit losses over the contractual period for which the Company is exposed to credit risk resulting from a contractual obligation to extend credit.
The amount of each allowance account represents management's best estimate of current expected credit losses on such financial instruments using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, credit quality, or term as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, gross domestic product, property values or other relevant factors. The Company utilizes Moody’s Analytics economic forecast scenarios and assigns probability weighting to those scenarios which best reflect management’s views on the economic forecast.
The allowance for credit losses for loans is measured on a collective basis for portfolios of loans when similar risk characteristics exist. Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated for expected credit losses on an individual basis and excluded from the collective evaluation. For determining the appropriate allowance for credit losses on a collective basis, the loan portfolio is segmented into pools based upon similar risk characteristics and a lifetime loss-rate model is utilized. The measurement of expected credit losses is impacted by loan/borrower attributes and certain macroeconomic variables. Management has determined that they are reasonably able to forecast the macroeconomic variables used in the modeling processes with an acceptable degree of confidence for a total of two years then encompassing a reversion process whereby the forecasted macroeconomic variables are reverted to their historical mean utilizing a rational, systematic basis. Management qualitatively adjusts model results for risk factors that are not considered within the modeling processes but are nonetheless relevant in assessing the expected credit losses within the loan pools. These qualitative factor (Q-Factor) adjustments may increase or decrease management's estimate of expected credit losses by a calculated percentage or amount based upon the estimated level of risk.
Due to the subjective nature of these estimates in general and more so due to the multiple, complex variables used in the calculation, the estimate for determining current expected credit losses is subject to uncertainty. The various components of the calculation require significant management judgement and certain assumptions are highly subjective. Volatility in certain credit metrics and variations between expected and actual outcomes are likely.
Further information regarding Company policies and methodology used to estimate the allowance for credit losses is presented in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5. Loans, Net and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Note 14. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Commitments and Contingencies.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
The Company has evaluated new accounting standards that have recently been issued and have determined that there are no new accounting standards that should be described in this section that will materially impact the Company’s operations, financial condition or liquidity in future periods. Refer to Note 2. Recent Accounting Standards, of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting standards and their expected impact on the consolidated financial statements.