ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including without limitation those described in Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussions of matters pertaining to the year ended December 31, 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K, but can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 that was filed on March 1, 2021.
Management Overview
We were incorporated in Delaware on November 4, 2011. We provide land-based contract drilling services for oil and natural gas producers targeting unconventional resource plays in the United States. We own and operate a premium fleet comprised of modern, technologically advanced drilling rigs.
Our rig fleet includes 24 marketed AC powered (“AC”) rigs plus additional AC rigs that require significant capital expenditures in order to meet our AC pad-optimal specifications that we do not plan to market absent a material improvement in market conditions. Our first rig began drilling in May 2012.
We currently focus our operations on unconventional resource plays located in geographic regions that we can efficiently support from our Houston, Texas and Midland, Texas facilities in order to maximize economies of scale. Currently, our rigs are operating in the Permian Basin, the Haynesville Shale and the Eagle Ford Shale; however, our rigs have previously operated in the Mid-Continent and Eaglebine regions as well.
Our business depends on the level of exploration and production activity by oil and natural gas companies operating in the United States, and in particular, the regions where we actively market our contract drilling services. The oil and natural gas exploration and production industry is historically cyclical and characterized by significant changes in the levels of exploration and development activities. Oil and natural gas prices and market expectations of potential changes in those prices significantly affect the levels of those activities. Worldwide political, regulatory, economic, and military events, as well as natural disasters have contributed to oil and natural gas price volatility historically, and are likely to continue to do so in the future. Any prolonged reduction in the overall level of exploration and development activities in the United States and the regions where we market our contract drilling services, whether resulting from changes in oil and natural gas prices or otherwise, could materially and adversely affect our business.
Significant Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update
During 2020, reduced demand for crude oil related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+ early in the year, led to a significant reduction in oil prices and demand for drilling services in the United States. In response to these adverse conditions and uncertainty, our customers reduced planned capital expenditures and drilling activity throughout 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, our operating rig count reached a peak of 22 rigs and temporarily reached a low of three rigs during the third quarter of 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, oil and natural gas prices began to stabilize and steadily improve, and demand for our products began to modestly improve from their historic lows, which allowed us to reactivate additional rigs during the back half of 2020 and throughout 2021. As market conditions improved, dayrates and our revenue per day also began to steadily improve for our contract drilling services, in particular during the second half of 2021. Recently, oil prices (WTI-Cushing) reached a high of $96.13 per barrel on February 28, 2022, and natural gas prices (Henry Hub) reached a high of $6.70 per mmcf on February 2, 2022. Although our customers have increased drilling activity in response to these improvements, capital
discipline and adherence to 2021 capital budgets, reduced access to capital markets and hedges in place based on lower commodity prices, have caused such increases to be less dramatic compared to prior industry cycles. As of December 31, 2021, we had 16 rigs operating and 17 contracted, with our 17th rig reactivating in January 2022.
Due to rapidly declining market conditions at the end of the first quarter of 2020, we took actions in order to reduce our cost structure including: salary or compensation reductions, suspension of all cash-based incentive compensation, reduction of the number of executive management and directors, reduction of annual director compensation and reduction of non-field-based personnel headcount. As market conditions improved in 2021, we reinstated our incentive compensation accruals and increased field pay in response to tighter labor markets. As of January 1, 2022, we have fully reinstitued pre-COVID compensation levels and in many cases increased compensation above pre-COVID levels in response to a tightening labor market.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.” The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. We deferred $0.8 million of employer social security payments during the year ended December 31, 2020. We made the first required payment of $0.4 million on January 3, 2022.
The CARES Act did not have a material impact on our income taxes. Management will continue to monitor future developments and interpretations for any further impacts on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity.
PPP Loan
During the second quarter of 2020, we entered into an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”), sponsored by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) as guarantor of loans under the PPP. The PPP was part of the CARES Act, and it provided loans to qualifying businesses in a maximum amount equal to the lesser of $10.0 million and 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The proceeds of the loan could only be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interests, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness (the “permissible purposes”) during the covered period that ended on or about October 13, 2020. Interest on the PPP loan was equal to 1.0% per annum. All or part of the loan was forgivable based upon the level of permissible expenses incurred during the covered period and changes to the Company’s headcount during the covered period to headcount during the period from January 1, 2020 to February 15, 2020. In the third quarter of 2021, we received notice from the SBA that our loan was forgiven and paid in full. The loan is considered an extinguishment of debt and is recorded as “Gain on extinguishment of debt” in our 2021 Statements of Operations. We have not accrued any liability associated with the risk of an adverse SBA review.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement
On November 11, 2020, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Commitment Purchase Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Tumim Stone Capital LLC (“Tumim”). Pursuant to the Commitment Purchase Agreement, the Company had the right to sell to Tumim up to $5.0 million (the “Total Commitment”) in shares of its common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Shares”) (subject to certain conditions and limitations) from time to time during the term of the Commitment Purchase Agreement. Sales of common stock pursuant to the Commitment Purchase Agreement, and the timing of any sales, were solely at our option and we were under no obligation to sell securities pursuant to this arrangement. Shares could be sold by the Company pursuant to this arrangement over a period of up to 24 months, commencing on December 1, 2020.
We determined that the right to sell additional shares represented a freestanding put option under ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging, but had a fair value of zero, and therefore no additional accounting was required. Transaction costs, of $0.5 million, incurred in connection with entering into the Purchase Agreement were expensed as selling,
general and administrative expense during the fourth quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had sold 1,144,000 shares for a total of $4.2 million in proceeds at an average sales price of $3.71 per share. On December 14, 2021, the agreement was terminated and no further shares were sold.
Amendments to Term Loan Credit Agreement
On June 4, 2020, we revised our Term Loan Credit Agreement to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest, solely during one three-consecutive-month period immediately following such notice, in-kind (the “PIK Amount”). We agreed to pay an additional amount equal to 0.75% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans under the Term Loan Credit Agreement plus all PIK Amounts, if any, that are added to such principal amount being repaid or prepaid on either the maturity date or upon the occurrence of an acceleration of obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. On April 1, 2021, we elected to pay in-kind the $2.8 million interest payment due under our Term Loan, which increased our Term Loan balance accordingly.
On September 28, 2021, we executed a Fourth Amendment (the “Fourth Amendment”) to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2018 (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”), which amended the Term Loan Credit Agreement to permit us, at our option, subject to required prior notice, to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest due October 1, 2021, in-kind. The payment-in-kind was in lieu of exercising a drawdown under the Accordion under the Term Loan Credit Agreement, thus, the amount of the Term Loan Accordion commitment of $15 million was reduced by the PIK Amount. On September 29, 2021, we elected to pay in-kind the $3.1 million October 1, 2021 interest payment.
On December 30, 2021 we executed a Fifth Amendment (the “Fifth Amendment”) to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2018, to permit us, at our option, subject to prior notice, to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest due January 1, 2022 in-kind. The payment-in-kind was in lieu of exercising a drawdown under the Accordion under the Term Loan Credit Agreement, thus the amount of the Term Loan Accordion commitment was further reduced by the PIK Amount. On December 30, 2021, we elected to pay in-kind the $3.2 million January 3, 2022 interest payment. Following this payment-in-kind on January 1, 2022, the Term Loan Accordion commitment was $8.7 million.
ATM Offering
On June 5, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement (the “Agreement”) with Piper Sandler & Co. (the “Agent”), through its Simmons Energy division. Pursuant to the Agreement, we were able to offer and sell through the Agent shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $11.0 million. We issued and sold approximately $11.0 million of common stock in the second and third quarters of 2020.
On March 8, 2021, in conjunction with the ATM Distribution Agreement entered into on June 5, 2020, our board of directors authorized an additional $2.2 million of common stock to be sold in transactions that are deemed to be “at-the-market offerings.” We began offering shares under this program during the first quarter of 2021 and completed this offering process during the second quarter of 2021, raising $2.2 million of gross proceeds and issuing an aggregate of 585,934 shares at an average gross offering price of $3.75 per share.
On August 19, 2021, we entered into a new ATM Distribution Agreement relating to the offer and sale of an additional $7.5 million of common stock to be sold in transactions that are deemed to be “at-the-market offerings.” During the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed this offering process, raising $7.5 million of gross proceeds and issuing an aggregate of 2,274,990 shares at an average gross offering price of $3.30.
On December 16, 2021, in conjunction with the ATM Distribution Agreement entered into on August 19, 2021, our board of directors authorized the sale of an additional $5.9 million of common stock to be sold in transactions that are deemed to be “at-the-market offerings.” We began offering shares under this program during the first quarter of 2022. As of March 4, 2022, we raised gross proceeds of $3.6 million from the sale of shares in the offering.
Reverse Stock Split
Following approval by our stockholders on February 6, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our common stock. The reverse stock split reduced the number of shares of common stock issued and outstanding from 77,523,973 and 76,241,045 shares, respectively, to 3,876,196 and 3,812,050 shares, respectively, and reduced the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 shares to 50,000,000 shares.
Sidewinder Merger Effects and Merger Consideration Amendment
We completed the merger with Sidewinder Drilling LLC on October 1, 2018. At the time of consummation of the Sidewinder Merger, Sidewinder owned various mechanical rig assets and related equipment (the "Mechanical Rigs") located principally in the Utica and Marcellus plays. As these assets were not consistent with ICD’s core strategy or geographic focus, ICD agreed that these assets could be disposed of, with the Sidewinder unitholders receiving the net proceeds. As a result of this arrangement, on the merger date, we recorded the fair value of the Mechanical Rigs less costs to sell, as assets held for sale, with a related liability in contingent consideration. Subsequently, these assets were sold at auction for substantially less than the appraised fair values on the merger date. As a result, in the second quarter of 2020, the contingent consideration liability was reduced by the appraised fair values on the merger date and the proceeds were recorded as merger consideration payable to an affiliate on our consolidated balance sheets.
On June 4, 2020, we entered into a letter agreement (the “Merger Consideration Amendment”) with MSD Credit Opportunity Master Fund, L.P. to allow for the deferral of payment of the Mechanical Rig net proceeds of $2.9 million, to the earlier of (i) June 30, 2022 and (ii) a change of control transaction (as defined therein) (such applicable date, the “Payment Date”), and requires us to pay an additional amount in connection with such deferred payment equal to interest accrued on the amount of Mechanical Rig net proceeds during the period between May 1, 2020 and the Payment Date, which interest shall accrue at a rate of 15% per annum, compounded quarterly, during the period beginning on May 1, 2020 and ending on December 31, 2020 and at a rate of 25% per annum, compounded quarterly, during any period following December 31, 2020. The Mechanical Rig net proceeds were previously payable in the second quarter of 2020. Accrued interest as of December 31, 2021 was $1.2 million.
Asset Impairment, net
During 2021, we impaired a damaged piece of drilling equipment for $0.3 million, net of insurance recoveries. We also sold miscellaneous drilling equipment. Accordingly, we impaired the drilling equipment to fair market value less cost to sell and recorded asset impairment expense of $0.5 million in our consolidated statements of operations.
During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of the rapidly deteriorating market conditions described in "COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update," we concluded that a triggering event had occurred and, accordingly, an interim asset impairment test was performed. As a result, we recognized impairment of $3.3 million associated with the decline in the market value of our assets held for sale based upon the market approach method and $13.3 million related to the remaining assets on rigs removed from our marketed fleet, as well as certain other component equipment and inventory; all of which was deemed to be unsaleable and of zero value based upon the macroeconomic conditions at the time and uncertainties surrounding COVID-19.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, due to the highly competitive market and in an effort to minimize capital spending, management drafted and approved a plan to upgrade our existing fleet by utilizing the primary components needed to complete the upgrades from five of our existing rigs and these five rigs were removed from our marketed fleet. We recorded an impairment charge of $21.9 million related to the remaining assets on these non-marketed rigs. Additionally, we recorded a $2.4 million asset impairment based upon the market approach method on certain capital spare parts, all of which were deemed to be incompatible with our upgraded fleet.
Our Revenues
We earn contract drilling revenues pursuant to drilling contracts entered into with our customers. We perform drilling services on a “daywork” basis, under which we charge a specified rate per day, or “dayrate.” The dayrate
associated with each of our contracts is a negotiated price determined by the capabilities of the rig, location, depth and complexity of the wells to be drilled, operating conditions, duration of the contract and market conditions. The term of land drilling contracts may be for a defined number of wells or for a fixed time period. We generally receive lump-sum payments for the mobilization of rigs and other drilling equipment at the commencement of a new drilling contract. Revenue and costs associated with the initial mobilization are deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the related drilling contract once the rig spuds. Costs incurred to relocate rigs and other equipment to an area in which a contract has not been secured are expensed as incurred. If a contract is terminated prior to the specified contract term, early termination payments received from the customer are only recognized as revenues when all contractual obligations, such as mitigation requirements, are satisfied. While under contract, our rigs generally earn a reduced rate while the rig is moving between wells or drilling locations, or on standby waiting for the customer. Reimbursements for the purchase of supplies, equipment, trucking and other services that are provided at the request of our customers are recorded as revenue when incurred. The related costs are recorded as operating expenses when incurred. Revenue is presented net of any sales tax charged to the customer that we are required to remit to local or state governmental taxing authorities.
Our Operating Costs
Our operating costs include all expenses associated with operating and maintaining our drilling rigs. Operating costs include all “rig level” expenses such as labor and related payroll costs, repair and maintenance expenses, supplies, workers’ compensation and other insurance, ad valorem taxes and equipment rental costs. Also included in our operating costs are certain costs that are not incurred at the “rig level.” These costs include expenses directly associated with our operations management team as well as our safety and maintenance personnel who are not directly assigned to our rigs but are responsible for the oversight and support of our operations and safety and maintenance programs across our fleet.
Our operating costs also include costs and expenses associated with construction activities at our Galayda yard location to the extent that construction activities cease or are not continuous. During 2021, our operating costs also included approximately $1.4 million of costs associated with the reactivation of idle rigs. Reactivation costs include costs associated with recommissioning the rig, the hiring and training of new crews and the purchase of supplies and other consumables required for the operation of the rigs.
How We Evaluate our Operations
We regularly use a number of financial and operational measures to analyze and evaluate the performance of our business and compensate our employees, including the following:
● Safety Performance. Maintaining a strong safety record is a critical component of our business strategy. We measure safety by tracking the total recordable incident rate for our operations. In addition, we closely monitor and measure compliance with our safety policies and procedures, including "near miss" reports and job safety analysis compliance. We believe our Risk-Based HSE management system provides the required control, yet needed flexibility, to conduct all activities safely, efficiently and appropriately.
● Utilization. Rig utilization measures the total amount of time that our rigs are earning revenue under a contract during a particular period. We measure utilization by dividing the total number of Operating Days for a rig by the total number of days the rig is available for operation in the applicable calendar period. A rig is available for operation commencing on the earlier of the date it spuds its initial well following construction or when it has been completed and is actively marketed. “Operating Days” represent the total number of days a rig is earning revenue under a contract, beginning when the rig spuds its initial well under the contract and ending with the completion of the rig’s demobilization.
● Revenue Per Day. Revenue per day measures the amount of revenue that an operating rig earns on a daily basis during a particular period. We calculate revenue per day by dividing total contract drilling revenue earned during the applicable period by the number of Operating Days in the period. Revenues attributable to costs reimbursed by customers are excluded from this measure.
● Operating Cost Per Day. Operating cost per day measures the operating costs incurred on a daily basis during a particular period. We calculate operating cost per day by dividing total operating costs during the
applicable period by the number of Operating Days in the period. Operating costs attributable to costs reimbursed by customers are excluded from this measure.
● Operating Efficiency and Uptime. Maintaining our rigs’ operational efficiency is a critical component of our business strategy. We measure our operating efficiency by tracking each drilling rig’s unscheduled downtime on a daily, monthly, quarterly and annual basis.
Results of Operations
The following summarizes our financial and operating data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) Marketed rigs exclude idle rigs that will not be reactivated until upgrades or conversions are complete or market conditions substantially improve.
(2) Rig operating days represent the number of days our rigs are earning revenue under a contract during the period, including days that standby revenues are earned.
(3) Average number of operating rigs is calculated by dividing the total number of rig operating days in the period by the total number of calendar days in the period.
(4) Rig utilization is calculated as rig operating days divided by the total number of days our drilling rigs are available during the applicable period.
(5) Average revenue per operating day represents total contract drilling revenues earned during the period divided by rig operating days in the period. Excluded in calculating average revenue per operating day are revenues associated with the reimbursement of (i) out-of-pocket costs paid by customers of $7.8 million and $9.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and (ii) early termination revenues of zero and $3.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(6) Average cost per operating day represents total operating costs incurred during the period divided by rig operating days in the period. The following costs are excluded in calculating average cost per operating day: (i) out-of-pocket costs reimbursed by customers of $7.8 million and $9.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, (ii) overhead costs expensed due to reduced rig upgrade activity of $1.6 million and $1.9 million during the years ended years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, (iii) rig reactivation costs, inclusive of new crew training costs, of $1.4 million and $1.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and (iv) rig decommissioning costs associated with stacking deactivated rigs of $0.1 million and $0.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(7) WTI spot price as reported by the United States Energy Information Administration.
(8) Henry Hub spot price as reported by the United States Energy Information Administration.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $88.0 million, representing a 5.4% increase over revenues of $83.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to an increase in operating days to 4,651 days as compared to 3,739 days in 2020. The increase in operating days was primarily attributable to the reactivation of rigs in 2021 after the drastic downturn in market conditions in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the concurrent initiation of a crude oil price war between members of the “OPEC+” group. On a revenue per operating day basis, which excludes the impact of early termination, our revenue per operating day decreased to $17,224 during 2021 compared to revenue per operating day of $19,000 during 2020. This decrease in average revenue per day resulted from the expiration of various higher dayrate legacy term contracts prior to 2021.
Operating Costs
Operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $75.8 million, representing a 15.9% increase over operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $65.4 million. This increase was attributable to an increase in operating days to 4,651 days as compared to 3,739 days in 2020. On a cost per operating day basis, our cost per day decreased to $13,943 during 2021, compared to cost per day of $13,984 during 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to inefficiencies during the downturn in 2020, offset by higher personnel costs associated with staffing for planned rig reactivations and tighter labor markets in 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $15.7 million, representing a 16.4% increase over selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $13.5 million. This increase was primarily related to higher incentive compensation accruals in 2021. We suspended our incentive compensation plan for 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Severance Expense
Severance expense of $1.1 million was recorded during 2020 in connection with our cost reduction measures instituted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and deteriorating market conditions. We did not record any severance expense in 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.9 million, representing a 11.4% decrease compared to $43.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily the result of the asset impairments incurred in 2020 and 2021, offset by increases related to the introduction of reactivated drilling rigs upgraded by us in 2021. We begin depreciating our rigs on a straight-line basis when they commence drilling operations.
Asset Impairment, net
Asset impairment expense of $0.8 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $41.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For further discussion, see “Significant Developments - Asset Impairments” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(Gain) Loss on Disposition of Assets, net
A gain on the disposition of assets totaling $0.2 million and a loss of $0.7 million was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the current and prior year period the gain and loss relate primarily to the sale of miscellaneous drilling equipment.
Other Expense
Other expense of $0.2 million was recorded during 2021 in connection with the termination of our Commitment Purchase Agreement. We did not record any other expense in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the current year primarily relates to the compounding interest on the merger consideration payable in June 2022.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
A gain on extinguishment of debt totaling $10.1 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the forgiveness of our PPP Loan. See Note 8 “Long-term Debt” for additional information.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $18.5 million compared to income tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate was negative 38.5% for the year ended 2021 compared to 0.2% for the year ended 2020. Tax expenses for 2021 primarily related to non-cash charges related to the inability to utilize net operating loss (“NOL”) deferred tax assets to offset deferred tax liabilities due to an IRC Section 382 ownership change occurring in October 2021 and the limitations therefrom placed upon the NOLs. Taxes for 2020 primarily relate to Louisiana state income tax and Texas margin tax. See Note 9 “Income Taxes” for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity as of December 31, 2021 included cash on hand of $4.1 million, $11.3 million of availability under our $40.0 million ABL Credit Facility, based on a borrowing base of $17.8 million, and an $11.9 million committed accordion under our existing term loan facility. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we raised an additional $3.6 million of gross proceeds through “at-the-market” equity offerings issuing an additional 1,061,853 shares which is not included in our liquidity or our outstanding share count as of December 31, 2021.
We expect our future capital and liquidity needs to be related to operating expenses, maintenance capital expenditures, rig reactivations, working capital and general corporate purposes.
Cash flow from operations, ignoring working capital fluctuations, was negative during 2021. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we elected to pay in-kind $3.2 million of interest due on January 1, 2022, which reduced our remaining Term Loan Accordion commitment and increased our Term Loan Facility balance accordingly. Looking forward past December 31, 2021, we currently estimate that required non-operating cash payments for interest under our credit facilities and finance lease payments will approximate $18.1 million for the 12 months ending December 31,
2022. In addition, the final merger consideration payment due pursuant to our merger agreement executed in connection with our merger with Sidewinder Drilling matures on June 30, 2022. Payments for capital expenditures and financing leases and to fund operations will be in addition to these amounts.
Because our cash flows from operations have been and could continue to be impacted by depressed market conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we may be required to continue to draw down under our ABL Credit Facility and to draw down funds pursuant to the DDTL Facility under our term loan facility to meet required non-operating expenditures and if necessary to fund operations. We currently believe that the actions we have taken to date and our existing sources of liquidity are sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months. However, due to the uncertainty regarding the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on the oil and gas industry and our business and operations, there can be no assurance in this regard.
Although our Term Loan Credit Agreement does not mature until October 2023, we also have begun the process of evaluating alternatives to refinance this Term Loan Facility. We cannot predict at this time the form of any such refinancing; however, such alternatives could include an extension of the term of the Term Loan Facility, the conversion or refinancing of all or part of the debt to equity or equity-linked instruments, and adjustments to interest rates and covenants, the issuance of debt or equity securities to third parties, or a combination of conversions or exchanges and issuances of debt or equity securities to third parties. Although market conditions for our business have been strengthening, we cannot predict whether suitable refinancing alternatives will be available to us, or the timing of when such refinancing could occur.
You should read "Item 1A Risk Factors" in particular, "Risks Related to Our Liquidity", for additional information regarding risks surrounding our operations and financial liquidity.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations as described below.
Our obligations include "off-balance sheet arrangements" whereby the liabilities associated with unconditional purchase obligations are not fully reflected in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our long-term debt as of December 31, 2021 consisted of amounts due under our Term Loan Facility (as defined and further described below). Interest on long-term debt is related to our estimated future contractual interest obligations on long-term indebtedness outstanding as of December 31, 2021 under our Term Loan Facility. Interest payment obligations on our Term Loan Facility were estimated based on the 9.0% interest rate that was in effect at December 31, 2021, and the principal balance of $135.9 million at December 31, 2021, and assuming repayment of the outstanding balance occurs at October 1, 2023. Interest payment obligation on our ABL Credit Facility were estimated based on the 4.75% interest rate that was in effect at December 31, 2021, and the principal balance of $6.3 million at December 31, 2021, and assuming repayment of the outstanding balance occurs at October 1, 2023. Included in our contractual obligations are finance leases on vehicles and certain drilling equipment. These leases generally have a term of 36 months and are paid monthly.
Our purchase obligations relate primarily to outstanding purchase orders for rig equipment or components ordered but not received. We have made progress payments on these orders of approximately $0.2 million that could be forfeited if we were to cancel these orders.
Cash Flows
Net Cash (Used In) Provided By Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash provided by operating activities of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Factors affecting changes in operating cash flows are similar to those that impact net earnings, with the exception of non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization, impairments, gains or losses on disposals of assets, stock-based compensation, deferred taxes and amortization of deferred financing costs. Additionally, changes in working capital items such as accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expense, accounts payable and accrued liabilities can significantly affect operating cash flows. Cash flows from operating activities during 2021 were lower as a result of a decrease in net loss of $29.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $57.1 million, compared to $88.5 million in 2020. Additionally, working capital changes that increased cash flows from operating activities were de minimis in 2021 compared to working capital changes that increased cash flows from operating activities of $8.4 million in 2020.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our primary investing activities in 2021 related to rig upgrades and maintenance capital expenditures. Cash payments of $16.4 million for capital expenditures were offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $2.0 million. Cash payments during 2021 included approximately $1.0 million associated with equipment purchased in 2020. During 2020, cash payments of $14.2 million for capital expenditures were offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $5.1 million and the collection of principal on note receivable of $0.1 million.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, we received proceeds from borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility of $6.3 million, proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our ATM transaction, net of issuance costs of $9.0 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity line of credit purchase agreement of $4.2 million offset by restricted stock units withheld for taxes paid of $14.0 thousand, the purchase of treasury stock of $10.0 thousand, financing cost paid of $64 thousand, and made payments for finance lease obligations of $3.6 million. During 2020, we made borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility of $11.0 million and under the PPP Loan of $10.0 million, offset by repayments under our Revolving Credit Facility of $11.0 million, common stock issuance costs of $0.8 million, received proceeds from issuance of common stock of $11.0 million, had restricted stock units withheld for taxes paid of $44.0 thousand, purchased $0.1 million of treasury stock and made payments for finance lease obligations of $4.3 million.
Long-term Debt
On October 1, 2018, we entered into a Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) for an initial term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $130.0 million, (the “Term Loan Facility”) and (b) a delayed
draw term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $15.0 million (the “DDTL Facility”, and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Term Facilities”). The Term Facilities have a maturity date of October 1, 2023, at which time all outstanding principal under the Term Facilities and other obligations become due and payable in full. The outstanding balance under this Term Loan Credit Agreement at December 31, 2021 was $135.9 million, and increased to $139.1 million in January 2022 as a result of the payment-in-kind of interest due on January 1, 2022.
At our election, interest under the Term Loan Facility is determined by reference at our option to either (i) a “base rate” equal to the higher of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.05%, (b) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) with an interest period of one month, plus 1.0%, and (c) the rate of interest as publicly quoted from time to time by the Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate” in the United States, plus an applicable margin of 6.5%, or (ii) a “LIBOR rate” equal to LIBOR with an interest period of one month, plus an applicable margin of 7.5%.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement contains financial covenants, including a liquidity covenant of $10.0 million and a springing fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of 1:1 that is tested when availability under the ABL Credit Facility (defined below) and the DDTL Facility is below $5.0 million at any time that a DDTL Facility loan is outstanding. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains other customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, asset dispositions, restricted payments, investments and transactions with affiliates. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default, including breaches of material covenants, defaults under the ABL Credit Facility or other material agreements for indebtedness, and a change of control.
The obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority lien on collateral (the “Term Priority Collateral”) other than accounts receivable, deposit accounts and other related collateral pledged as first priority collateral (“Priority Collateral”) under the ABL Credit Facility (defined below) and a second priority lien on such Priority Collateral, and are unconditionally guaranteed by all of our current and future direct and indirect subsidiaries. MSD PCOF Partners IV, LLC (an affiliate of MSD Partners) is the lender of our $130.0 million Term Loan Facility. MSD Partners, together with MSD Capital, owned approximately 6.1% of the outstanding shares of our common stock as of June 30, 2021. Their ownership percentage dropped below the 5% beneficial ownership percentage as of September 30, 2021, and remains as such at December 31, 2021.
In June 2020, we revised our Term Loan Credit Agreement to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest, solely during one three-consecutive-month period immediately following such notice, in-kind (the “PIK Amount”). We agreed to pay an additional amount equal to 0.75% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans under the Term Loan Credit Agreement plus all PIK Amounts, if any, that are added to such principal amount being repaid or prepaid on either the maturity date or upon the occurrence of an acceleration of obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. As such, the additional amount, approximately $1.0 million, was recorded as a direct deduction from the face amount of the Term Loan Facility and as a long-term payable on our consolidated balance sheets. The additional amount is amortized as interest expense over the term of the Term Loan Facility. During the second quarter of 2021, we utilized this PIK option to pay interest due during the quarter. In September 2021, we amended our Term Loan Credit Agreement to permit us, subject to required prior notice, to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest due October 1, 2021, in-kind. The payment-in-kind is in lieu of exercising a drawdown under the DDTL Facility under the Term Loan Credit Agreement, reducing the amount of the DDTL Facility commitment of $15 million by the amount of the accrued and unpaid interest due October 1, 2021. On October 1, 2021, we elected to pay in-kind the $3.1 million interest payment due under our Term Loan Credit Agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we elected to pay in- kind $3.2 million of interest due on January 1, 2022, which will draw down our remaining $11.9 million DDTL Facility and increase our Term Loan Facility balance accordingly.
Additionally on October 1, 2018, we entered into a $40.0 million revolving Credit Agreement (the “ABL Credit Facility”), including availability for letters of credit in an aggregate amount at any time outstanding not to exceed $7.5 million. Availability under the ABL Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base calculated based on 85% of the net amount of our eligible accounts receivable, minus reserves. The ABL Credit Facility has a maturity date of the earlier of October 1, 2023 or the maturity date of the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
At our election, interest under the ABL Credit Facility is determined by reference at our option to either (i) a “base rate” equal to the higher of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.05%, (b) LIBOR with an interest period of one month, plus 1.0%, and (c) the prime rate of Wells Fargo, plus in each case, an applicable base rate margin ranging from 1.0% to 1.5% based on quarterly availability, or (ii) a revolving loan rate equal to LIBOR for the applicable interest period plus an applicable LIBOR margin ranging from 2.0% to 2.5% based on quarterly availability. We also pay, on a quarterly basis, a commitment fee of 0.375% (or 0.25% at any time when revolver usage is greater than 50% of the maximum credit) per annum on the unused portion of the ABL Credit Facility commitment.
The ABL Credit Facility contains a springing fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of 1:1 that is tested when availability is less than 10% of the maximum credit. The ABL Credit Facility also contains other customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, asset dispositions, restricted payments, investments and transactions with affiliates. The ABL Credit Facility also provides for customary events of default, including breaches of material covenants, defaults under the Term Loan Credit Agreement or other material agreements for indebtedness, and a change of control. We are in compliance with our financial covenants as of December 31, 2021.
The obligations under the ABL Credit Facility are secured by a first priority lien on Priority Collateral, which includes all accounts receivable and deposit accounts, and a second priority lien on the Term Priority Collateral, and are unconditionally guaranteed by all of our current and future direct and indirect subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, the weighted-average interest rate on our borrowings was 8.81%. At December 31, 2021, the borrowing base under our ABL Credit Facility was $17.8 million, and we had $11.3 million of availability remaining of our $40.0 million commitment on that date.
In addition, on April 27, 2020, we entered into an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the PPP, sponsored by the SBA as guarantor of loans under the PPP. The PPP was part of the CARES Act, and it provided loans to qualifying businesses in a maximum amount equal to the lesser of $10.0 million and 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The proceeds of the loan could only be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interests, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness (the “permissible purposes”) during the covered period ending October 13, 2020. Interest on the PPP Loan was equal to 1.0% per annum. All or part of the loan was forgivable based upon the level of permissible expenses incurred during the covered period and changes to the Company’s headcount during the period from January 1, 2020 to February 15, 2020. In the third quarter of 2021, we received notice from the SBA that our loan was forgiven and paid in full. We have not accrued any liability associated with the risk of an adverse SBA review.
Additionally, included in our long-term debt are finance leases. These leases generally have initial terms of 36 months and are paid monthly.
Critical Accounting Policies and Accounting Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies and estimates and assumptions used by management during their preparation. These estimates and assumptions are evaluated on an on-going basis. Estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities if not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and estimates used in our consolidated financial statements. Other significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Revenue and Cost Recognition
We earn contract drilling revenues pursuant to drilling contracts entered into with our customers. We perform drilling services on a “daywork” basis, under which we charge a specified rate per day, or “dayrate.” The dayrate associated with each of our contracts is a negotiated price determined by the capabilities of the rig, location, depth and
complexity of the wells to be drilled, operating conditions, duration of the contract and market conditions. The term of land drilling contracts may be for a defined number of wells or for a fixed time period. We generally receive lump-sum payments for the mobilization of rigs and other drilling equipment at the commencement of a new drilling contract. Revenue and costs associated with the initial mobilization are deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the related drilling contract once the rig spuds. Costs incurred to relocate rigs and other equipment to an area in which a contract has not been secured are expensed as incurred. Our contracts provide for early termination fees in the event our customers choose to cancel the contract prior to the specified contract term. We record a contract liability for such fees received up front, and recognize them ratably as contract drilling revenue over the initial term of the related drilling contract or until such time that all performance obligations are satisfied. While under contract, our rigs generally earn a reduced rate while the rig is moving between wells or drilling locations, or on standby waiting for the customer. Reimbursements for the purchase of supplies, equipment, trucking and other services that are provided at the request of our customers are recorded as revenue when incurred. The related costs are recorded as operating expenses when incurred. Revenue is presented net of any sales tax charged to the customer that we are required to remit to local or state governmental taxing authorities.
Our operating costs include all expenses associated with operating and maintaining our drilling rigs. Operating costs include all “rig level” expenses such as labor and related payroll costs, repair and maintenance expenses, supplies, workers’ compensation and other insurance, ad valorem taxes and equipment rental costs. Also included in our operating costs are certain costs that are not incurred at the rig level. These costs include expenses directly associated with our operations management team as well as our safety and maintenance personnel who are not directly assigned to our rigs but are responsible for the oversight and support of our operations and safety and maintenance programs across our fleet.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, including renewals and betterments, are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. All property, plant and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from two to 39 years. Our determination of the useful lives of property and equipment requires us to make various assumptions when the assets are acquired or placed into service about the expected usage, normal wear and tear and the extent and frequency of maintenance programs. The cost of maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Major overhauls and upgrades are capitalized and depreciated over their remaining useful life.
We review our assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparison of the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset to the carrying amount of the asset. If the carrying value of such assets is less than the estimated undiscounted cash flow, an impairment charge is recorded in the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds their estimated fair value.
Asset impairment expense of $0.8 million was recorded for 2021, as compared to $41.0 million for 2020. For further discussion, see “Significant Developments - Asset Impairments” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, we record deferred income taxes based upon differences between the financial reporting basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities, and use enacted tax rates and laws that we expect will be in effect when we realize those assets or settle those liabilities. We review deferred tax assets for a valuation allowance based upon management’s estimates of whether it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax asset will be fully realized in a future period.
We recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant taxing authority would more-likely-than-not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to the unrecognized tax benefits within the income tax expense (benefit) line item in our consolidated statement of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record compensation expense over the requisite service period for all stock-based compensation based on the grant date fair value of the award. The expense is included in selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of operations or capitalized in connection with rig construction activity.
Other Matters
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are party to certain arrangements defined as “off-balance sheet arrangements” that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors. These arrangements relate to non-cancelable operating leases with terms of less than twelve months and unconditional purchase obligations not fully reflected on our consolidated balance sheets. See Note 13 “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, as additional guidance on the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. The new guidance requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable supportable forecasts. In addition, the guidance amends the accounting for credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities and purchased financial assets with credit deterioration. The new guidance is effective for all public companies for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018. In October 2019, the FASB approved a proposal which grants smaller reporting companies additional time to implement FASB standards on current expected credit losses (CECL) to January 2023. As a smaller reporting company, we will defer adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 until January 2023. We are currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
On April 1, 2020, we adopted the new standard, ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform: Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting, which provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform (e.g. discontinuation of LIBOR) if certain criteria are met. In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-01, Reference Rate Reform, to provide clarifying guidance regarding the scope of Topic 848, effective immediately. As of December 31, 2021, we have not yet elected any optional expedients provided in the standard. We will apply the accounting relief as relevant contract and hedge accounting relationship modifications are made during the reference rate reform transition period. We do not expect the standard to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, to simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. We do not expect the standard to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options, which clarifies that issuers should account for modifications and exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options that remain equity-classified after these transactions as an exchange of the original instrument for a new instrument. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2022 and there is no impact on our consolidated financial statements.