Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those described under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics to treat progressive non-viral liver diseases with high unmet medical need utilizing our proprietary bile acid chemistry. Our first marketed product, Ocaliva® (obeticholic acid or “OCA”), is a farnesoid X receptor (“FXR”) agonist approved in the United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union and several other jurisdictions for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis (“PBC”) in combination with ursodeoxycholic acid (“UDCA”) in adults with an inadequate response to UDCA or as monotherapy in adults unable to tolerate UDCA.
In addition to commercializing OCA for PBC under the Ocaliva brand name, we are also currently developing OCA for additional indications, including nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”). We are also developing product candidates in various stages of clinical and preclinical development. We believe that OCA and our other product candidates have the potential to treat orphan and other more prevalent liver diseases such as NASH for which there are currently limited therapeutic options.
Ocaliva was approved for PBC by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in May 2016 under the accelerated approval pathway. We commenced sales and marketing of Ocaliva in the United States shortly after receiving approval, and Ocaliva is now available to U.S. patients primarily through a network of specialty pharmacy distributors. Ocaliva received conditional approval for PBC from the European Commission in December 2016 and we commenced our commercial launches across Europe (including the United Kingdom) in January 2017. In addition, we continue to work to execute on our post-marketing regulatory commitments with respect to Ocaliva in the U.S. and Europe. We will continue to generate placebo controlled data from the COBALT trial as well as data from studies utilizing real world evidence in support of a broader evidence data package, which we anticipate submitting to the FDA and the EMA in the second half of 2022. If this data package does not support fulfillment of our post-marketing obligations, we may not be able to maintain our previously granted marketing approvals of Ocaliva for PBC.
Our lead development product candidate is OCA for the potential treatment of NASH. In February 2019, we announced topline results from the planned 18-month interim analysis of our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial of OCA in patients with liver fibrosis due to NASH, known as the REGENERATE trial. The REGENERATE trial is ongoing and is expected to continue through clinical outcomes for verification and description of the clinical benefit of OCA. In June 2020, we received a complete response letter (“CRL”) from the FDA stating that our NDA for OCA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH could not be approved in its present form. We had our end of review meeting with the FDA in October 2020 to discuss the FDA’s risk-benefit assessment in the CRL based on its review of the available data, as well as our proposed resubmission of our NDA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH. The meeting was constructive and the FDA provided us with helpful guidance regarding supplemental data we can provide to further characterize OCA’s efficacy and safety profile that could support resubmission based on our Phase 3 REGENERATE 18-month biopsy data, together with a safety assessment from our ongoing studies.
Following our end of review meeting, we have held a productive dialogue with FDA regarding the REGENERATE study to clarify data, a new consensus read methodology for liver biopsies, and analyses required to resubmit our NDA. We are also in the process of generating a new data package from our REGENERATE study using the new liver biopsy consensus read methodology, and if the data supports accelerated approval, we plan to have a potential pre-NDA submission meeting with the FDA during the first half of 2022.
As part of our product development activities, we expect to continue to invest in evaluating the potential of OCA in progressive non-viral liver diseases. We are currently conducting a Phase 3 clinical trial in NASH patients with compensated cirrhosis, known as the REVERSE trial.
We are evaluating the efficacy, safety and tolerability of OCA in combination with bezafibrate in patients with PBC in a Phase 2 study outside of the United States. In the United States, we have an ongoing Phase 1 study to better characterize the exposure response of the fixed-dose combination, and we have an open Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application with the FDA. We are also in the process of initiating a second Phase 2 study in the United States. Our longer-term goal is developing and seeking regulatory approval for a fixed dose combination regimen in PBC and potentially in other diseases.
In addition, we have other compounds in early stages of research and development in our pipeline, including our INT-787 compound, an FXR agonist. We are currently evaluating INT-787 in a Phase 1 clinical trial and plan to submit an IND in the first half of 2022.
Recent Developments
In December 2021, the Company withdrew its MAA with the EMA for conditional approval of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH as the established application timeline could not be extended any further to allow for submission of additional safety and efficacy data being generated from the REGENERATE study and the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (the “CHMP”) was not able to determine a positive benefit-risk based on previously submitted data. Once the additional data from REGENERATE becomes available, the Company will assess the possibility of submitting a new application to the EMA.
In February 2022, we withdrew our application for reimbursement in France of Ocaliva for treatment of primary biliary cholangitis (“PBC”), on account of inability to reach mutually acceptable pricing terms with the Economic Committee for Health Products (“CEPS”), the French regulator for pricing and reimbursement of pharmaceuticals. The French market represents approximately 1% of global net sales for the Company and its consolidated affiliates.
COVID-19
In March 2020, we announced new initiatives intended to ensure business continuity and support our employees during the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) global pandemic, while continuing the critical activities necessary to bring our approved medicines to patients. With respect to our ongoing clinical trials, we are continuing to closely monitor the latest developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and together with our contract research organizations, study sites and other partners, have taken measures intended to minimize disruption to these studies. With respect to our supply chain, we have been working with our third-party manufacturers, distributors and other partners to manage our supply chain activities and mitigate disruptions to our product supplies. In addition, we continue to closely evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on our ability to effectively market, sell and distribute Ocaliva for PBC. The long-term effects of COVID-19 are unknown and we cannot presently predict the duration, scope or severity of the potential effects of COVID-19 on our operations, including our clinical trials, regulatory submissions and reviews, supply chain or our ability to generate product sales from Ocaliva or, if approved, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, and any such effects could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operation and financial condition.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We commenced our commercial launch of Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC in the United States in June 2016. In December 2016, the European Commission granted conditional approval for Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC and we commenced our European commercial launch in January 2017. Since January 2017, Ocaliva has also received regulatory approval in several of our target markets outside the United States and Europe, including (but not limited to) Canada, Israel, and Australia. We sell Ocaliva to a limited number of specialty pharmacies which dispense the product directly to patients. The specialty pharmacies are referred to as our customers.
Product Revenue, Net
We recognize revenue upon shipment of Ocaliva to our customers. We provide the right of return to our customers for unopened product for a limited time before and after its expiration date.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), we have written contracts with each of our customers that have a single performance obligation - to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order - and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Ocaliva. We evaluate the creditworthiness of each of our customers to determine whether collection is reasonably assured. We estimate variable revenue by calculating gross product revenues based on the wholesale acquisition cost that we charge our customers for Ocaliva, and then estimating our net product revenues by deducting (i) estimated government rebates and discounts related to Medicare, Medicaid and other government programs, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients and (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees.
We recognized net sales of Ocaliva of $363.5 million, $312.7 million and $249.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of, among other initiatives, the commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC in the United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union and our other target markets. In addition, we have incurred significant selling, general and administrative expenses and may in the future incur similar expenses in connection with the preparation for the potential commercialization of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, if approved, and our other future approved products, if any, and any maintenance of our general and administrative infrastructure in the United States and abroad.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused significant resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, pursuing regulatory approvals and engaging in other product development activities. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant research and development expenses as a result of, among other initiatives, our clinical development programs for OCA for PBC and NASH, our other earlier stage research programs and our regulatory approval efforts.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues
Product revenue, net was $363.5 million and $312.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, product revenue, net was comprised of U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $260.8 million and $234.0 million, respectively, and ex-U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $102.7 million and $78.7 million, respectively. The increase in product revenues was driven by operational growth, primarily due to higher unit sales volumes and higher net pricing in select markets.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $3.1 million and $5.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted primarily of packaging, labeling, materials and related expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $230.9 million and $332.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $101.6 million net decrease between periods was primarily driven by decreases in expenses relating to our activities associated with the potential approval and commercialization of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $185.3 million and $191.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $6.2 million net decrease between periods was primarily driven by lower personnel costs, including stock compensation expense and lower costs for NASH related R&D activities, partially offset by the recognition of lower R&D tax credits and higher costs for cholestasis related R&D activities.
Restructuring expenses
Restructuring (benefits) expenses were $(0.1) million and $14.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease between periods was primarily driven by severance costs and other related termination benefits incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 in conjunction with the 2020 Workforce Plan.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $54.4 million and $48.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense related to the principal amounts outstanding for the 2023 Convertible Notes, 2026 Convertible Notes and 2026 Convertible Secured Notes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense related to the principal amounts outstanding for the 2023 Convertible Notes and 2026 Convertible Notes.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
The gain on extinguishment of debt was $16.5 million, related to the exchange of the 2023 Convertible Notes and 2026 Convertible Notes along with the repurchase of 2023 Convertible Notes.
Other income, net
Other income, net was $2.2 million and $4.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such income is primarily attributable to interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and investment debt securities.
Income taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, no income tax expense or benefit was recognized. Our deferred tax assets are comprised primarily of net operating loss carryforwards. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets since we have not yet achieved sustained profitable operations. As a result, we have not recorded any income tax benefit since our inception.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, see Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have never been profitable and do not expect to be profitable in the foreseeable future. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public and private securities offerings, sales of product and payments received under our licensing and collaboration agreements.
Continued cash generation is highly dependent on the success of our commercial product, Ocaliva, as well as the success of our product candidates if approved.
We have devoted substantially all of our resources to the development of our product candidates, including the conduct of our clinical trials, the launch and commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC, preparation for a potential launch of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH and general and administrative operations, including the protection of our intellectual property. We intend to continue to develop OCA and our other existing product candidates, alone or in combination, for non-viral liver diseases. If OCA or any of our other product candidates fails in clinical trials or does not gain or maintain regulatory approval, or if OCA or any of our other product candidates does not achieve market acceptance, we may never become
profitable. Our net losses and negative cash flows have had, and will continue to have, an adverse effect on our stockholders’ deficit and working capital.
Our executive officers and our Board of Directors periodically review our sources and potential uses of cash in connection with our annual budgeting process. Generally speaking, our principal funding source is cash from operating activities, and our principal cash requirements include operating expenses and interest payments.
We expect to continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect these losses to be significant as we, among other things, develop and seek regulatory approval for our product candidates, including OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, maintain our regulatory approvals and commercialize our approved products. We believe our prospects and ability to significantly grow revenues will be dependent on our ability to successfully develop and commercialize OCA for indications other than PBC, such as NASH, and to identify strategic business development opportunities to leverage our capabilities in rare diseases. As a result, we expect a significant amount of resources to continue to be devoted to our development programs for OCA and to developing our pipeline.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities of $41.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of our $91.4 million net loss and a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $14.4 million, partially offset by $33.9 million in stock-based compensation, $13.0 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, $8.4 million for accretion of the discount on the 2026 Convertible Notes, $9.4 million for accretion on the 2026 Convertible Secured Notes, $5.8 million for non-cash operating lease costs and $3.0 million of depreciation. Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 include net cash receipts of $4.0 million reflecting payments from the HMRC for the U.K. R&D tax credit claims.
Net cash used in operating activities of $170.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of our $274.9 million net loss, partially offset by $60.8 million in stock-based compensation, $16.6 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, $9.4 million for accretion of the discount on the 2026 Convertible Notes, $6.1 million for non-cash operating lease costs, $3.1 million of depreciation and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $2.0 million. Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 include cash receipts of $20.7 million reflecting payments from the HMRC for the U.K. R&D tax credit claims.
Net cash used in operating activities of $236.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of our $344.7 million net loss and a gain on lease termination of $2.0 million, partially offset by $56.0 million in stock-based compensation, a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $19.3 million, $15.3 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, $5.9 million for accretion of the discount on the 2026 Convertible Notes, $5.4 million for non-cash operating lease costs, $3.7 million of depreciation and $2.7 million for loss on the disposal of fixed assets.
Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities primarily reflects the sales and maturities of investment debt securities of $420.6 million, partially offset by the purchases of investment debt securities of $349.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities primarily reflects the sales and maturities of investment debt securities of $497.4 million, partially offset by the purchases of investment debt securities of $330.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities primarily reflects the purchases of investment debt securities of $603.0 million, partially offset by the sales of investment debt securities of $415.2 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $116.7 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, from the sale of 2026 Convertible Secured Notes, offset by payments of $75.8 million for the repurchase of common stock and $38.1 million for the repurchase of 2023 Convertible Notes.
Net cash used in financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $2.0 million from payments of employee withholding taxes related to stock-based awards offset by $1.3 million of net proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of net proceeds received from the 2019 Public Offering and 2019 Concurrent Private Placement in May 2019 of $227.3 million and net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Convertible Notes of $223.4 million.
2021 Debt Refinancing, Retirement, and New Money Investment
In August 2021, we agreed with certain institutional holders of our 2023 Convertible Notes and our 2026 Convertible Notes maturing May 15, 2026, to exchange existing notes of both series at a discount for new 2026 Convertible Secured Notes maturing February 15, 2026, and secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all assets of Intercept Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and of any subsidiaries that meet certain threshold requirements to become guarantors. The noteholders (1) exchanged $306.5 million of 2023 Convertible Notes for $292.4 million of new notes, (2) exchanged $114.7 million of 2026 Convertible Notes for $90.0 million of new notes, and also (3) subscribed to buy $117.6 million of new notes for cash. We thereby issued $500.0 million of 2026 Convertible Secured Notes at an interest rate of 3.50%. We received cash proceeds of $117.6 million. We also paid our financial advisory fee by issuing 769,823 new shares of common stock. Further, in connection with the exchange and sale, we bought back approximately 4.5 million shares of common stock for $75.8 million in cash.
In September 2021, we agreed with certain institutional holders to buy back $39.9 million of our 2023 Convertible Notes at a discount.
On account of these transactions, we reduced our 2023 Convertible Notes outstanding by approximately 75% from $460.0 million to $113.7 million and our 2026 Convertible Notes outstanding by approximately 50% from $230.0 million to $115.3 million.
Future Funding Requirements
We are currently developing OCA for additional indications, including NASH, and other product candidates through various stages of clinical and preclinical development. Developing pharmaceutical products, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, is expensive. In addition, we have incurred and anticipate that we will continue to incur significant research and development, product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution expenses relating to the commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC. As part of our longer-term strategy, we anticipate that we will incur significant expenses in connection with our research and development efforts, the commercialization of our other products such as OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, if approved, and the maintenance of our general and administrative infrastructure in the United States and abroad. We may also engage in business development activities that involve potential in- or out-licensing of products or technologies or acquisitions of other products, technologies or businesses.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $429.4 million in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investment debt securities. We currently expect to continue to incur significant operating expenses in the fiscal year ending December 31,
2022. These expenses are planned to support, among other initiatives, the continued commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC in the United States and our other markets, our continued clinical development of OCA for PBC and NASH and our other earlier stage research and development programs. Although we believe that our existing capital resources, together with our net sales of Ocaliva for PBC, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating requirements for the next twelve months following the filing of this report, we may need to raise additional capital to fund our operating requirements beyond that period. In recent quarters we have significantly reduced our cash burn and remain in a stable cash position. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. As of December 31, 2021, our funds are primarily held in U.S. treasuries, corporate and municipal bonds, commercial paper, and money market accounts.
We successfully exchanged the majority of our near-term debt to address the maturity of 2023 convertible notes. While we have retired approximately 75% of our 2023 Convertible Notes, we still have $113.7 million of them scheduled to mature on July 1, 2023, and $615.3 million of convertible notes scheduled to mature in 2026, all of which will need to be paid off or refinanced, if not converted. Furthermore, in light of our receipt of the CRL from the FDA in June 2020 with respect to our NDA for OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH and the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development and commercialization, any delays in, or unanticipated costs associated with, our development, regulatory or commercialization efforts could significantly increase the amount of capital required by us to fund our operating requirements. Accordingly, we may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, to issue new securities, or to refinance or repurchase existing securities, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time.
Our forecasts regarding the period of time that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to meet our operating requirements and the timing of our future funding requirements, both near and long-term, will depend on a variety of factors, many of which are outside of our control. Such factors include, but are not limited to, those factors listed above under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”.
We have no committed external sources of funding and additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. If adequate funds are not available to us, we may not be able to make scheduled debt payments on a timely basis, or at all, and may be required to delay, limit, reduce or cease our operations.
Future Contractual Obligations
Our estimated future obligations as of December 31, 2021 include both current and long term obligations. For our long-term debt as noted in Note 9-Long-Term Debt, we have short-term obligations for interest payments of $23.5 million and long-term obligations of $793.3 million for interest and principal payments. Under our operating leases as noted in Note 7-Leases, we have short-term obligations of $3.4 million and long-term obligations of $4.8 million.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for our clinical trials. We may incur expenses related to clinical studies of our product candidates. The timing and amounts of these disbursements are contingent upon the achievement of certain milestones, patient enrollment and services rendered or as expenses are incurred by the CROs or clinical trial sites. Therefore, we cannot estimate the potential timing and amount of these payments.
We source the manufacture and commercial supply of API from manufacturers, for use in Ocaliva and, if approved, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH. Our contracts either do not require us to purchase a specific percentage of our annual commercial requirements of API, are made on a purchase order basis or may require future purchase obligations in the event of the achievement of agreed regulatory and product development milestones. We cannot, at this time, determine when or if the related milestones will be achieved or whether the events triggering the commencement of payment obligations will occur.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. The preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We have identified certain estimates as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our past or present results of operations related to (i) revenue recognition (ii) stock-based compensation (iii) issuance of convertible debt and (iv) income taxes. These estimates are considered critical because they had a material impact, or they have the potential to have a material impact, on our consolidated financial statements and because they require us to make significant judgments, assumptions or estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances based on information available at the time they were made. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. However, our actual results could differ from these estimates, and these differences may be material.
Revenue Recognition
Product Revenue, Net
Under ASC 606, we have written contracts with each of our customers that have a single performance obligation - to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order - and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Ocaliva. We evaluate the creditworthiness of each of our customers to determine whether collection is reasonably assured. The wholesale acquisition cost that we charge our customers for Ocaliva is adjusted to arrive at our estimated net product revenues by deducting (i) estimated government rebates and discounts, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients, and (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees.
Rebates and Discounts
We contract with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and other government agencies to make Ocaliva available to eligible patients. As a result, we estimate any rebates and discounts and deduct these estimated amounts from our gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. Our estimates of rebates and discounts are based on the government mandated discounts, which are statutorily-defined and applicable to these government funded programs, and our historical experience with actual payments and redemptions. These estimates are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. To date, actual government rebates have not differed materially from our estimates.
We have been distributing and selling Ocaliva in Europe through our EU marketing authorization since 2017 and are engaged in ongoing price discussions regarding the final price of Ocaliva within one of those jurisdictions. We recognize net product revenues based on our estimate of consideration we expect to retain through final negotiations in that jurisdiction that will not be subject to a significant reversal. Our estimate is based on benchmarks of pricing approved in other relevant European jurisdictions and relevant information in the ongoing negotiations. We expect the difference between the amounts collected at the invoiced price and the final price for OCA will be returned to the local government. If our estimates regarding the amounts to be refunded to the government change, we will reflect the effect of the change in estimate in net product revenues in the period in which the change in estimate occurs and will include any adjustments against all prior sales. These estimates are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Other Incentives
Other incentives that we offer to indirect customers include co-pay assistance cards provided by us for PBC patients who reside in states that permit co-pay assistance programs. Our co-pay assistance program is intended to reduce each participating patient’s portion of the financial responsibility for Ocaliva purchase price to a specified dollar amount. We estimate the amount of co-pay assistance provided to eligible patients based on the terms of the program when product is dispensed by the specialty pharmacies to the patients. These estimates are based on historical redemption and payment information provided by third-party claims processing organizations along with estimated future redemptions and are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Trade Allowances
We provide invoice discounts on Ocaliva sales to certain of our customers for prompt payment and record these discounts as a reduction to gross product revenues. These discounts are based on contractual terms. We anticipate that our customers will earn these discounts and fees and, therefore, we deduct the full amount of these discounts and fees from total gross product revenues. Reserves for prompt payment discounts are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and accounts receivable.
Returns
The Company provides the right of return to its customers for unopened product for a limited time before and after its expiration date. Returns are estimated based on historical experience and product shelf lives. In arriving at our estimate, the assessment considered the product type, life-cycle, price, distribution channel, channel inventory and the customer returns policy along with benchmarking against industry data specific to the pharmaceutical distribution industry. Historically, actual returns have not differed materially from our estimates.
The potential of our estimates to vary due to sensitivity differs by program, type of customer and/or geographic location. Estimates associated with government programs have a higher risk of being subject to adjustment because of the time delay between recording the accrual and the final settlement. These reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which the relevant third party is entitled to based on the terms of the applicable contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Historically, adjustments to these estimates to reflect actual results or updated expectations have not been material. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenues and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the date of the grant. Valuation models, like the Black-Scholes-Merton model, require the use of subjective assumptions that could materially impact the estimation of fair value and related compensation expense to be recognized. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of assumptions, including with respect to price volatility of the underlying stock, assumed dividend yield, expected term of the options and the risk-free interest rate, as described below:
• The expected volatility is estimated based on actual daily historical volatility information of our own ordinary shares equal to the expected term of our options.
• The assumed dividend yield is based on not issuing any dividends and not expecting to issue any dividends over the life of the options. As a result, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
• The expected term of options granted represents the period of time the options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the simplified method, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years).
• The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield curve for U.S. Treasury securities at the date of grant with maturity dates approximately equal to the expected term of the award at the grant date.
There have been no material changes in our estimates or assumptions since the prior reporting period. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions.
We expect to continue to grant stock options and other stock-based awards and the impact of stock-based compensation may fluctuate in future periods due to changes in the value of our common stock, changes to our headcount and the number and value of awards granted.
Convertible Senior Notes
The Convertible Notes are accounted for in accordance with ASC Subtopic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. ASC Subtopic 470-20 requires the issuer of convertible debt that may be settled in shares or cash upon conversion at the issuer’s option, such as the Convertible Notes, to account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components separately. The value assigned to the debt component is the estimated fair value, as of the issuance date, of a similar debt instrument without the conversion option. The amount of the equity component (and resulting debt discount) is calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the convertible debt instrument. The resulting debt discount is amortized as additional non-cash interest expense over the expected life of the notes utilizing the effective interest method.
The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature using the income approach. The allocation was performed in a manner that reflected our non-convertible borrowing rate for similar debt. For the income-based approach, we use a convertible bond lattice model that includes assumptions such as volatility and the risk-free rate. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification.
The estimate is not expected to have any impact on the future results given the adoption of the new ASU 2020-06 standard will reclass the amounts of the equity components into the liability components. For additional information, see Note 9 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
We determine the need for a valuation allowance by assessing the probability of realizing deferred tax assets, taking into consideration all available positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, expectations of future taxable income, carryforward periods available, various income tax strategies and other relevant factors. Judgment is required in making this assessment and to the extent future expectations change, we would have to assess the recoverability of our deferred assets at that time. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
Our tax returns are subject to examination by U.S. Federal, state, and foreign taxing jurisdictions. The impact of an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return must be recognized in our financial statements at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized in our financial statements unless it is more likely than not to be sustained. We consider the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting date. The level of evidence that is necessary and appropriate to support an entity’s assessment of the technical merits of a tax position is a matter of judgment that depends on all available information. As a result, whether a tax position will ultimately be sustained may be uncertain. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no reserves for unrecognized tax benefits.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and expected effects, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition.